A priori justification is a type of epistemic
justification that is, in some sense, independent of
experience. Gettier examples have led most philosophers to think that
having a justified true belief is not sufficient for knowledge
 (see sec. 5, below, and the
example, Sheep), but many still believe that it is
necessary. For those that do, a priori knowledge is knowledge
based on a priori justification. There are a variety of views
about whether a priori justification can be defeated
(overridden or undercut) by other evidence, especially empirical
evidence, and a variety of views about whether a priori
justification, and knowledge, must be only of necessary or analytic
propositions (see examples (1a)–(4a) and (7a)–(14a),
below), or at least of ones believed to be necessary or analytic.
 A priori justification seems to rest on rational
intuitions, or insights, but there are a variety of views about the
nature of these intuitions or insights. There are different
explanations of how these intuitions provide justification, if they
do. Some philosophers do not see a priori justification as
resting on any evidence, either experiential or nonexperiential, and
so not resting on rational intuitions or insights at all. Their idea
is that in some circumstances it can be default reasonable for a
person to accept a proposition, or that the person is entitled to
accept certain presuppositions independent of any evidence. Of course,
there are also many objections to the idea that there can be a
priori justification. Finally, rationalists think that there can
be a priori justification and knowledge of the world while
empiricists deny this.


Because most philosophers believe that knowledge requires
justification, it is widely thought that a priori knowledge
is just a special kind of knowledge, namely, knowledge that is based
solely on a priori justification. That makes the notion of
a priori justification central, and that is why I will focus
this discussion on that notion. I will make only a few remarks about
a priori knowledge at the end of this essay. The following
list indicates the topics that will be presented and addressed.
 
1. Examples that illustrate the difference between a priori and a posteriori (empirical) justification

A priori justification is a certain kind of justification
often contrasted with empirical, or a posteriori,
justification. To get an idea of the difference, consider the
following pairs of propositions. In each case, the first member of the
pair is supposed to be an example in which, if we are justified in
believing the proposition, we are a priori justified in
believing it, and the second member an example in which, if we are
justified in believing the proposition, we are a posteriori
(that is, empirically) justified in believing it. Some of the
propositions are false, but that does not mean that we could not be
justified in believing them before we had evidence that they are
false.

1
a.
All bachelors are unmarried.

b. All bachelors in the U.S. are taxed at a different rate from married men.
2a. All crows are birds.
b. All crows are black.
3a. All vixens are female.
b. All vixens are cunning.
4a. Green is a color.
b. Grass is green.
5a. No object can be red and green all over at the same time.
b. There are ripe tomatoes that are now red all over but were green all over weeks earlier.
6a. If A is taller than B, and B is taller than C, then A is taller than C.
b. Shaquille O'Neale is taller than Kobe Bryant, and Kobe Bryant is taller than Tony Parker (famous basketball players).
7a. A house is an abode for living.
b. A house undermined will fall.
8a.All rubies are red.
bi. All rubies have chemical structure Al2O3.
ii. Topaz is either blue, orange, yellow, or yellowish brown.
iii. Water is H2O.
9a. 2 + 2 = 4.
b. 2 quarts of any liquid added to 2 more quarts of any liquid = 4 quarts of liquid.
10a. All squares are rectangles.
b. No square-shaped object has a surface area greater than the total surface area of the United States.
11a. If you know something, you believe it and it's true.
b. I know that the earth is the third planet from the sun.
12a. Happiness is an intrinsic good.
b. Happiness is produced by a person's belief that the most important things in her life are going well.
13a. It is wrong to punish the innocent.
b. People who are unjustly punished often become resentful.
14a. Torturing people just for the fun of it is wrong.
b. Torture often produces unreliable testimony.



In each example, it is possible for someone to be justified in
believing the first member of the pair (or in the case of 8, the first
of four members) in a way that is different from how it is possible
for someone to be justified in believing the second member of the
pair. Let's say that the first members are justified a
priori; the latter members, a posteriori (or
empirically) justified, if justified at all.
2. What sorts of propositions can be a priori justified and known?


A justified proposition need not be true. (9b) is false, for if you
add two quarts of carbon tetrachloride to two quarts of water you
will get less than four quarts of liquid because the molecules pack
together in a way that diminishes the total volume. Still, someone
not knowing of such examples might be justified in believing
(9b). (8bii) is also false; topaz can be other colors than the four
listed. “All rubies are red” might strike you as being
like “All crows are black”, and so lead you to believe
that if we are justified in believing that all rubies are red, the
justification must be empirical. But gemologists think that rubies
must be red, that it is conceptually required that they be
red. In any case, let's assume that the concept of a ruby requires
that rubies be red. Then that concept would be a hybrid
concept. Necessarily, a ruby is a red stone, and that it
must be red can be known a priori. Also, a ruby necessarily
has the chemical composition of Al2O3, and that
it must have that composition can be known only empirically. Hence,
its essence is knowable in part a priori and in part only
empirically. So rubies would not be like topaz where the underlying
chemical structure alone determines whether some stone is a
topaz, and that structure can only be known empirically. In that
respect, topaz is like water because what water is
essentially can only be known empirically.


Just as we can be empirically justified in believing a false
proposition (e.g., 9b), we can also be a priori justified in
believing a false proposition. Many physicists believe that there are
genuinely random events at the subatomic level, and so believe it
false that every event has a cause. However, Kant may have been a
priori justified in believing it true since no one back then had
the knowledge of physics that we now possess. You might initially be
a priori justified in believing that no matter how happiness
has been produced it is intrinsically good (12a), or that it is always
wrong to punish an innocent person (13a), and later think of
counterexamples to such claims (e.g., happiness had through the
suffering of others or punishing an innocent person to prevent some
evil men from punishing him and many other innocent people). Then your
initial a priori justification would be defeated. These
examples show that a priori justification is fallible and
defeasible (i.e., it can be defeated by further evidence).


Consider another example that makes this point. A particular sorites
paradox involving heaps consists of the general claim that, if you
take one bean away from a heap of beans, you still have a heap and a
particular claim that, say, a cone-shaped stack of ten thousand beans
is a heap. These two premises will lead you, bean by bean, to the
conclusion that one, or even no beans, is a heap! It seems that we are
a priori justified in believing both the general and the
particular claim to be true, but at least one of them must not be true
(perhaps the general claim is false, or even neither true nor false)
because together they lead to an absurd conclusion. So this is another
reason to think that a priori justification is fallible. (See
Sosa 1998: 258–59, for an example about heaps and Bealer 1998:
202, where he argues that philosophical paradoxes show that intuition
is fallible. With a paradox, you are justified in believing each of a
set of propositions taken separately, but at least one of them must be
false because the set is inconsistent.)


Why have others thought this impossible? Kant said that a
priori knowledge is “knowledge that is absolutely
independent of all experience” (Kant 1787: 43). But the
requirement that a priori knowledge (and justification) be
absolutely independent of all experience
seems too stringent and suggests that all a priori knowledge
(and justification) must rest on innate ideas. A more plausible
requirement is that a priori knowledge and justification be
independent of all experience beyond what is needed to grasp the
relevant concepts involved in the relevant proposition
 (see below, sec.  4).


When it is just a matter of a priori justification, not
knowledge, Philip Kitcher thinks that if there is such a thing as all
things considered a priori justification, then “a
person is entitled to ignore empirical information about the type of
world she inhabits” (Kitcher 1983: 30; see, also, 24,
80–87). Hilary Putnam thinks that if there is that sort of
justification, then there are “truths which it is always
rational to believe” (Putnam 1983: 90). On Kitcher's
understanding of a priori justification, it is not defeasible
by empirical information; on Putnam's, it is not defeasible
at all.  But insofar as justification is relative to the
evidence a person has, or should have, it is possible for further
evidence, either empirical or from intuition or rational insight, to
override or undercut a person's current evidence and thereby destroy
that person's current justification and knowledge. Nothing in the
nature of a priori justification rules out that
possibility. (See the discussion of Hartry Field,
 sec. 6, below, for more on why it
is possible for empirical evidence in particular to defeat
a priori justification.)


Not all necessary truths can be justified a priori. (8bi) and
(8biii) are necessary truths that can be justified only
empirically. On the other hand, some think that there are contingent
truths that can be justified, and known, a priori. Saul
Kripke proposed that “the standard meter stick in Paris is a
meter long” is such an example (Kripke 1972:
274–75). Others have countered that what is justified a
priori is “the length of the stick designated as
the meter stick on some appropriate date and time is a meter
long”, and that that proposition is necessarily true.
We know empirically that a certain stick was so designated, and so are
derivatively and empirically justified in believing of a
particular stick (the standard meter stick in Paris) that its length
on that appropriate date and time is one meter. 


But there are other candidates for contingent truths that are a
priori knowable and justifiable. Gareth Evans thinks that we can
be a priori justified in believing, and know, the contingent
proposition, “If actually p, then p”, and
particular instantiations of it. Consider, “if the post is
actually red, then it is red”. This proposition is contingent
because the post could be red in the actual world but not red in some
other possible world. So in some other possible world,
w2, its antecedent can be true (because its
antecedent is about the color of the post in the actual world,
w1) and it's consequent false (because the post is
not red in w2 and the consequent is about the
color of the post in that world). A conditional that is necessarily
true cannot have a true antecedent and a false consequent in
any possible world. However, we can know independently of
experience (that is, a priori) that if the post is actually
red, then it's red since it is true in the actual world. In this
respect the proposition is like the one expressed by “if
something is a crow, it is black” since it, too, is true in the
actual world but not necessarily true. But unlike that proposition
about crows, “if actually p, then p” can be
known to be true a priori. Hence it is an example of a
contingent proposition that is knowable a priori (cf., Evans
1979: 83–85, for his discussion of this topic).


While we have seen that not all necessary truths are capable of being
justified, or known, a priori (e.g., 8bi and 8biii), there is
a difference between necessarily true propositions that might be
known, or justified, a priori. The propositions expressed by
(5a) and (6a) seem different from the propositions expressed by the
other first members of the other pairs. Those other propositions seem
to be analytic. A sentence is analytic if, and only if, it can be
changed so as to express a logical truth by substituting appropriate
synonyms for relevant terms and expressions in the sentence. So, for
instance, “all vixens are female” will express a logical
truth of the form if A&B, then A if we substitute for
“vixen”, “female fox”, for it will then say:
if something is a female fox, it is a female. But no substitution of
synonyms for terms or expressions in (5a) and (6a) will yield a
logical truth. The propositions expressed by (5a) and (6a) are often
said to be synthetic a priori propositions because they are
not analytic (they're synthetic) but are a priori knowable
and justifiable. 


Up to this point, I have been discussing what sorts of propositions
can be justified, or known, a priori, and whether a
priori justification is fallible and defeasible. But what does it
mean to say that someone is a priori justified in believing
propositions like those expressed by each of the first sentences in
the fourteen pairs, that is, by (1a)–(14a)? I will now turn to
that question.
3. A priori justification is justification independent of experience, but what is meant by “experience”?


A standard answer to the question about the nature of a
priori justification is the following: someone is a
priori justified in believing some proposition if, and only if,
he is justified independently of experience in believing
that proposition.  Various things have been meant by
“experience”. On a narrow account,
“experience” refers to sense experience, that is, to
experiences that come from the use of our five senses: sight, touch,
hearing, smell, and taste. However, this narrow account implies that
justification based on introspection, proprioception (our kinesthetic
sense of the position and movements of our body), memory, and
testimony would be a priori justification. That means that
if I am justified in believing that the earth is the third planet
from the sun (11b), it would be an example of a priori
justification since it is based on the testimony of my science
teachers or what I have read in some book. Also, on this account of
experience, I could be a priori justified in believing:
“I had cereal for breakfast this morning”, “My feet
are resting on the floor”, and “I'm feeling tired right
now”, since the justification of those three propositions is
based on memory, proprioception, and introspection, respectively, not
on any of the five senses. Given these considerations, perhaps
“independent of experience” should be taken to mean
“independent of sense experience, introspection,
proprioception, memory, and testimony”. A priori
justification is independent of experience in that sense. But this
suggestion is also too narrow.


What if people had other sources of experience like telepathy,
clairvoyance, echo-location (like bats have), electrolocation (like
duck-billed platypuses have), and the ability to tell north from south
and east from west, even after having been spun around several times
with their eyes closed
 (see the example of Truenorth, sec. 10, below)? 
Or what if God exists and reveals
things to certain people? Should beliefs based on divine revelation
and these other sources be considered beliefs based on experience, not
independent of it? One can argue that they should because any belief
justified on the basis of these experiences would not be justified
solely on the basis of the person's understanding
the proposition which is the object of her belief. Any beliefs based
on experiences other than those involving the understanding should be
considered to be based on experience, not independent of
experience.


A plausible positive account of a priori justification says
that a person is a priori justified in believing some
proposition if, and only if, that justification rests solely
on her understanding the proposition which is the object of her
belief. Then a posteriori justification would be
justification that does not rest solely on understanding
such a proposition. No one can be justified in believing (2b): all
crows are black, without understanding that proposition, but any
justification for believing that proposition would not rest
solely on that understanding. The justification would have
to come from testimony or seeing lots of black, and no non-black,
crows. But someone could be a priori justified in believing
(2a): all crows are birds, solely on the basis of
understanding (2a). The same holds for all the other first members of
the fourteen examples.


With perhaps the exception of (5a) (more below on this), experiences
of how the world is seem to have no relevance to whether someone is
justified in believing (1a)–(14a), provided, of course, that
statements of the form “All As are Bs”
(e.g., “All bachelors are unmarried”, “All vixens
are female”, “All crows are birds”, etc.) are not
taken to imply that there are any As, that is, are instead
interpreted as conditionals of the form : “If something is an
A, then it is a B”, which have no
“existential import” regarding As. Even with (5a),
we could be justified in believing that no object can be red and green
all over at the same time if we had the experiences that people in the
film The Matrix typically have, even though the world is
nothing like what they think it is. Even here, how the world really is
seems to have no relevance to whether we are justified in believing
that no object can be red and green all over at the same time.


Albert Casullo challenges people to say what underlies and grounds the
list of things considered to be “experiences” such that
a priori justification must (in some sense;
 see sec. 4, below)
 be independent of
them. He recommends that we take “experience” to be a
natural kind term like “water”, “aluminum”,
and “horse”, and discover empirically what its essence is
(Casullo 2003: 159). Then we will have a way to distinguish
experiential from nonexperiential (a priori)
justification.


The problem with giving a natural kind account of
“experience” is the same problem that faces those who wish
to give a natural kind account of “good” or
“right” or a host of other terms. I'll call it The
Problem of Possible and Unwelcome Big Surprises (the PUBS problem
for short). The problem is that on this account we may discover
empirically that things that, intuitively, are not
experiences, are experiences, and that things that, intuitively,
are experiences, are not experiences. Something similar
happens when we discover empirically that the essence of
“mammal” implies that whales (which, initially, seem to be
fish, not mammals) are mammals, or that not all stones called
“jade” are really the same thing even though, initially,
they seem to be. There is nothing wrong with these “big
surprises” because biology and chemistry should determine
empirically what is the best way to “carve nature at the
joints”, that is, the best way to categorize phenomena according
to the best scientific theories.


The worry is that the best psychological theories might categorize
experiences in such a way that what, intuitively, seem to be
nonexperiential sources of justification (say, intellectual intuitions
or rational insights;
 see sec. 5, below)
 will turn out not to be such sources and what,
intuitively, seem to be experiential sources of justification will not
turn out to be such sources (say, sense experience or
introspection). That is because the best psychological theories will
be concerned with categorizing experiences causally, that is,
according to their role in causing beliefs and behavior. That focus
ignores the epistemic relevance of experiences, that is,
their relevance to justifying beliefs. Similar remarks apply to
so-called nonexperiential sources of justification: because the best
psychological theories might categorize them according their
causal roles, they might not categorize them according to their
epistemic relevance.


Further, if the best psychological theories give a naturalistic
account of justifying experiences (whether empirical or a
priori), for all we know those theories will imply that sense
experience and introspection do not provide justification and that
hunches and guesses do. That is because the properties normally
possessed by a kind of thing (say, water) may turn out not to be
necessary properties of that kind of thing (e.g., being clear,
odorless, colorless, thirst-quenching, etc.) if the term
(“water”) that refers to that kind of thing is a natural
kind term. So, if “justifying experience” is a
natural kind expression, we cannot be certain that experiences that
seem to provide justification for beliefs will really provide that
justification, and vice versa. But it seems that we can be certain
that sense experience and introspection had under certain conditions
do provide justification (even if they do not guarantee that the
corresponding beliefs are objectively likely to be true, as happens in
demon world and Matrix-type situations) and that hunches and guesses
do not (at least when there is no track record that would confirm
their reliability).
 “Experience” cannot be a natural kind term whose
essence must be discoverable empirically if we are taking it in a
sense relevant to epistemic justification. If it were a natural kind
term, we could not know before empirical investigation that some
things don't justify and others do, but it seems we can (though those
convinced, or even puzzled, by skeptical arguments would
disagree).
4. What is meant by independent in the phrase “independent of experience”?


As noted in the previous section, we take it that a belief that is
“independent of experience” is based solely on
understanding the proposition which is its object; all others are
based on experience. But people sometimes understand
“independent of experience” to mean something else. Some
have taken it to mean “apart from experience”. But how
could there be any justification apart from experience? Don't people
have to learn from experience what bachelors, crows, and knowledge are
in order to be justified in believing (1a), (3a), and (11a)?
These are not innate ideas that people are born with, even if
there are some innate ideas. And even if we are born with
some innate capacities, say, to learn a language and to reason, those
capacities by themselves do not provide justification for believing
any of (1a)–(14a).


It seems impossible for there to be any justification completely
independent of experience. We need to distinguish the experience
needed to acquire the relevant concepts involved in (1a)–(14a)
and any additional experience needed to determine whether the relevant
propositions that contain those concepts are true or false. To say
that a person could be justified in believing any of (1a)–(14a)
independent of experience means that they could be justified
independent of experience beyond that which is needed to
acquire the relevant concepts needed to understand those
propositions. For a person to be justified in believing
any of (1b)–(14b), it is also true that she must have enough
experience to acquire the relevant concepts expressed in those
propositions. Having those concepts is necessary for her to understand
the relevant propositions, and she cannot justifiedly believe a
proposition that she does not understand. However, she must also have
additional experience beyond that in order to determine
whether the relevant proposition is true or false, or be aware of the
testimony of someone who has had the requisite additional experience.
That additional experience is not required for someone to tell whether
(1a)–(14a) are true or false. For someone to be a
priori justified in believing some proposition is for her to be
justified absent experiences beyond those required for her
to acquire the relevant concepts employed in the statement of that
proposition. This is sometimes described as the view
that a priori justification depends only on enabling
experiences, that is, the experiences a person needs in order to
understand the proposition at issue.


There are two ways that someone could be justified in believing some
proposition without having experiences beyond those required to
acquire the relevant concepts: (1) being justified in believing the
proposition on the basis of output (evidence) from
a nonexperiential source (for example, on the basis of
rational intuitions or insights) or (2) being entitled to accept that
proposition without any output (evidence) from any source.
5. A priori justification as resting on some nonexperiential source of evidence: intuition and rational insight


Suppose a priori justification rests on output (evidence)
from some nonexperiential source. What sort of evidence could
that be? A standard answer is that intuition, or rational insight, is
the basis of a priori justification. And what are intuitions,
or rational insights? Laurence BonJour thinks that rational insight is
an immediate, non-inferential grasp, apprehension, or
“seeing” that some proposition is necessarily true
(BonJour 1998: 106). He goes on to argue that a proposition's
appearing to be necessarily true is the foundation of a
priori justification, for he wants to allow that such
justification can be fallible and defeasible. So for BonJour it is
apparent rational insights that are the evidence on which
a priori justification rests, not rational insights
themselves (1998: 112–13 and secs. 4.5, 4.6).  After publishing
In Defense of Pure Reason (1998), and in response to comments
by Paul Boghossian (2001), BonJour wrote that these appearances are
not propositional, that is they are not appearances that
something is the case (BonJour 2001a: 677–78; BonJour 2005a:
100).  In this respect, they are unlike beliefs and more like
perceptual sensations.


George Bealer characterizes a rational intuition as an intellectual
seeming that some proposition is necessarily, or
possibly, true (Bealer 1998: 207–08). He contrasts
intuitions with “judgments, guesses, and hunches” (1998:
210–11), common sense, belief, and even an inclination to
believe (1998: 208–09). The following example shows how
something may seem true to someone even though he does not
believe it, and how someone can believe something that does not
seem true to him.


Monty Hall was the host of the game show “Let's Make a
Deal”. Contestants would choose one of three doors and behind
one of them was a big prize; behind the others, some worthless joke
prize (say, a hundred boxes of tissue to dry their tears). Monty would
open one of the doors with a joke prize behind it and then ask the
contestant whether he wanted to stick with the door he had chosen or
switch to the other unopened door. It can be shown that the
probability that the contestant will win the big prize if he switches
is 2/3, but only 1/3 if he sticks. But it seems to many that
the probability of his winning is 1/2 regardless of whether he sticks
or switches since there are only two unopened doors left. Call that
“seeming” an intuition. For some people, it still
seems that the probability is 1/2 even when they
do not believe that it is, say, because they
have proven for themselves that the probability of winning by
switching is 2/3 or because they trust the reliable testimony of
someone who has.  This example shows that someone can have an
intuition that a proposition is true, but not believe it, and
conversely, can believe some proposition (namely, that the probability
is not 1/2) without having the corresponding intuition (see
Russell 2010: 464, for the Monty Hall example). Another example from
Brian Weatherson shows that a person may believe something that is
even necessarily true where she does not have any intuition that it is
true. She might believe, on the basis of calculation, that 643 ×
721 = 463,603 yet have no intuition that it's true (Weatherson 2003:
3).


Intuitions are non-inferential in that they are not the conclusion of
some piece of reasoning. Like sensations, they must be occurrent but
unlike beliefs, which need not be. You can have a belief that P
while not considering P, but you can't have an intuition that
P while not considering P. 


Bealer distinguishes between rational or intellectual intuitions on
the one hand and physical intuitions on the other, saying that a
person could have a physical, but not an
intellectual, intuition that (7b): A house undermined will
fall (Bealer 1992: 102).  (I take it that physical intuitions are of
propositions about a physical event, state of affairs, or object.)
Presumably, he would say that a person could have an
intellectual intuition that (7a): A house is an abode for
living. What makes physical and intellectual intuitions, intuitions,
for Bealer, and what distinguishes them? Well, intuitions regarding
both (7b) and (7a) are noninferential, occurrent seemings, and both
propositions seem obviously true. According to Bealer, what
distinguishes intellectual from other intuitions is that intellectual
intuitions are modal: the propositions that are their objects seem
possibly, or necessarily, true. (Recall that BonJour required
this of apparent rational insights.) For those who do not think that
intuitions must have as their objects propositions about what is
possibly, or necessarily, true, they might distinguish intuitions from
hunches in that intuitions are necessarily a product of a person's
understanding a proposition while hunches and guesses are not.


Must intellectual intuitions be modal? Couldn't it just seem that each
of (1a)–(14a) are true without their seeming necessarily true?
In a footnote, even BonJour allows that there could be an
unsophisticated person who lacks the concept of necessity who accepts
some proposition because it seems overwhelmingly obvious, not because
it is seems necessarily true. According to BonJour, this person would
have an intuition that the proposition is true, and that intuition
would provide evidence if it were a response to what is in fact
“the apparent necessity of the proposition”, (BonJour
1998: 114, note 23; Russell 2010: 465). There are lots of thought
experiments in philosophy that are intended to evoke intuitions, even
in people who do possess the concept of necessity, that some
proposition is true, not that it is necessarily true. Bealer himself
offers an example that I will call Sheep (Bealer 1992:
3–4; no doubt based on Roderick Chisholm's example in Chisholm
1989: 93). In the example, you are driving on a country road and spot
some animals in a nearby field that look just like sheep. However,
they are really poodles bred and clipped to look like sheep by the
jokester farmer who owns them. On the basis of seeing these animals,
you form the belief that there are sheep in the field. As it turns
out, there are—lying down, out of sight, behind some large
boulders in the far corner of the field. So you have a justified true
belief that there are sheep in the field, justified because you are
justified in believing that: (a) the creatures you are looking at are
sheep, (b) if they are sheep, then there are sheep in the field, and
that (c) there are sheep in the field follows from (a) and
(b). However, most people when considering this example have the
intuition that (d) you do not know that there are sheep in
the field. The intuition is not (d*) = necessarily, in these
circumstances you do not know that there are sheep in the field, even
if (d*) is true. (Of course, some may have the intuition that, in the
situation, you couldn't know that there are sheep in the
field, but people need not have that modal intuition.) There
are many others examples in epistemology and ethics like
Sheep in that they evoke some intuition that P, not an
intuition that necessarily, P.


Further, Albert Casullo has argued that if intellectual intuitions are
distinguished by their modal status, there is no guarantee that those
intuitions do not come from an experiential source (2012b:
237–238). Perhaps Casullo is thinking that someone might have the
intuition that necessarily, water is H2O = (8biii)
or (less likely) that necessarily, rubies are
Al2O3 = (8bi), where such an intuition would
have an empirical or a posteriori source. So there is no
guarantee that intuitions so understood provide a priori
justification insofar as that sort of justification must derive from
some nonexperiential source.


An alternative way of distinguishing intellectual from physical
intuitions is to hold that intellectual intuitions must be based
solely on the understanding while physical
intuitions cannot be
 (see above, sec. 3).
 On this account, if a person is a priori
justified in believing (1a)–(14a) it is because she
understands what those propositions mean, that understanding
is the basis of her intuition that they are true, and that
intuition is the a priori justification for her believing
that they are true. In the case of the physical intuition that a house
undermined will fall, that intuition is not based
solely on the person's understanding what the proposition
means and so her intuitive belief that it is true is not
a priori justified.


It might be thought that this way of characterizing intellectual
intuition, and thereby a priori justification, implies that
only analytic statements can be justified a priori,
where an analytic sentence is one that can be changed so that it
expresses a logical truth by substituting synonyms for relevant terms
or expressions
 (see above, sec. 2).
 But in a broad sense propositions like “no object
can be red and green all over at the same time” are true
“in virtue of their meaning”, even if they are not
analytic (they're synthetic). You cannot substitute synonyms for
relevant terms in “no object can be red and green all over at
the same time” and derive a proposition whose form is some
logical truth, say, a logical truth of the form A =
A. But to fully understand the proposition you have to
understand not only the concepts involved but also their
relationship. So, for instance, you need to understand what happiness
is and what it is for something to be an intrinsic good, and
the relationship between happiness and intrinsic goodness, to fully
understand (12a): Happiness is an intrinsic good. Similar remarks
apply to (5a), the proposition about no object's being red and green
all over at the same time, and (6a), the proposition about
“taller than”.


Perhaps part of the justification for believing “no object can
be red and green all over at the same time” is that no one has
been able to think of a counterexample to it, that is, an example that
shows it to be false. Maybe the best explanation of those failures is
that the proposition is necessarily true and that is why we
are justified in believing the red-green proposition. That sort of
justification would not be based on intuition. However, Gilbert Harman
has said that the best explanation of our failure to find a
counterexample to some proposition may be due to our limited
imaginations (Harman 2001). So it seems problematic whether there is
some non-intuitional source of the justification of the red-green
proposition. 


Harman even thinks that there are counterexamples to that proposition
(Harman 2001), in which case there would not be a lack of
counterexamples and so nothing to explain. Harman gives examples of
how an object could look red all over from one angle and
green all over from a slightly different angle, or red all over to one
eye but green all over to the other. But the relation between
looking red or green and being red or green is
complex. These examples do not show that an object could be
red all over and green all over at the same time. Perhaps the thing to
say about these examples is that the object is neither red
all over nor green all over at the same time. Hence it is
not both red and green all over at the same time and so does
not contradict (5a).


That it just seems obvious that no object could be red and green all
over at the same time is an intellectual intuition that provides
some justification for believing that proposition. That is
compatible with there also being other grounds for believing it
true.


The most promising account of a priori justification in terms
of a nonexperiential source of evidence is one that sees
intellectual intuition, rational insight, or apparent
rational insight, as providing the relevant a priori evidence
with its source being reason, not some special faculty of intuition
analogous, say, to sight, which is a source of empirical evidence. One
function of reason involves “seeing” how evidence
supports a conclusion, and in deductive reasoning,
“seeing” how conclusions follow from
premises. This same ability is exercised when reason
“sees” that some proposition is true, or necessarily true,
simply in virtue of the person's understanding the
proposition. However, this intellectual “seeing” need not
have qualia associated with it, unlike perceptual seeing, which
does. Apparent rational insights need not be accompanied by
appearances, if “appearances” necessarily involve
qualia. The metaphor of “seeing” logical connections or
that certain propositions are true should not mislead us into thinking
that there is a special, quasi-perceptual faculty along with sight,
touch, hearing, etc. Reason can “grasp” and
“see” without there being any analogue to having certain
feelings or having visual sensations.
6. A priori justification as not resting on any nonexperiential source of evidence


Recently some philosophers have thought that a person can be justified
in believing, or accepting, a proposition without having any evidence
to support it, and so even if there is no nonexperiential
source of evidence for that belief, or acceptance. Timothy
Williamson has argued that certain acquired skills can
provide justification for believing a proposition for which the person
does not have evidence. For instance, a person might be justified in
believing that two marks nine inches apart are further apart than the
front and back legs of an ant, even though he is not now looking at an
ant, and so lacks visual evidence to support his belief (Willamson
2007b: 166–67; cited in Casullo 2012c: 312–18). The
proposal is that it is his skill at making comparisons of
length, not his evidence, that supports his judgment.


Even if true, it seems that we can distinguish empirically based from
understanding based skills. A person's skill at making
comparisons of length is empirically based while his skill at
judging, say, that in Sheep you do not know that there are
sheep in the field is based in his understanding the concept
“knowledge”. So even if the exercise of relevant skills
can provide justification apart from evidence, it still allows for a
way to distinguish a priori from a posteriori
(empirical) justification, provided the intellectual skill that
involves understanding is founded on no more than
“enabling” experiences
 (see above, sec. 4).


Another view that rejects the idea that a justified belief must be
founded on evidence says that all of our beliefs are
prima facie justified so all of them are what one might call
“default reasonable”, that is, justified barring reasons
to reject them (this is what Gilbert Harman (2001) calls
“general foundationalism”). On some accounts of a
priori justification, namely those that hold that a
priori justification is justification independent of
empirical evidence, general foundationalism would imply that all
of a person's beliefs are prima facie (or weakly) a priori
justified since that justification would stem merely from the fact
that the person believes them, not from any empirical evidence
that supports them. On this view, and contrary to initial
appearances, there is really no difference in the way the propositions
at the start of this essay are prima facie justified since
they are all weakly a priori justified if you accept them. If
some are all things considered less justified than others, it
is because of the relationships between them. Coherence considerations
account for all things considered justification and are what upsets
initially equal prima facie justification. Further, this view
has the implication that you could be prima facie justified
in believing extremely bizarre propositions, say, beliefs about what
happens on the planet Gliese 581d (Russell 2012: 100), even
though you have no empirical or testimonial evidence to support your
beliefs about this alien planet. (You may, but need not, also believe
that the Gliesians are in touch with you (but not others) via
telepathy because you are “the chosen one”.). Insofar as
you have no defeating evidence, you could even be all things
considered justified in believing all those things about the
Glieseans, despite having no evidence to support your beliefs.


Hartry Field also holds that belief in certain propositions can be
“default reasonable”, that is, justified but not on the
basis of evidence. He seems to think that if a belief's being
“default reasonable” were sufficient for its being a
priori justified, too many beliefs would count as being a
priori justified. That's because he thinks, for example, that
“People usually tell the truth” is default reasonable but
not a priori justified. So he adds the requirement that an
a priori justified belief cannot be empirically
defeasible (Field 2000: 119–20; cited in Casullo 2012c:
318–20). But that requirement seems too stringent. Suppose I
have an intuition that, necessarily, if P, then Q for
some specific P and Q (say, that necessarily, if a
person has a justified true belief, he has knowledge). Then it is
possible for me to be a priori justified in believing that
conditional is true. However, if I think of a possible example where
P obtains but Q does not, that a priori
justification will be defeated. But an actual example known
empirically to obtain of a P that is not a Q is a
possible example. (A student once described such an example to me. She
did not want her mother to know she had gotten a tattoo. So she threw
away the receipt.  But her mom found her boyfriend's receipt with no
name on it in the glove compartment of her car and, on that good
evidence, concluded that she had gotten a tattoo! Her mom had a
justified true belief, but not knowledge, that my student had gotten a
tattoo.) So actual examples known empirically to obtain can defeat
a priori justification.


Further, I might be a priori justified in believing the
conclusion of some mathematical proof I have constructed, but that
justification can be defeated by the testimony of excellent
mathematicians who tell me that the proof is unsound. Since testimony
is an empirical source, this is another example of how a
priori justification can be defeated by empirical evidence.
(Thanks to an anonymous referee for suggesting this example to me.) It
is a mistake to think that a priori justification cannot be
empirically defeasible. Of course, if Field allows that a
priori justification can be empirically defeated, he
faces the same problem as Harman in drawing the boundaries of a
priori justification too broadly.


A final attempt at offering a view of a priori justification
that does not rest on nonexperiential evidence holds that we
are entitled to accept certain propositions on no evidence
and that entitlement on no grounds (evidence) is what a
priori justification amounts to. To be entitled to accept, or
trust, some presupposition is for it to be rational to accept or
trust it, though this is supposed to be different from being
justified in believing it. Crispin Wright proposes that the
laws of logic and the presupposition that I am not now in the midst
of a coherent and continuing dream, not now a brain-in-a vat, etc.,
are rational presuppositions. That's because certain “cognitive
projects” (i) could not be pursued without presupposing those
things, (ii) there is no evidence to think that those presuppositions
are false (even if also none to think them true), and (iii) nothing
will be lost, and something may be gained, by accepting these
presuppositions (so dominance considerations recommend accepting
them) (see Jenkins 2006). Of course, the gains and losses must not be
pragmatic gains and losses (gains and losses in happiness, prestige,
accomplishments, wealth and the like). Otherwise all that would
follow is that it is practically rational to accept the
presuppositions. The gains and losses must be epistemic (say, having
to do with truth, or probable truth, or with evidence), for Wright
wants the rational acceptance of such presuppositions to be an answer
to the skeptic. 


But even if we accept that the gains and losses must be epistemic,
there seem to be counterexamples to Wright's view. Given
(i)–(iii) above, Wright should count the view that there are no
miracles as a rational presupposition of science because (i) science
could not be pursued if it assumed that some phenomena might have
supernatural causes (then why continue to look for natural causes
instead of positing some supernatural cause of some phenomena?), (ii)
there is no evidence to think that there are miracles (people being
deceived, or deceiving others, is at least as good an explanation of
apparent miracles, as Hume proposed), and (iii) nothing may be lost,
and something gained, by making this presupposition (scientists will
continue to look for natural causes and thereby find some they would
otherwise not have found if they assumed that there could be
supernatural causes). But even if within the cognitive project of
science we are entitled to accept that there are no miracles, it does
not seem that we are entitled a priori to accept it. Any such
entitlement would seem to rest on inductive grounds: in the past,
phenomena have been capable of being explained without invoking God or
any other spiritual or immaterial beings as causes. So probably in the
future they will be explained in naturalistic terms, too.


Counterexamples aside, some have questioned whether the
project-relative rationality of a presupposition (determined by the
epistemic value of the consequences of accepting it) is enough to make
it rational to accept that presupposition (Jenkins 2006). For
instance, when conducting certain inquiries, it might be rational
relative to some project or kind of inquiry to accept that
the world is a pretty orderly place, yet not epistemically rational to
accept the presupposition itself (maybe we should suspend judgment
about that until we go look at the world). This objection parallels a
standard objection to rule egoism in the practical realm in which
critics point out that it may be in a person's rational self-interest
to accept a set of rules (analogues to Wright's presuppositions) for
action but not in her rational self-interest always to act in
accordance with some rule in that set (the analogue to its not always
being rational to believe in accordance with those
presuppositions).


Sometimes Wright does not seem to appeal to a dominance argument to
make his case that it is rational to accept a presupposition.
Sometimes it seems that the answer for Wright will depend on whether
that presupposition rests on “more secure” presuppositions
or not (Wright 2004a: 192; cited in Casullo 2012c: 321–22). But that seems
to allow a presupposition based on a whim that does not rest on any
more secure presuppositions could be justified, and even a
priori justified.


In summary, it seems that accounts of a priori justification
that do not hold that it rests on evidence provided by a
nonexperiental source are in danger of counting certain beliefs or
acceptances as a priori justified that, intuitively, do not
seem to be. They are in danger of drawing the circle of a
priori justification too broadly to include propositions that are
“default reasonable” (Harman) or are presuppositions of
science (Wright) that may be justified but do not seem to be a
priori justified. The attempt by Field to narrow the circle rests
on a false assumption, namely, that a priori justification
cannot be defeated by empirical evidence.


Since a correct account of intuition can explain why we are justified
in accepting the laws of logic (and, I'd add, of induction and
inference to the best explanation), these cases do not represent
problems for rational intuitionism. It's true that rational
intuitionism cannot explain why we are a priori justified in
accepting the proposition that we are not now in the midst of a
persistent coherent dream or in accepting that there are no miracles,
but that is not a problem. We can be a posteriori justified
in believing these things even if we are not a priori
justified in accepting them.


I will now turn to considerations that seem to count for the view
that intellectual intuitions are evidence for the propositions that
are their objects.
7. Why we should think that intellectual intuitions provide evidence for the propositions that are their objects

There are four arguments for the view that intuitions can provide
evidence. The first argument sounds circular because it starts with
examples like Sheep and claims that it is
intuitively obvious that the intuition that the person does
not know there are sheep in the field is evidence that he
does not know. Here a second-order intuition about the evidential
weight of first-order intuitions is invoked. This approach goes on to
defend the appeal to intuitions on the grounds that according to our
standard justificatory practice intuitions as well as experiences
(visual, tactile, auditory, olfactory, taste) provide evidence. It
then challenges those who want to eliminate intuitions as a basic
source of evidence to say why this is legitimate but, say, eliminating
all but visual experiences as basic sources of evidence is not (Bealer
1996a,b, 1998, 1999).


The second sort of argument rests on the idea of concept possession
(Bealer 1999: 255–65). The basic idea is that if a person
possesses a concept (or, perhaps, possesses it under certain ideal
conditions and in a certain “determinate” way (Bealer
1999: 256)), then her intuitive judgments of actual, or hypothetical,
cases where the concept is in play will be reliable, that is, for the
most part will be true. For instance, if a person adequately grasps
the concept “knowledge”, then, for the most part, her
intuitive judgments about whether a person knows, or does not know, in
various scenarios will be correct. Concept possession guarantees the
reliability of concrete case intuitions. A person would not possess
the concept of a square if he often applied the term to circles and
ovals or did not apply it to squares whose sides were over three
hundred feet long. In general, to have the concept of an X, a
person must be reliable (though not infallible) in his application of
the term X to, and only to, things that are X. (Bealer
1996b: 7, 11–12, 18 and 1999: 246 and Peacocke 2000 both appeal
to concept possession to justify the evidential force of rational
intuitions).


However, even if concept possession requires reliability, this does
not show that concept possession guarantees justification since
reliability does not. There are lots of cases where, intuitively,
reliability is not sufficient for justification. Keith Lehrer's famous
Truetemp case is one of them (Lehrer 1990: 163–64;
1996: 32–33), as is BonJour's case of Norman (BonJour 1985:
41–45) who has reliable clairvoyant powers but no confirmation
of their reliability. On the basis of his first clairvoyant
experience, Norman finds that he cannot help believing something (say,
that the President is in New York), but, intuitively, he is not
justified, and does not know, what he can't help believing. This
example shows that reliability by itself is not sufficient for either
justification or knowledge. So there is no reason to think that even
if concept possession guarantees reliability, it guarantees
justification. George Bealer thinks that a certain sort of concept
possession (what he calls determinate possession) guarantees
necessary reliability, and that, in turn, does guarantee
justification. (Hence his view is called “modal
reliabilism”.) Bealer thinks that the following is false:
necessarily, if your belief is the result of a reliable
belief producing mechanism (or process), you are justified in holding
it. However, he thinks the following is true: if your belief is the
result of a necessarily reliable mechanism (or process), you
are justified in holding it. In addition, he thinks that a certain
sort of concept possession necessarily makes our judgments
about the applicability of concepts to concrete cases reliable.


A third attempt to show that intuitions provide evidence relies on
what we might call an outside source of evidence. We might
rely on the standard five senses to confirm the reliability of some
sixth sense (say, echo-location), and then later rely on that sixth
sense alone to provide justification. Similarly, suppose the best
explanation of my failures, and the failures of others, to find
counterexamples to propositions that seem intuitively obvious is that
those propositions are necessary truths. That could give me reason to
believe that having an intuition that P is good evidence that
P is necessarily true. In turn, that could justify me in later
relying on intuition alone to provide justification for the
proposition that is its object.


A fourth approach offers ideal conditions under which
rational insights, or intellectual intuitions, provide evidence
(requiring ideal conditions is not unique to this approach as Bealer
1996b and 1999 and Peacocke 2000 also require them in their defense
of intuition based on concept possession). BonJour argues that a
priori justification that rests on rational intuitions, or
insights, does not require what he calls a metajustification
for those intuitions to provide justification, that is, does not
require reasons, or an argument, to show that beliefs based on those
intuitions are likely to be true. In this respect, intuition is like
introspection and unlike perception, premonitions about the future,
and clairvoyance (if it exists). BonJour seems to think that a
principle something like the following is true: (J) if
S has a rational intuition, or insight, that necessarily
p after (i) considering p with a reasonable degree
of care (which includes a clear and careful understanding of
p), (ii) having at least “an approximate understanding
of the concept of logical or metaphysical necessity” (BonJour
1998: 127 and 114), and (iii) S is neither dogmatic nor biased
regarding p (BonJour 1998: sec. 5.3, 133–37), then
S's rational insight that p makes p likely
to be true. Here (though not elsewhere) he seems to assume that
beliefs that are likely to be true are justified, so (J)
implies that subjects that meet the conditions specified in its
antecedent are justified in believing p. Given BonJour's
objections to reliability as being sufficient for justification, he
probably means that a belief that satisfies conditions
(i)–(iii) is epistemically likely to be true, where
that sort of likelihood does not imply objective likelihood and can
be present even in demon and Matrix worlds.


However, BonJour does not believe that a person must be justified
in believing (J) (or some similar principle) in order to
be justified in believing some proposition on the basis of an
intuition that, as a matter of fact, satisfies conditions
(i)–(iii). He seems to think that if (J) could be
justified, it would be either by empirical evidence or by
intuition. If empirically justified, he thinks that rational intuition
would not then provide a priori evidence.  On the other hand,
justification by intuition would be circular since (J) is
supposed to give the conditions for intuitive justification. So it
seems that there is no way to justify a principle that states the
conditions sufficient for a priori justification: an attempt
at empirical justification would turn rational intuitions into
empirical evidence and an attempt at intuitive justification would be
circular. So if justification via rational intuitions is possible, it
cannot require a metajustification of some principle like
(J). Still, according to BonJour, if (J) is in fact true
and rational intuitions satisfy the antecedent conditions of it, they
will provide a priori justification.


Given the above discussion of the “outside source”
approach, BonJour seems mistaken in thinking that an empirical
justification of (J) would mean that intuitions at most provide
empirical evidence. After all, (J)'s truth is not affected by
any sort of justification, and it is a statement of when intuitions
provide a priori justification. All that an empirical
justification will provide are reasons to think (J) true, not
reason to think intuitions do not provide a priori
justification. Of course, if you thought that empirical justification
presupposes a priori justification, and that that sort of
justification presupposes (J), there could be no non-circular
justification of (J).
8. Should we doubt the evidential force of intellectual intuitions?
8.1 What is an intuition?


If by “intuition” we mean “the mental state in which
some proposition seems true to someone but not on the basis of any
inference”, then there will be no reason to think that an
intuition always provides evidence for the proposition that is its
object. It might seem obviously true to me that I am going to win the
next lottery or that there are more females than males on Gliese
581d, where that seeming is not the result of some inference.
That “intuition” would provide no evidence that I am going
to win or that what I believe about Gliese 581d is true. But
the best way to understand “intuition”, if we are looking
for a meaning that implies that intuitions always provide
some evidence for the propositions that are their objects, is
to mean by “intuition”: the mental state in which some
proposition seems true to someone, not on the basis of any inference,
but solely on the basis of his understanding that
proposition. (Several philosophers appeal to the understanding in
their accounts of a priori justification: Bealer in all his
essays; BonJour 1998; Jackson 2000; Peacocke 2000.)

But suppose there were someone with an unusual psychology such that
whenever he understood a certain contingent proposition, such as
“there are more females than males on Gliese
581d”, it would immediately seem true to him. Then he would
have a non-inferential belief in that proposition based
solely on his understanding it, and so on this account would
have an intuition, and be justified in believing, that it is true. To
meet this objection we might have to return to Bealer's and BonJour's
idea that the objects of intuitions must be modal propositions, but
modify it to say that they must either be propositions of the
form possibly P, necessarily, P, or P
itself, provided that person would have the intuition that
necessarily, P if she fully understood P,
possessed the concept of necessity and carefully considered whether
“necessarily P” is true. So there can be an
intuition in Sheep that the observer does not know that there
are sheep in the field, provided the person who has that intuition
would have an intuition regarding the corresponding modal proposition,
“necessarily, in the circumstances the observer does
not know that there are sheep in the field”, if she fully
understood the non-modal part of that proposition, possessed the
concept of necessity, and carefully considered whether the relevant
modal proposition is true. However, a person who possessed
the concept of necessity could not have an intuition regarding the
corresponding modal proposition about Gliesians,
“necessarily, there are more females than males on
Gliese 581d” simply on the basis of fully understanding
the non-modal part of that proposition and the modal proposition
itself.


An alternative defense of the evidential force of intellectual
intuitions would say that when a person is a priori justified
in believing some proposition it is because she possesses the relevant
concepts expressed in that proposition. Possessing those concepts, and
understanding the proposition that contains them, explains
why the person is justified in accepting that proposition even if it
does not cause them to hold it. The concept possession, or
understanding, of the person with the odd psychology who believes
contingent propositions once he understands what they are asserting
may cause him to believe those propositions, but it does not
explain why he is justified in believing them. Strictly speaking, a
person's acceptance of some proposition is based solely on her
understanding it only if that understanding both causes and
justifies her accepting that proposition. Hence, strictly speaking,
the beliefs or acceptances of the person with the odd psychology would
not be based solely on his understanding.
8.2 Experimental philosophy


A new branch of philosophy called experimental philosophy (X-phi for
short) has studied the intuitive judgments of people (often
students) when presented with well-known examples in epistemology and
ethics. They ask these people (often from different ethnic, cultural,
economic, and educational backgrounds) whether someone in a
hypothetical scenario knows, or only believes, that some proposition
is true, say, in Sheep whether the person knows, or only
believes, that there are sheep in the field. In ethics they may
present the subjects with a case and ask them if it is wrong, or not
wrong, to do what is described. In a case often called
Transplant, five innocent people are desperately in need of
certain vital organs, and the only way to save them is to cut up some
innocent person and distribute his organs to the five (transplant
surgery has been perfected and our potential donor is a perfect match
to all five). Experimental philosophers will ask their subjects
whether it is wrong, or not wrong, to cut up the one to save the
five, and then record their intuitive judgments. In another
case often called Trolley, a runaway trolley is on track
A and headed for five innocent people who are trapped on that
track. All person S can do to avoid this is to turn the
trolley down track B where one innocent person is trapped. If
S does nothing, five will die; if he throws the switch via a
remote device, the one on track B will be killed.
Experimental philosophers ask whether it would be wrong, or not
wrong, for S to throw the switch. They record the data, which
they take to be intuitive judgments on the cases, and note
differences in the responses, say, between different ethnic or
economic groups.


There is a danger that what the experimenters mean by
“intuition” and “an intuitive judgment”
appeals to the broad, commonsense understanding of the term
“intuition” given above
 (sec. 8.1, first sentence), 
not to the narrower sense which requires that
intuitions be based solely on understanding the proposition at
issue (cf., Bealer 1998: 213 for this objection). If that is
true, then people who draw conclusions about the evidential force of
“intuitions” on the basis of these experiments may be
guilty of talking past the epistemologists. Maybe the intuitions that
are studied by experimental philosophers do not provide evidence but
intuitions understood as being based solely on the understanding do
(see sec. 5 and
 8.1, above).
 Some of the experiments seem to show that there are differences in
“intuitions” (in some sense) for cases in both
epistemology and ethics that depend on differences in a person's
ethnic, cultural, economic, or educational background. So how could
intuition be a source of evidence given that there is so much
disagreement in intuitions and no way to discount some and privilege
others?  Suppose we had the ability to see clouds in the sky but
nothing else, nothing on earth and nothing solid in the sky. Suppose,
also, that people reported “seeing” different shapes in
the clouds.  Wouldn't we then have reason to think that
“skysight” does not provide evidence of the shapes of
clouds? Of course, the answer to that question depends on what is the
best explanation of the disagreement. Perhaps different people are
looking at the clouds from different angles, some have impaired
“skyvision” while others do not, some have a stake in the
clouds looking a certain way while others have no stake or a stake in
their looking a different way, and so on. Similar sorts of
consideration need to be looked at when it comes to the differing
intuitions observed by experimental philosophers. We need to know what
the best explanation of the disagreements is before concluding
anything about the evidential status of intuitions.


Suppose we grant for the sake of argument that experimental
philosophers have observed disagreement in intuitions in the relevant
sense, that is, where an intuition is understood to be an intellectual
seeming founded solely on the understanding of concepts.
Before concluding that intuitions cannot provide evidence, we must ask
why they disagree. In so-called Truetemp cases, a
person is able to correctly tell the ambient temperature because,
unbeknownst to him, his brain has been affected by a blow to the head.
More Westerners than East Asians (Korean, Japanese, Chinese) judge
that the person knows what the temperature is. But do they
make different background assumptions? Do more Westerners than East
Asians assume that the person has confirmed his ability to
correctly tell the temperature? If so, there may not be a fundamental
difference in their intuitions because the members of the two groups
of subjects will not be considering precisely the same
case. Until we investigate further into whether different
background assumptions are being made, we should suspend judgment
about what to conclude from the different responses.


Or perhaps when the intuitions of different groups differ, they may be
appealing to different concepts even though the same
word (say, “knows”) is being read by the
different groups when they read the experimental scenarios. Further,
insofar as “intuitions” are understood to rest
solely on the understanding of the relevant epistemic
proposition, the depth, or degree, of understanding can vary across
individuals and cultures, and this could account for differing
intuitions. This difference can remain even when subjects are first
screened to make sure that they have at least minimal
competence with the relevant concept (say, of knowledge). Until
there is some reason to think that the differences in intuition are
not the result of people employing different concepts and are not due
to different levels of understanding of the concepts, the experimental
philosophers should suspend judgment on whether intuitions, properly
understood, can provide evidence.


The crucial role of the understanding in grounding intuitions, when
properly understood, might make one think that the only relevant data
regarding different intuitions are different intuitions among
professional philosophers who probably share equally high levels of
understanding of the concepts. Of course, if differences were found
here it might be because some of these philosophers have a vested
interest in defending a view that to others has counterintuitive
implications. On the other hand, if few differences were found, this
might be due to the education of graduate students and the culture of
professional philosophy. Perhaps graduate students are taught that
certain Gettier cases defeat the justified true belief account of
knowledge and, for the most part, students with contrary intuitions do
not make it through graduate school! Perhaps a person's colleagues
look down upon, or dismiss, someone who does not share intuitions that
are widespread in the discipline. Insofar as there are several
competing explanations for disagreement in intuitions (properly
understood), and one is not obviously better than the others, we
should suspend judgment about the evidential weight of intuitions,
just as we should suspend judgment on whether a coyote or a dog has
left certain paw prints in an area where it is not known whether it's
more likely to be dog than coyote paw prints or vice versa. Kornblith
(2010, 2013) has argued that we should suspend judgment on most
philosophical questions given the widespread disagreement among
“epistemic peers” on these questions. Goldberg (2013)
agrees but has argued that a philosopher who knows there are
“epistemic peers” on the opposite side of an issue can
still appropriately adopt an attitude of regarding her own view as
defensible because that attitude does not imply that the person
believes her view is correct.
 Some initial differences in intuitions (e.g., due to differences
in economic class) have not been replicated in later
experiments. Other differences have been found to obtain only when two
or more cases are considered together but not when considered
separately. Some experiments have been criticized because they were
poorly designed, not allowing researchers to determine whether it was
one factor (the possibility of error) or another (the practical
benefits or harms = the stakes) that accounted for different
judgments. Different results have been observed depending on whether
the subjects were asked, “Does the person know or does he not
know” rather than, “Does the person really know or only
believe?” But even if experimental design is improved, and
results that show difference in judgments between different groups are
replicated, it will not follow that intuitions are not
evidence. Whether the data support the view that intuitions provide
evidence, or support the opposite, depends on what the best
explanation of those differences is. (I am indebted to Beebe (2012)
for updating me on the current state of experimental philosophy.  His
essay also raises some of the same objections and problems that I
discuss here.)


And if the data collected only concerns intuitions understood in a
loose, commonsensical way, then the conclusions reached will not be
relevant to the epistemic claim that intuitions, properly
understood, have evidential weight, at least when they are the
intuitions of people with a deep understanding of the relevant
concepts where those people are not influenced by bias and prejudice
(that is, where the intuitions are produced under ideal
conditions).
8.3 Naturalized epistemology


There are other objections to the reliance on intuitions in philosophy
that do not call into question their reliability. They call into
question their relevance. We have seen that Casullo proposes to treat
“experience” as a natural kind term, and Hilary Kornblith
and Philip Kitcher propose to treat epistemic terms such as
“knowledge” and “justification” in that way.
Kornblith thinks that intuitions can help direct us to the appropriate
objects, or phenomena, of investigation but not much more. For
instance, we have an intuition that knowledge is not a type of
furniture so we should not start our empirical investigation into the
essential nature of knowledge by looking at furniture (Kornblith 1998,
2005, 2006). Kitcher relies heavily on the example, “Acids
contain oxygen”, to conclude that we cannot have any a
priori knowledge since we cannot have a priori knowledge
of that proposition (Kitcher 1983: 82–85). Of course,
“acid” is a natural kind term, and we cannot have a
priori knowledge of the essential nature of that to which a
natural kind term refers. So the fact that we cannot have a
priori knowledge of propositions that contain natural kind terms
is no reason to think that we cannot have a priori knowledge,
period.


The problem with this empirical approach to philosophy is that the
terms that philosophy is interested in do not seem to be natural kind
terms (Feldman 1999: 176–80). What I called The Problem of
Possible and Unwelcome Big Surprises (the PUBS problem,
 sec. 3, above) 
applies here,
too, where the concepts to be investigated include those of
justification, evidence, and knowledge. With a natural kind term like
“water”, the properties commonly associated with it
(clear, odorless, colorless, thirst-quenching, etc.) fix the reference
of “water” but are not essential properties of
it. However, the properties relevant to knowledge are part of the
essence of knowledge (e.g., being justified, believed, and
true). Similar remarks apply to other terms that have been of interest
to philosophers: “causality”, “personal
identity”, “justice”, “being morally
responsible”, “acting freely”, etc.
8.4 Pragmatism


Another approach that discounts the role of intuitions in philosophy,
especially in epistemology, is pragmatic. The idea is to first
determine what epistemic goals we want principles to serve, and then
to discover empirically which epistemic principles, if adhered to,
will best serve those goals (Weinberg 2006). For instance, your goal
might be to have lots of true beliefs or, alternatively, to have few
false ones. Or your goal might be to have beliefs that make you happy.
Probably the best set of rules to follow to obtain lots of true
beliefs will be different from, and more lenient than, the best set of
rules to follow to avoid having false beliefs, and it is probable that
those sets of rules will be different from the set of rules you should
adopt if you are interested in having beliefs that make you
happy. It's reasonable to think that intuitions will have to be
appealed to in determining what the appropriate epistemic
goal is, and it is probably different from any of the three just
considered. For instance, Lehrer (1986: 6–7) holds that the
appropriate epistemic goal for any proposition, P, a
person is considering is to believe P, if and only if, it is
true. Intuition must be relied on to determine that the goal of making
a person happy is epistemically irrelevant, that is, that a
belief cannot be epistemically justified simply because a
person's holding it makes him happy.  It also seems
counterintuitive to think that the appropriate epistemic goal
is to have few false beliefs, for that goal could be satisfied by
believing only obvious and trivial truths such as 1 + 1 = 2; that you
exist; that your name is such-and-such; and so on. It's just as
counterintuitive to think that the appropriate epistemic goal
is to have many true beliefs, for that goal could be satisfied by
memorizing all the phone numbers of people in the phone book. The
pragmatic approach that I have sketched seems doomed at the outset: it
cannot avoid appealing to intuitions in order to determine what the
appropriate epistemic goal is.


Another problem that faces the pragmatic approach is that whether we
are empirically justified in believing some epistemic
principle, P1, (say, that you should believe a proposition for
which you have the most confirming instances) serves the
relevant epistemic goal, G1, (say, having many true beliefs)
depends on whether some other epistemic principle, Q1,
implies that we are (say, a principle that says that adherence to the
epistemic principles you accept, like P1, are more likely to
lead to truth if you have consulted a crystal ball and the crystal
ball says that adherence to them is more likely to lead to truth). But
what justifies us in believing that these other principles like
Q1 are true? On the pragmatic approach, it must depend on
whether adherence to them serves relevant epistemic goals
(G1 or some other goals, G2, G3, etc.). Well,
they either do or do not, but we want to know whether we
arejustified in thinking they serve the relevant goals. That
must be determined by some third set of epistemic principles,
R1 (maybe R1 says that whether adherence to Q1 is
likely to lead to truth depends on whether the reading of tea leaves
says it will). At each step we must presuppose certain epistemic
principles in order to assess whether we are justified in
believing that certain lower level principles serve the relevant
epistemic goals. We could bring this regress to a halt if we could
appeal to epistemic intuitions to assess the presupposed principles,
but the pragmatic approach disallows such an appeal.
8.5 Can intuitions be checked for accuracy?


A different sort of objection to intuitions as a source of a
priori evidence assumes that a source of justification must be
capable of being calibrated to determine whether it is accurate
(Cummins 
  1998:
116–18). What we see through a telescope justifies us in
believing that the moon has mountains because we have looked through
telescopes at distant mountains on earth and then gone to them and
discovered that the telescopes presented an accurate picture of the
mountains. But what, the objection goes, can intuitions be checked
against? Other intuitions? But that is like checking a crystal ball
against itself.
 BonJour has argued that many errors involving apparent rational
insights (intuitions) can be corrected internally by further
reflection, or by appealing to coherence (BonJour 1998:
116–19). Others have replied that neither perception nor memory
(Goldman 2007: 5) can be checked either, except against themselves,
but that does not prevent these sources from providing justification
in certain circumstances.


In reply to this sort of response, critics of intuition-based views of
a priori justification have said that at least different
types of perception can be checked against each other, say, vision
against touch (Weatherson 2003: 4). The critics of intuition add that
while we can distinguish circumstances where, say, vision is
unreliable (say, where the lighting conditions, or the person's
eyesight, are bad; when we are in a desert where optical illusions
occur; when we are hallucinating, etc.) from circumstances where it is
not, nothing similar can be done when it is a matter of
intuitions.


However, the latter does not seem true. I can tell when I do not have
a very firm grasp of some concept (say, of poignancy), and sometimes I
know that someone has thought about some concept as long and as hard
as I have (is my epistemic peer), has intuitions opposed to mine, and
I cannot explain his intuitions away. In those circumstances, the
evidential weight of my intuitions is at least diminished and may be
reduced to zero.


Someone might respond that this only shows that we can know under what
conditions intuitions are not reliable, but we do not know under what
conditions they are reliable. Sometimes we can check one sense
modality against another. But suppose we could check a Ouija board
against a crystal ball, and they always agreed. That need not give us
reason to believe that either is a reliable source of truth. Perhaps
some agent or force is causing the two sources to agree even though
what they agree on is false; perhaps there is a common cause that
explains the relevant agreement. Suppose, for instance, over a good
stretch of time both sources agreed on what the weather has been like
on Gliese 581d. I think we should suspend judgment about
whether they are accurate in their weather reports if we do not have
any sensory input that bears on the issue. So agreement between, say,
vision and touch may not justify us in believing what they agree
upon. Again, it depends on what the best explanation of agreement is
whether it be agreement between the Ouija board and the crystal ball,
sight and touch, or between the intuitions of different people.


Further, why should we accept the claim that a source of justification
must be capable of being tested for its reliability? Even if we cannot
test whether we are in The Matrix or some Cartesian demon
world, it does not seem to matter as regards justification.  Perhaps
that is because justification is a matter of being epistemically
responsible to the evidence (empirical or a priori), not a
matter of reliability, though just what epistemic responsibility
amounts to is a difficult question. Someone could even be
epistemically responsible in believing what a Ouija board says if it
had “a good track record”, that is, if in the past the
beliefs it prescribed mostly turned out to be confirmed by perception
and the best explanation of all that was that our five senses and the
Ouija board enabled us to grasp the relevant truths.


Finally, it may be true that intuitions do not have as much
evidential weight as perceptions. It seems that coherence
considerations can override intuitions more easily than they can
override perceptions. A person who initially has the intuition that
someone who holds a losing ticket in a large lottery does not
know that he does may justifiably give up that intuition on the
basis of some theory of knowledge that implies that the person
does know that he holds a losing ticket. However, someone who
sees a humming bird or bumblebee fly should not give up his belief
that he saw them fly just because some physical theory he accepts
implies that these creatures cannot fly and so he could not have seen
what he thinks he saw.
9. If intuitions can justify, can they justify propositions about the world?


Suppose, for the sake of argument, we grant that intuitions
properly understood and had under ideal conditions by people with
a deep understanding of the relevant concepts can justify certain
propositions. But can they justify propositions that are about the
world? Carrie Jenkins has argued that they can insofar as the
concepts that play a role in a priori justification have been
shaped by experience. She thinks that for knowledge (not
justification) our concepts must be grounded. By this she
means that they must accurately and non-accidentally represent the
world. So the concept table can be grounded for a person in a
world where there are tables but not for a brain-in-a-vat (BIV)
(Jenkins 2008a: 128–29). For a concept to be justified
for Jenkins is for it to be respectable for us to rely on it (by
which, I believe, she means that we would be epistemically blameless
in relying on it) as “a relevantly accurate guide to the
world” (Jenkins 2008a: 129). So a BIV can have a justified,
though not a grounded concept, about things existing in the external
world.


Jenkins's argument for thinking our concepts are grounded is that our
basic concepts are useful, but if they did not fit the world (weren't
grounded) even though they are founded on sensory input, their
usefulness would be a miracle. But since we should not believe in
miracles, those concepts must fit the world. The best explanation of
the usefulness of our concepts is that they accurately represent
features of the world that produce our sensory inputs that allow us to
navigate successfully in the world. She thinks that this No-Miracles
Argument shows that it is reasonable to think that our concepts (or
groups of concepts) mirror the world's structure (Jenkins 
 2008a: 
  139). If we have
justified concepts, we can examine them to see what they
involve and then have a priori justification for believing
that certain propositions that involve them are true of the
world. So, on her view, we (and BIVs) could be a priori
justified in thinking, merely on the basis of examining our
concepts, that all vixens are female and that there
are (or at least were) vixens, and that all bachelors are unmarried
and that there are (or at least were) bachelors. If we have
grounded concepts, we (but not BIVs) can have a
priori knowledge that all of these propositions are true.


Jenkins often appeals to an analogy with maps when discussing the
accuracy of concepts. Accurate maps accurately represent the location
of various things in the world and their location relative to each
other (how they fit together). Accurate concepts represent how things
are in the world and how they relate to each other (how they fit
together). But maps do not represent how things are in every
possible world (in some possible world San Francisco is not south
of Seattle: think how the geological plates on which these cities rest
might shift radically over time), but certain relationships between
concepts represent how things are in every possible world (in
every possible world bachelors are unmarried). Let's grant that
“all crows are birds” contains concepts (all, crow,
bird) that are grounded in our world. But how does such
non-accidental accuracy in this world give us reason to think
that “all crows are birds” is true in every possible
world?


This-worldly grounding does not seem able to explain how we can have
a priori justification and knowledge, and Jenkins's account
of a priori justification and knowledge that is built on her
notion of grounded concepts has the counterintuitive result that we
can be a priori justified in believing, and can even know,
things about the world (say, that vixens and bachelors exist or
existed) simply on the basis of examining our concepts. It's
more plausible to think that we have a priori justification
for believing that if someone is a
bachelor, he is unmarried (and if
some animal is a vixen, it is female) and a
posteriori (empirical) justification for thinking there are
bachelors and vixens. Together these two propositions imply
that all bachelors are unmarried (all vixens are
female) and that there are bachelors (vixens).  But
since the justification of that conjunction rests in part on an
empirical premise, its justification is empirical, not a
priori. Further, we could know the relevant conditionals
a priori even if we were BIVs, provided we adequately
understood the concepts involved. We do not need to have
accurate concepts, ones that fit how the world actually is,
in order to have knowledge of the relevant conditionals. We could have
conceptual knowledge founded on the relation of concepts regardless of
whether the concepts were implanted in us by some scientists or
supercomputers (as in the film The Matrix) or God, which
shows that not even enabling experience is necessary for
a priori knowledge (though it is compatible with it), let
alone having grounded concepts (which require sensory inputs
caused by things in the real world).


Further, there seem to be actual examples of propositions that are not
founded on justified or grounded concepts that we can be a
priori justified in believing and even know. Contrary to what
Jenkins's view seems to imply, we can be a priori justified
in believing, and even know, that “Ghosts are disembodied
spiritual beings” even if we have no relevant sensory experience
that would ground the concepts (namely, ghosts, disembodied,
spiritual) involved in that proposition. She allows that some
concepts can be grounded, even if they are not directly grounded,
provided they are constituted by grounded concepts, but it is hard to
see how “spiritual” could be so constituted.

A priori justification and knowledge of propositions of the
form “All As are Bs” seem to be
justification and knowledge of conditionals that have no existential
import and are of the form, “If something is an
A, then it's a B”. A
priori justification and knowledge of propositions such as,
“In Sheep, you don't know that there are sheep in the
field”, don't imply that there are sheep, fields, etc. They
might be best understood as claiming, “If there were a situation
like the one described, you would not know that there are sheep in the
field”. 


If the propositions that are supposed to be the objects of a
priori justification and knowledge are really counterfactual
conditionals, then our justification for believing them could rest on
empirical evidence (Williamson 2007b). We can be justified in
believing, and even know, that if the earth stopped spinning half of
it would be boiling hot and half freezing cold on the basis of knowing
about what makes objects hot and cold, that the sun is hot, that the
earth does not produce its own heat, etc., that is, on empirical
grounds. On the view we are considering, we know that if someone is a
bachelor, he is unmarried on similar empirical grounds because that
conditional should really be understood as a counterfactual
conditional of the form: if X were the case, then
Y would be the case. That counterfactual conditional
is true if, and only if, in the nearest possible world where the
antecedent is true, so is the consequent. So we will be justified in
believing “all bachelors are unmarried” just in case we
are justified on empirical grounds in believing that in the
nearest possible world where someone is a bachelor he is also
unmarried.


The problem with this view is that, intuitively, “bachelors are
unmarried” seems to be true only if it is true in every possible
world, not just in nearby worlds, and the same goes for, “if we
are in a situation like the one described in Sheep, we do not
know that there are sheep in the field”.
10. What is a priori knowledge?


It is widely, though not universally, held that knowledge requires
justified true belief. If so, it is plausible to understand a
priori knowledge as knowledge founded on a priori
justification, that is, as a priori justified true belief,
plus some anti-luck conditions to handle Gettier cases. Whatever is
the correct account of a priori justification could then be
used to fill out the details of the account of a priori
knowledge.


The chief rival to accounts of a priori knowledge that
require a priori justification is knowledge reliabilism that
holds that someone knows something if, and only if, they have a true
belief that has been reliably produced, that is, produced by a
cognitive mechanism, faculty, or process that, for the most part,
yields true beliefs, and (some would add) that knowledge is not
ultimately defeated by other considerations (there are no undefeated
defeaters).  Presumably, knowledge reliabilists would say that a
person knows some proposition a priori insofar as he has a
true belief, his belief that it is true has been
produced solely by his understanding of the relevant concepts
involved, that understanding is a reliable source of true beliefs, and
that knowledge is not defeated by any undefeated defeaters. If there
are problems with this reliabilist conception of knowledge, they are
similar to the problems faced by reliabilist conceptions of
justification.


One of those problems is that a person's beliefs can be formed by a
reliable cognitive mechanism without that person's having any
confirmation, or evidence, that that mechanism is reliable. Let
Truenorth be a person who knows what direction is north, what south,
what east, and what west even after being spun around several times
with his eyes closed. Perhaps Truenorth has some internal compass like
the ones found in migratory birds. However, assume that Truenorth has
no reason to think that his beliefs about compass directions are
accurate; he has never received confirmation of their accuracy,
neither from the testimony of others or by checking things out
himself.  Nevertheless, he is confident that his beliefs about what is
north, etc., are correct. Assume, also, that he has no reason to think
that others in his society have, nor that they lack, his directional
ability. In general, assume that there are no undefeated defeaters of
Truenorth's beliefs about what is north, etc. Intuitively, it seems
that if he believes that some direction he points to is north, he is
not justified in believing, nor does he know, that it is north, even
if what he believes is true. If this is a problem for reliabilists
about empirical justification and knowledge, it is also a
problem for reliabilists when it comes to a priori
justification and knowledge.