In the accounts we give of one another, claims about our
abilities appear to be indispensable.  Some abilities are so
widespread that many who have them take them for granted, such as the
ability to walk, or to write one's name, or to tell a hawk from a
handsaw.  Others are comparatively rare and notable, such as the
ability to hit a Major League fastball, or to compose a symphony, or
to tell an elm from a beech. In either case, however, when we ascribe
such abilities to one another we have the impression that we are
making claims that, whether they are worth saying or not, are at least
sometimes true. The impression of truth exerts a pressure towards
giving a philosophical theory of ability. It is not an option, at
least at the outset, to dismiss all our talk of ability as fiction or
outright falsehood. A theory of ability can be reasonably expected to
say what it is to have an ability in a way that vindicates the
appearance of truth. Such a theory will deserve the name
‘philosophical’ insofar as it gives an account, not of
this or that range of abilities, but of abilities generally.


This article falls into three parts. The first part, Sections 1 and 2,
states a framework for discussing philosophical theories of
ability. Section 1 will say more about the distinction between
abilities and other modal aspects of people and things. Section 2 will
articulate constraints on a satisfactory theory. The second part,
Sections 3 and 4, surveys theories of ability that have been defended
in the philosophical literature. Section 3 concerns the most prominent
kind of theory, on which abilities are to be understood in terms of a
hypothetical relating an agent's actions to her volitions. Section 4
considers views of ability that are not hypothetical in this way. The
third part, Section 5, turns to the relationship between a theory of
ability and the free will debates. Such debates often involve claims
about agents' abilities, and many have hoped that getting clearer on
abilities themselves could resolve, or at least shed light on, such
debates. The aim of this last section will be to assess whether these
hopes are reasonable ones.
 
1. A taxonomy


What is an ability? On one reading, this question is
a demand for a theory of ability of the sort described
above. On another reading, however, this question simply asks for
a rough guide to what sort of things we are speaking of when
we speak of ‘abilities’. So understood, this question
is not asking for a theory of ability, but for an explanation of what
exactly a theory of ability would be a theory of. This
section will offer an answer to this question on this second, more
modest, reading.
1.1 Dispositions and powers


Let us begin with a much more general distinction, the distinction
between dispositions on the one hand and powers on
the other.


Dispositions are, at first pass, those properties picked out by
predicates like ‘is fragile’ or ‘is soluble’,
or perhaps more accurately by sentences of the form ‘x is
disposed to break when struck’ or ‘x is disposed to
dissolve when placed in water’. Dispositions so understood
have figured centrally in the metaphysics and philosophy of science of
the last half-century (Carnap 1936 & 1937, Goodman 1954), and also
in influential accounts of the mind (Ryle 1949). They are like
abilities in many significant respects, in particular in the fact that
they can exist even when not manifested. Indeed, it is an open
question whether abilities simply are, or at least are
realized by, certain dispositions (see the ‘new
dispositionalist’ proposals below in Section 5.2). But
however that question is answered, there is at least a nominal
distinction to be drawn between dispositions and the topic of this
article, namely abilities.


We may approach that distinction via the distinction that is our
topic in this section, namely the distinction between dispositions, so
understood, and powers (Reid 1788; note this term is sometimes
used to mean something like dispositions, e.g. in Molnar 2006).
Powers, at first pass, are all and only those properties that (i) are
possessed by agents and (ii) are typically expressed by the modal
auxiliary ‘can’. This immediately raises two
difficult questions that will go unanswered here, namely what it is to
be an agent and what it is to be typically expressed by
‘can’. Nonetheless, we have some intuitive idea of
what kind of things are included under the range of powers: these
include, inter alia, competence (‘She can
understand French’), potentiality (‘She can understand
French provided she takes classes’), and opportunity (‘She
can understand French now that she's awake’). (Compare
van Inwagen 1983, 8–13.)


There may be some infelicities in this way of drawing the
distinction. For example it classes those properties that satisfy (ii)
but not (i) (such as the ‘capacities’ of Cartwright 1994)
as a species of disposition, which is perhaps mistaken, or at least
overly simplistic. Nonetheless, this distinction is fit to play
its present role, which is to fix on the domain of abilities. For, in
these terms, an ability is simply a particular kind of power.
1.2 Powers and abilities


The distinction between dispositions and powers was drawn partly in
terms of their subjects: it is a necessary condition on a
power, but not on a disposition, that it be a property of an
agent. The distinction between powers generally and abilities in
particular may be drawn in terms of their objects. A
power is an ability just in case it relates an agent to an
action.


Some examples may make this distinction clear. Some powers,
though properties of agents naturally expressed by ‘can’,
do not intuitively involve any relation to action. The case of
understanding, just mentioned, is a good example of this.
Understanding a sentence, while it is not wholly passive or arational,
is not typically an action. In contrast, speaking a sentence
is. Thus the power to understand French will be a power, but not
an ability, on the present taxonomy. In contrast the power to speak
French will be an ability, since it involves a relation to action.
(Again, see van Inwagen 1983, 8–13.)


This way of drawing the distinction inherits the problems involved
in drawing the distinction between actions and non-actions.
First, there is the problem that the domain of action is itself a
contentious matter. Second, there is the problem that, even if we have
settled on an account of action, it is plausible that the domain of
action will be vague, so that there are some events that are
not definitely actions, but that are not definitely not actions either.
If this is right, then the present account of ability, which is cashed
out in terms of action, will be correspondingly contentious and
vague. The cases borderline between action and non-action may
generate problems for the theory of ability. But such problems
will not be central here. For giving such a theory will be difficult
enough even when we focus on paradigm cases of action, and so on
paradigm cases of ability.


Note there is a similarity between the present distinction between
powers and abilities and the traditional distinction between
intellectual and active powers, with the latter being
powers that essentially involve the will, and the former those that do
not (Reid 1785 & 1788). But it is not clear that these distinctions
overlap exactly. For example, the power to will itself will clearly be
an active power. It is less clear whether it will count as an ability,
for the answer to that question will turn on the contentious question
of whether willing is itself an action.
1.3 General and specific abilities


The distinctions made thus far have been distinctions between
abilities and other properties. But there is also a distinction
to be made within the class of abilities itself. This is the
distinction between general and specific abilities
(Honoré 1964, Mele 2002).


The distinction between general and specific abilities may be
brought out by way of example. Consider a well-trained tennis
player equipped with ball and racquet, standing at the service
line. There is, as it were, nothing standing between her and a
serve: every prerequisite for her serving has been met. Such an
agent is in a position to serve, or has serving as an
option. Let us say that such an agent has the specific
ability to serve.


In contrast, consider an otherwise similar tennis player who lacks a
racquet and ball, and is miles away from a tennis court. There is
clearly a good sense in which such an agent has the ability to hit a
serve: she has been trained to do so, and has done so many times in the
past. Yet such an agent lacks the specific ability to
serve, as that term was just defined. Let us say that such an
agent has the general ability to serve.


The concern of this article will be general abilities in this sense,
and unqualified references to ‘ability’ should be read in
that way. But specific abilities will also be at issue.
This is for at least two reasons.


The first is one of coverage: many of the proposals that are relevant
to the understanding of ability, especially the classical
‘conditional analysis’ (discussed in Section 3.1 below),
are naturally read as proposals about specific ability in the present
sense, and a suitably broad conception of ability lets us keep these
proposals within our domain of discussion.


The second reason is more properly philosophical. If we accept the
distinction between general and specific abilities, then we want for
our account of ability to accommodate both of them, and ultimately to
explain how they are related to each other. For this distinction is
not plausibly diagnosed as mere ambiguity; it rather marks off
something like two modes of a single kind of power. There are at least
two kinds of proposals one may make here. One, arguably implicit in
many of the ‘new dispositionalist’ approaches to ability,
is that general ability is in some sense prior to specific ability: to
have a specific ability is simply to have a general ability and to
meet some further constraint, such as having an opportunity. Another
proposal is that specific ability is in some sense prior to general
ability: to have a general ability is simply to have a specific
ability under a certain range of circumstances (see (Maier
forthcoming) for such a proposal).


The idea that there is some sort of bipartite distinction to be made
between abilities has been a prominent theme in recent work on
ability. It has been endorsed and developed, in different contexts, in
work by Eprhraim Glick (Glick 2012), Kadri Vihvelin (Vihvelin 2013),
and Ann Whittle (Whittle 2010). It is an open question whether the
bipartite distinctions in ability introduced by these authors are the
same as one another, or the same as the one introduced here. It could
be that there are several bipartite distinctions to be made
in this area, or that we simply have one distinction under several
names.
1.4 The question of ‘know how’


Some will expect that an account of ability would also be an account
of what it is to know how to perform an action, on the
supposition that one knows how to perform a certain action just in
case one has the ability to perform that action. This supposition,
which we may call the Rylean account of know how (since it is
most explicitly defended in Ryle 1949, 25–61), has been called
into question in an influential discussion by Jason Stanley and
Timothy Williamson (Stanley and Williamson 2001). Let us briefly
consider Stanley and Williamson's argument and how it bears on the
theory of ability.


Stanley and Williamson argue, on broadly linguistic grounds, that
our default view of know how ought to be rather different from
Ryle's. Part of the argument for this is that standard
treatments of embedded questions (‘know who’, ‘know
where’, and so forth; see Karttunen 1977) suggest a rather
different treatment. On this treatment, to know how to A is to
know a certain proposition. At first pass, in Stanley and
Williamson's presentation, for S to know how to A is for S to
know, of some contextually relevant way of acting w, that w is a way
for S to A. Stanley and Williamson develop and defend such a
treatment, and offer independent considerations for rejecting
Ryle's own arguments for the Rylean view. On their view,
then, to know how to A is not to have an ability.


Stanley and Williamson's arguments are far from widely
accepted (see Noë 2005), but they tell at the very least against
simply assuming that an account of ability will also be an
account of know how. So we will leave questions of know how to
one side in what follows. It is also reasonable to hope that an
account of ability, while it may not simply be an account of
know how, will at least shed light on disputes about know how.
For so long as we lack a theory of what an ability is, the precise
content of the Rylean view (and of its denial) remains unclear.
So it may be that getting clear on abilities may help us, perhaps
indirectly, to get clear on know how as well.


There has been far too much work on the topic of know how in the last
several years to adequately review it here. Among those works that
bear mentioning are Jason Stanley's book-length development of his and
Williamson's initial position (Stanley 2011), as well as the papers
collected in (Bengson and Moffett 2011). Interested readers are
encouraged to consult the entry on
 knowledge-how.
2. Constraints on a theory of ability


If one wishes to give a theory of ability of the sort described at
the outset—one that does justice to our ordinary judgments
about abilities—that theory will have to meet certain
constraints. This section canvasses two of the most important
kinds of such constraints.
2.1 Extensional constraints


Since our ordinary conception of ability is one on which almost
everyone has some abilities and lacks others, we do not want our theory
to ascribe too few or too many abilities to
agents. These are extensional constraints on a theory of
ability.


One theory that appears to ascribe too few abilities to
agents is the error theory about ability, according to which
agents never have the ability to do anything. A slightly more
modest theory which also ascribes too few abilities to agents is one
that says that agents have the ability to do only what they actually
do. In the Metaphysics, Aristotle ascribes such a view
to the Megarians:

  
There are some—such as the Megarians—who say that
something is capable only when it is acting, and when it is not acting
it is not capable. For example, someone who is not building is not
capable of building, but someone who is building is capable when he is
building; and likewise too in other cases. It is not hard to see
the absurd consequences of this. (1046b; Makin 2006, 3)
  


Such views of abilities have not received much explicit defense,
though they follow naturally from some views that have been widely
defended. For example, they naturally follow from
‘necessitarian’ views which deny that anything but what is
actual is possible. Nonetheless, insofar as we are seeking a
theory of ability that does some justice to our ordinary judgments,
these views fall outside the domain of plausible candidates for such a
theory.


There is also the risk of ascribing too many abilities to
agents. One theory that does so is what we might call the
omnipotence theory, according to which any agent has the
ability to do anything whatsoever. It is not obvious that such a view,
which Descartes for one seems to have attributed to God, is coherent,
let alone plausible (see the discussion in Curley 1984). A
somewhat more modest theory is one on which any agent has the ability
to do anything that is metaphysically possible. But this
view too is implausible, for it is plausible, at least by the lights of
our ordinary judgments, that there are many actions that it is
metaphysically possible for someone to perform that she lacks the
ability to perform.


A theory of ability that wants to uphold our ordinary conception of
ability will therefore have to avoid ascribing too few or
too many abilities to agents. This is not a trivial
task, and it remains to be seen whether there is an account of ability
that can successfully steer between these extremes. If there is
not, one reaction may be to relax the extensional constraints and
revisit some of the more radical views of ability just mentioned.
2.2 Actuality constraints


Having an ability to perform some action stands in some
relationship to actually performing that action. But on our
ordinary conception of ability this relationship is a rather relaxed
and indirect one. The actuality constraints rule out overly
stringent ways of construing this relationship.


We do not want, first of all, for a theory of ability to take
actually performing an action to be a necessary condition for
having the ability to perform that action. This is precisely the
view that, as noted above, Aristotle attributes to the Megarians.
This view is too stringent because it seems that we can retain
abilities even at times when we are not actually exercising those
abilities. Indeed, it is plausible that there are abilities that
we never actually exercise. For example, for a normal speaker of
a language, there is some sentence that she has the ability to
meaningfully utter but never in fact meaningfully utters. If we
wish to uphold these sorts of possibilities, then we do not want to
make performance a necessary condition on having an ability.


A more delicate question is whether actually performing an action is
a sufficient condition for having the ability to perform that
action. Here intuitions diverge. On the one hand, as J.L.
Austin famously notes of a golfer who sinks a difficult putt, there is
one sense in which ‘it follows merely from the premise that he
does it, that he has the ability to do it, according to ordinary
English’ (Austin 1956, 218). On the other hand, there seems
also to be a sense in which abilities are somewhat more demanding than
this. This is the sense in which fluky success, as in the case of
the golfer, is not sufficient for ability. On this
reading, having an ability seems to demand a measure of robustness and
control that is not underwritten by one instance of success.


One conjecture suggests itself in light of the foregoing. This is that
the former sense of ability is what we have called specific
ability, and the latter what we have called general
ability. (This is the conjecture suggested by Honoré 1964,
466–468). If this is correct, then the second actuality
constraint may be stated as follows. An account of specific ability
may, and indeed ought to, treat actual success as a sufficient
condition for having a specific ability. But an account of general
ability ought not treat actual success as a sufficient condition for
having a general ability. The plausibility of this diagnosis will
depend in part on an issue already raised, namely the nature of the
relationship between specific and general ability. (A rather different
diagnosis is suggested by Mele 2002, who suggests that there are
several kinds of specific ability, and that this sort of
distinction may be drawn within the realm of specific
ability.)
3. Hypothetical theories of ability


The bulk of theories of ability that have been defended in the
historical and contemporary literature have been what we might call
hypothetical theories. On such views, to have an ability
is for it to be the case that one would act in certain ways if
one were to have certain volitions. One arrives at different
theories depending on how one understands the volitions in question and
how exactly these actions would hypothetically depend on them, but
nonetheless these views constitute something like a unified
family. Given their prominence and unity, it is natural to begin
our survey of theories of ability with them.
3.1 The ‘conditional analysis’


The most prominent hypothetical theory of ability is what has come
to be called the ‘conditional analysis’. In this
section, we will survey that form of analysis, the problems for it, and
alternatives to it that are supposed to overcome those problems.


The conditional analysis of ability has at least two
aspects. First, S has an ability to A just in case a
certain conditional is true of her. Second, that conditional has the
following form: S would A if S were to have
a certain volition. The precise form such an analysis will take will
depend on, first, how we interpret this conditional and, second, which
volition figures in the antecedent.


It has been standard in the literature, when this first question has
been raised, to understand the conditional as a subjunctive
conditional (Ginet 1980), and we will assume in what follows that this
is the best form of the conditional analysis. There has been some
disagreement about whether it is a might or a would
conditional that is relevant (for an account of this distinction, see
Lewis 1973, 21–24), as well as about which volition is relevant.
In the following we will take the relevant conditional to be a
would conditional, and the relevant volition to be
trying, though nothing will hang on these selections, and the
points to be raised would apply also to other forms of conditional
analysis, mutatis mutandis.


We thus arrive at the following form of the conditional
analysis:

  (CA) S has the ability to A iff S
  would A if S tried to A.
  


If (CA) were true, it would constitute a theory of ability in that it
would say under exactly what conditions some agent has the ability to
perform some action without making reference to the idea of ability
itself. (Note that a variant on (CA) that is sometimes discussed,
according to which S has the ability to A
iff S could A if S tried
to A, would not meet this standard, since the
‘could’ seems to make a claim about S's
abilities. So such a view is not really a
conditional analysis. Indeed, it is not even clear that it
involves a genuine conditional, for reasons discussed in Austin 1970,
211–213).


The conditional analysis so understood has been subject to a fair
amount of criticism, which will be reviewed in the following
section. It bears noting, however, just how apt an account of
ability it seems at first pass. It satisfies, at least at first
approximation, the extensional constraints: there are many actions with
respect to which a typical agent satisfies the relevant conditional,
and also many actions with respect to which she does not, and these
roughly correspond to her abilities. This imposes a demand even
on those who wish to reject (CA), namely to explain why, if
(CA) is simply false, it so closely approximates to the truth about
abilities.


Its approximate satisfaction of the extensional constraints is also
plausibly a reason why something like (CA) has found so many thoughtful
advocates. It is at least strongly suggested, for example, by the
following remarks from Hume's Enquiry:

  For what is meant by liberty, when applied to voluntary actions? We
  cannot surely mean that actions have so little connexion with motives,
  inclinations, and circumstances, that one does not follow with a
  certain degree of uniformity from the other, and that one affords no
  inference by which we can conclude the existence of the other. For
  these are plain and acknowledged matters of fact. By liberty, then, we
  can only mean a power of acting or not acting, according to the
  determinations of the will; this is, if we choose to remain at rest, we
  may; if we choose to move, we also may. Now this hypothetical liberty
  is universally allowed to belong to every one who is not a prisoner and
  in chains. (8.1; Hume 1748, 72)

  


Of course, Hume and many of those who have followed him have been
attempting to do something rather more than to offer a theory
of ability. Hume's intent was to show that disputes over
‘question of liberty and necessity, the most contentious question
of metaphysics’ have been ‘merely verbal’ (8.1; Hume
1748, 72). Whatever we may think of this striking claim, however,
there is a dialectical gap between it and the alleged truth of
(CA). To anticipate a theme that will be central in what follows,
we must be careful to distinguish between, on the one hand, the
adequacy of various views of ability and, on the other, the more
contentious metaphysical questions about freedom to which they are
doubtlessly related. It is the former that will be our concern in
this section.
3.2 Problems for the conditional analysis


(CA) says that satisfying a certain conditional is both sufficient
and necessary for having a certain ability. There are two kinds
of counterexamples that may be brought against (CA): counterexamples to
its sufficiency, and to its necessity. Let us take these in
turn.


Counterexamples to the sufficiency of (CA) have been most
prominent in the literature. Informally, they are suggested by
the question: ‘but could S try to A?’ There are a
variety of ways of translating this rhetorical question into a
counterexample. We may distinguish two: global
counterexamples, according to which (CA) might always get the
facts about ability wrong, and local counterexamples,
according to which (CA) might sometimes get the facts about
ability wrong.


Begin with global counterexamples. Let us say that
determinism is true at our world. Familiar arguments
purport to show that, if this is the case, then no one has the ability
to do anything, except perhaps for what she actually does (for several
developments of such an argument, see van Inwagen 1983, 55–105).
But if (CA) is true, then agents would have the ability to perform
various actions that they do not actually perform. For it is
plausible that the conditionals in terms of which (CA) analyzes ability
would still be true in a deterministic world. But then, since it
makes false predictions about such a world, which for all we know may
be our own, (CA) is false.


The difficulties involved in this sort of counterexample are
clear. The proponent of (CA) will reject the arguments for the
incompatibility of ability and determinism as unsound. Indeed, it
is precisely her thought that such arguments are unsound that has
typically led her to take ability to be analyzed in terms like those of
(CA). So global counterexamples, while they may be successful,
are dialectically ineffective relative to the range of
questions that are at issue in the debates over ability.


It seems, however, that we can show that (CA) is false even relative
to premises that are shared between various disputants in the free will
debates. This is what is shown by local counterexamples
to (CA). One such example is given by Keith Lehrer:

  Suppose that I am offered a bowl of candy and in the bowl are small
  round red sugar balls. I do not choose to take one of the red sugar
  balls because I have a pathological aversion to such candy. (Perhaps
  they remind me of drops of blood and … ) It is logically
  consistent to suppose that if I had chosen to take the red sugar ball,
  I would have taken one, but, not so choosing, I am utterly unable to
  touch one. (Lehrer 1968, 32)

  


Such an example shows that (CA) is false without assuming anything
contentious in debates over freedom. It turns rather on a simple
point: that psychological shortcomings, just as much as external
impediments, may undermine abilities. (CA), which does not
recognize this point, is therefore subject to counterexamples where
such psychological shortcomings become relevant. We may, if we
like, distinguish ‘psychological’ from
‘non-psychological’ ability, and claim that (CA) correctly
accounts for the latter (this sort of strategy is suggested, for
example, by Albritton 1985). But our ordinary notion of ability, that
of which we are attempting to give a theory, seems to involve
both psychological and non-psychological requirements.
And if that is correct, then Lehrer's example succeeds as a
counterexample to (CA) as a theory of our ordinary notion of
ability.


Counterexamples to the necessity of (CA) have been less
frequently discussed (though see Wolf 1990), but they also raise
important issues about ability. Consider again Austin's
golfer. Earlier we considered the case where a poor golfer makes
a difficult putt. But consider now the case where a good golfer
misses an easy putt. Given that this golfer tried to make the
putt and failed to, it is false that she would have made the putt if she
had tried to; after all, she did try it and did not make
it. (This thought is vindicated by standard views of subjunctive
conditionals; see Bennett 2003, 239). But, as a good golfer, she
presumably had the ability to make the putt. So this seems to be
a case where one can have an ability without satisfying the relevant
conditional, and hence a counterexample to the necessity of (CA).


Here the defender of (CA) might avail herself of the distinction
between specific and general abilities. (CA), she might say, is an
account of what it is to have a specific ability: that is, to actually
be in a position to perform an action. The golfer does
lack this ability in this case, as (CA) correctly predicts. It is
nonetheless true that the golfer has the general ability to
sink putts like this. But (CA) does not purport to be an analysis
of general ability, and as such is compatible with the golfer having
that sort of ability. Again, the plausibility of this response
will hang on the viability of the distinction between specific and
general abilities.


We have seen that (CA) faces serious problems, especially as a
sufficient condition for ability, even once we set to one side
contentious claims about freedom and determinism. If this is
correct, then (CA) must either be modified or rejected outright.
Let us first consider the prospects for modification.
3.3 The conditional analysis: some variations


The guiding idea of hypothetical accounts is that abilities are to
be defined in terms of what someone would do were he in certain
psychological conditions. There are a number of ways of
developing this idea that do not fit into the form of (CA). At
least two such proposals deserve attention here.


Donald Davidson takes concerns about the sufficiency of (CA),
especially as developed in Chisholm 1964, to tell decisively against
it. More specifically, he takes the lesson of this problem to be
is that:

  The antecedent of a causal conditional that attempts to analyze
  ‘can’ or ‘could’ or ‘free to’ must
  not contrain, as its dominant verb, a verb of action, or any verb
  which makes sense of the question, Can someone do it?
  (Davidson 1980, 68)
  


Davidson suggests that we may overcome this difficulty at least by
endorsing:

A can do x intentionally (under the
  description d) means that if A has desires and
  beliefs that rationalize x (under d),
  then A does x. (Davidson 1980, 68)
  


Davidson proceeds to consider a number of further problems for this
proposal and for the causal theory of action generally, but he takes it
to suffice at least to overcome standard objections to the sufficiency
of (CA).


The trouble is that it is not at all clear it does so. For
these objections did not essentially depend on a verb of action
figuring in the antecedent of the analyzing conditional. Consider
Lehrer's case again. It seems true that if Lehrer's imagined agent
has desires and beliefs that rationalized that action under the
description ‘eating a red candy’—namely, adopting
the analysis of Davidson 1963, a desire for a red candy and a belief
that this action is a way of eating a red candy—she would
eat a red candy. But the trouble is precisely that, in virtue of
her psychological disability, she is incapable of having this desire,
and so cannot perform this action intentionally. For this reason
it does not seem that Davidson's proposal successfully overcomes
the sufficiency problem, at least not on Lehrer's way of
developing that problem.


A second and rather different approach to modifying (CA) has been
taken in recent work by Christopher Peacocke. Peacocke accepts
that (CA) is insufficient in light of counterexamples like
Lehrer's. But he argues that we might supplement
(CA) in order to overcome these difficulties. In the terms of the
present discussion, Peacocke's proposal is: S has the ability to
A just in case: (i) (CA) is true of S and
(ii) the possibility in which S tries to A is a
‘close’ one.  The closeness of a possibility as it figures
in (ii) is to be understood, at first pass, in terms of what we can
reasonably rely on: a possibility is a distant one just in
case we can reasonably rely on it not obtaining; otherwise it is a
close one (Peacocke 1999, 310). To modify one of Peacocke's
examples, the possibility of toxic fumes being released into a train
car that is safely insulated is a distant one; on the other hand, the
possibility of toxic fumes being released into a train car where they
just happen to be blocked by a fortuitous arrangement of luggage is a
close one.


Peacocke's thought is that this suffices to overcome the
sufficiency objection: though Lehrer's agent satisfies (i), she
does not satisfy (ii): given the facts about his psychology, the
possibility that he tries to A is not a close one. The trouble,
however, is that Peacocke's proposal is subject to modified
versions of Lehrer's counterexample. Consider an agent
whose aversion to red candies is not a permanent feature of her
psychology, but an unpredictable and temporary
‘mood’. Consider the agent at some time when she is in
her aversive mood. This agent satisfies (i), for the same reason
as above, and she also satisfies (ii): given the fragility of her mood,
the possibility of her trying is a close one in the relevant
sense. Yet such an agent lacks the ability to eat a red candy, in
precisely the same way as she does in Lehrer's original
example.


It is an interesting question how we might develop other
‘supplementation’ strategies for (CA) (such strategies are
also suggested by Ginet 1980), though the track record of this method
of analysis in other domains (for instance, the project of
‘supplementing’ the analysis of knowledge in terms of
justified true belief, in response to (Gettier 1963)) does not inspire
confidence.
4. Non-hypothetical theories of ability


There is a surprising disconnect between the way abilities have been
discussed in the philosophical literature that grows out of Hume and
the way that they have been approached in more recent work in logic and
linguistics. Here hypothetical approaches have had relatively
little influence. Rather, abilities have been understood in terms
of categorical possibility claims. This section provides
an overview of this rather different way of developing a theory of
ability.
4.1 Ability as restricted possibility


Intuitively, claims about ability are claims about
possibility. This was arguably implicit in the proposals
discussed above, which took claims about ability to be reducible to
claims about subjunctive conditionals. For the truth-conditions
of such conditionals are plausibly given by facts about what would be
the case in certain possible scenarios. The approaches to be
canvassed in this section pursue a more direct connection between
ability and possibility. On such views, ability is to be
understood in terms of restricted possibility.


What does this mean? Begin with the thought that for S to
have an ability to A it is necessary, but not sufficient,
that it be possible that S does A. This claim will
be contentious for various more specialized sorts of possibility, such
as nomic possibility. But if we may help ourselves to the
idea of possibility simpliciter (‘metaphysical
possibility’, on at least one reading of that phrase), then this
claim is a plausible one. (Assuming, at least, that we can reasonably
set aside the extreme omnipotence view of Descartes, discussed above
at Section 2.1). On the other hand it seems
implausible that this sort of possibility is a sufficient condition:
there are any number of actions that it is possible for someone to do
in this unrestricted sense of possibility that she lacks the ability
to do (again, as noted above at
Section 2.1).


This suggests a natural hypothesis. To have an ability is for it to be
possible to A in some restricted sense of
possibility. As nomic possibility is possibility relative to the laws
of nature, and epistemic possibility is possibility relative to what
an agent knows, so may ability be possibility relative to some
independently specifiable set of conditions. On a standard
formalization, to be discussed further below, this is to be understood
in terms of accessibility relations among possible worlds: someone has
the ability to A just in case there is an accessible
world where she As. The task of giving a theory of ability is
then simply the task of articulating the relevant accessibility
relation. 


As noted above, this approach to ability has been developed most fully
in logic and linguistics. Accordingly, the challenges to this approach
have largely been logical and linguistic ones. (Though, for a
discussion of similar issues within a more familiar philosophical
framework, see Lehrer 1976 and the response in Fischer 1979). Let us
turn then to those challenges.
4.2 Restricted possibility: logical considerations


There are two questions that might be raised for this proposal about
ability. First, is ability indeed a restricted
possibility? Second, if it is, how exactly are we to spell out
the details of the restriction? This section will consider the
first, more basic, question.


Anthony Kenny raises two considerations in favor of a negative
answer to the question (Kenny 1975; the presentation of Kenny
here is indebted to the discussion in Brown 1988). He argues
that, if ability is indeed a restricted kind of possibility, then it
should obey the principles that govern the possibility operator in
standard modal logics. Kenny claims it fails to satisfy the
following two principles:
(1) A → ◊ A. 


Informally, (1) expresses the principle that if an agent performs an
action, then she has the ability to perform this action. This is, Kenny
argues, false of ability.
(2) ◊(A ∨ B) →
(◊A ∨ ◊B).


Informally, (2) expresses the principle that if an agent has the
ability to perform one of two actions, then she has the ability to
perform either the first action or the second action. This is,
Kenny argues, false of ability.


Let us begin with (1). Kenny claims that this principle is
false in light of cases like the following: ‘A hopeless darts
player may, once in a lifetime, hit the bull, but be unable to repeat
the performance because he does not have the ability to hit the
bull’ (Kenny 1975, 136). This sort of counterexample we
have already discussed in Section
 2.1.
 There we conjectured that
the truth or falsity of this sort of actuality entailment corresponded
to the distinction between specific and general abilities. The
defender of a restricted possibility account of ability may at this
point simply take the strategy suggested there: she is purporting to
give an account only of specific, not of general, ability.


But this response is subject, in the present context, to the following
concern. Even if we allow ourselves the distinction between general
and specific abilities, the restricted possibility view of ability
plausibly aspires to be an account ultimately of all ability claims,
including claims about general abilities. And if possibility does
indeed require this sort of entailment by actuality, then that
aspiration is one that could not be satisfied.


A better response denies that modal logics on which (1) is true,
namely any system as strong as or stronger than the system T, are the
right logics for modeling ability. To deny this is still to allow for
a treatment of ability within the framework of possible
worlds. Notably, the modal logic K is not one on
which (1) is true. A natural response to Kenny's first point, then, is
to say that K, rather than T or some
stronger system, is the correct modal logic of ability.


This response is not available, however, in response to
Kenny's second objection. Recall that objection was that
(2) is true of possibility but not of ability. Here the retreat
to weaker modal logics will not work, since (2) is provable on the
weakest standard modal logic, namely K. Yet the parallel claim
does not seem true of ability. Kenny gives the following
example:

  Given a pack of cards, I have the ability to pick out on request a
  card which is either black or red; but I don't have the ability
  to pick out a red card on request nor the ability to pick out a black
  card on request. (Kenny 1975, 137)

  


This then appears to be a case where S has the ability
to A or B but lacks the ability to A and
lacks the ability to B. So it appears that (2) is false of
ability. In light of this Kenny concludes that ‘if we regard
possible worlds semantics as making explicit what is involved in being
a possibility, we must say that ability is not any kind of
possibility’ (Kenny 1975, 140).


It is not clear that this is the only way to go. Mark Brown,
for example, has suggested that, if we take accessibility relations to
hold between a world and a set of worlds, that we may capture
talk of ability within a possible worlds framework that is broadly in
the spirit of standard views (Brown 1988). Conversely, we may
take this sort of point to militate in favor of a return to
hypothetical theories of ability, since, at least on Lewis's view
of subjunctive conditionals, it may be that a disjunction follows from
a counterfactual claim without either of its disjuncts following from
that claim (Lewis 1973, 79–80).
4.3 Restricted possibility: linguistic considerations


Much philosophical discussion of ability has taken place in the
formal, as opposed to the material, mode. Thus we are often asked to
distinguish senses of ‘ability’, or to think
about what ‘can’ means. But there is nothing recognizable
as a rigorous semantic theory of such terms prior to the work of
Angelika Kratzer, introduced in (Kratzer 1977) and refined in (Kratzer
1981). This section presents an extraordinarily brief introduction to
Kratzer's views, as they bear on ability attributions, and some
challenges to those views. (Those interested are encouraged to consult
Kratzer's original papers, recently revised and republished as
(Kratzer 2012), as well as the discussion in (Portner 2009)).


On Kratzer's view, any modal claim can be thought of having a semantic
and a pragmatic aspect. Consider a possibility claim. Semantically, it
expresses that a certain proposition is true at some accessible
world. The matter of which worlds are accessible (as well as, in
(Kratzer 1981), how those worlds are ordered), is determined
pragmatically, by (inter alia) the conversational context in which the
claim is uttered. Matters are exactly the same for necessity claims,
but these instead make a claim about what is true at all
accessible worlds. 


This approach is intended to be an extremely general one, but let us
consider how it applies to the specific case of an ability attribution
introduced by ‘can’. (‘Can’ is the focus of
(Kratzer 1977), though (Kratzer 1981) considers a more diverse range
of abilitative locutions). Consider the sentence: ‘Sam can
swim’. On Kratzer's view, this is true just in case the
proposition determined by that sentence (roughly, the proposition
expressed by ‘Sam swims’) is true at some accessible
world. What worlds are accessible will by determined by context. Thus,
when we are attending to Sam's physical capabilities, and ignoring the
absence of nearby water, what we express by uttering such a sentence
may be true. But when we are considering or ‘holding
fixed’ the absence of nearby water, what we express by uttering
such a sentence may be false. 


There are at least two questions to be asked about this approach to
the semantics of ability attributions, and of modal language more
generally. First, is it true? Second, if it is true, what are its
philosophical consequences (if any)? 


On the first question, it is fair to say Kratzer's approach to
modality has held up well, though it is hardly
unchallenged. Currently, the most difficult open problem in this area
is perhaps to account for the so-called ‘actuality
entailments’ noticed by Rajesh Bhatt (Bhatt 1999). Bhatt notices
that certain ability-attributing phrases appear to
behave amodally in certain constructions. Thus, ‘Sam
was able to get to the party on time’ is naturally read in a way
that entails that Sam did get to the party on time, and in
certain languages (such as French) such a reading can be made
mandatory (so that it is a genuine entailment, as opposed to an
implicature). Bhatt takes this phenomenon to tell in favor of the view
that ‘able to’ is not in fact a modal expression after
all. More recent work by Valentine Hacquard (Hacquard 2006), aims to
accommodate actuality entailments within a (modified) Kratzerian
framework. 


The second question remains largely unaddressed. Kratzer herself
appears to suggest an application to questions concerning
responsibility (Kratzer 1977, 343), and David Lewis draws consequences
for certain paradoxes about the abilities involved in time travel
(Lewis 1976, 77–78). But otherwise there is very little published
discussion of such issues. (Nor is there much work by authors who
endorse semantics for ability attributions that are opposed
to Kratzer's, with the exception of recent work by Barbara Vetter
(Vetter 2013)). A couple of preliminary questions suggest
themselves. One is whether the restrictions on possibility involved in
ability attributions may be made explicit in a way that does not
itself appeal to abilitative notions (see (Maier forthcoming) for
discussion). Another is whether this approach to ability is indeed a
rival to the ‘conditional analysis’, or a much more
general framework of which the latter may be thought of as a special
case. As such questions remain largely unaddressed, so they remain
largely unresolved. 
5. Abilities and the free will debates


Thus far our questions about abilities have been formal ones: we
have been asking what it is to have an ability without concerning
ourselves with the substantive work that a theory of ability might have
to do. But there is much work to be had for a theory of ability:
abilities have figured as unexplained explainers in a range of
philosophical theories, for example in accounts of concepts (Millikan
2000), of knowledge (Greco 2009, Sosa 2007), and of ‘knowing what it's
like’ (Lewis 1988). Perhaps the most prominent substantive
role for a theory of ability, however, has been the uses to which
accounts of ability have been put in the free will debates. So
let us close with a brief survey of what work a theory of ability might
be expected to do in those debates.
5.1 Compatibilism and the theory of ability


Questions about abilities have figured most prominently in debates
over compatibilism. ‘Compatibilism’ is used in many
ways, but let us understand it here as the thesis that the ability to
perform actions one does not perform is compossible with the truth of
determinism, which we may take to be the view that the facts about the
past and the laws jointly determine the facts about the present and all
future moments. (We should sharply distinguish this view, which
we might call classical compatibilism, from more recent views
such as the ‘semi-compatibilism’ of Fischer and Ravizza
1998). Insofar as compatibilism, so understood, has been
explicitly defended, these defenses have made appeal to theories of
ability, notably the ‘conditional analysis’ and its
variants canvassed above.


There we distinguished between global and local
counterexamples to hypothetical theories of ability, where the former
appealed to the fact that any such theory would render ability
compatible with determinism which, according to the objector, it is
not. There we noted the dialectical limitations of such
counterexamples, namely the contentiousness of their main
premise. But compatibilists have often been guilty of what seems
to be the opposite mistake. Namely, they have offered theories of
ability which show abilities to be compatible with determinism, and
have argued from this to the claim that such abilities are
indeed compatible with determinism.


The shortcomings of this strategy are nicely diagnosed by Peter van
Inwagen. After surveying the local counterexamples that arise for
various hypothetical theories of ability, van Inwagen imagines that we
have arrived at the best possible hypothetical theory of ability, which
he labels ‘the Analysis’. van Inwagen then
writes:

  What does the Analysis do for us? How does it affect our
  understanding of the Compatibility Problem? It does very little
  for us, so far as I can see, unless we have some reason to think it is
  correct. Many compatibilists seem to think that they need only
  present a conditional analysis of ability, defend it against, or modify
  it in the face of, such counter-examples as may arise, and that they
  have thereby done what is necessary to defend compatibilism. That
  is not how I see it. The particular analysis of ability that a
  compatibilist presents is, as I see it, simply one of his premisses;
  his central premiss, in fact. And premisses need to be defended. (van
  Inwagen 1983, 121)

  


van Inwagen's point is that, provided the incompatibilist has
offered arguments for the claim that such abilities are
incompatible with determinism—as, in van Inwagen's presentation,
the incompatibilist has—the production of an analysis is as yet
no answer to those arguments. For those arguments are also
arguments, inter alia, against the compatibilist's favored
account of ability.


What is the compatibilist to say in response to van Inwagen's
point? One response that is natural is to make a
distinction between two kinds of compatibilist project.
(Compare Pryor 2000 on responses to skepticism). One project is
to convince someone moved by the incompatibilist's
arguments to retreat from her position. Call this
ambitious compatibilism. For precisely the reasons van
Inwagen gives, it is doubtful that any theory of ability will suffice
for a defense of ambitious compatibilism. There is another
project, however, that the compatibilist might be engaging in.
Let us say that, for some reason or other, she herself is not convinced
by the incompatibilist's argument. She is still left with an
explanatory burden, namely to explain, if only to her own
satisfaction, how it could be that abilities are compatible
with the truth of determinism. Here the compatibilist's aim
is not to convince the incompatibilist of the error of her ways, but
simply to work out a satisfactory conception of compatibilism.
Let us call this modest compatibilism. This distinction
is not often made, and it is not always clear which of these projects
classical compatibilists are engaged in. If the latter project is
indeed part of classical compatibilism, however, we may grant van
Inwagen's point while still granting the theory of ability a
central place in defenses of compatibilism. For it may be that,
though a theory of ability is of no use to the ambitious compatibilist,
it has a crucial role to play in the defense of modest
compatibilism.
5.2 The ‘new dispositionalism’


In recent years several authors have revisited the thought that
compatibilism may be defended by a broadly hypothetical theory of
ability, but their approach differs in important ways from more
traditional approaches. This is the view of compatibilism that has
been defended by Michael Smith (Smith 2003), Kadri Vihvelin (Vihvelin
2004), and Michael Fara (Fara 2008). Following Randolph Clarke
(Clarke 2009), we may label this view the ‘new
dispositionalism’. Thinking through the new
dispositionalism will shed further light on how a theory of ability may
figure in a defense of compatibilism.


What unifies the new dispositionalists is that they return to the
conditional analysis of ability in light of two thoughts. The first
thought is one already noted: that dispositions and abilities are,
despite their differences, naturally thought of as members of the same
broad ontological category (see Sections 1.1
and 1.2 above).  The second thought is that there
are well-known problems of giving a conditional analysis
of dispositions, in light of which many authors have been
inclined to reject the long-assumed link between dispositions and
conditionals. Taken together, these thoughts yield a promising new
line on abilities: that though we ought to reject the conditional
analysis of abilities, we may yet defend a
dispositional account of abilities.


Why ought we reject the conditional analysis of dispositions?
Consider the following analysis of the disposition to break when
struck:

  (CD)
  x is disposed to break when struck iff S would
  break if S were struck.

  


Despite the intuitive appeal of (CD), there appear to be at least
two kinds of counterexamples to it. First, consider a crystal
glass that, if it were about to be struck, would transform into
steel. This glass is disposed to break when struck, but it is not
true that it would break if struck—the transformation renders
this false. This is a case of finking, in the language
of Martin 1994. Second, consider a crystal glass stuffed with
styrofoam packaging. This glass is disposed to break when struck,
but it is not true that it would break if struck—the packaging
prevents this. This is a case of masking, in the
language of Johnston 1992. In light of such cases, it seems we
ought to reject (CD).


The bearing of these points on our earlier discussion of the
conditional analysis is the following. There appear to be quite
general problems for giving a conditional analysis of
dispositions and powers. So it may be that the failures of the
conditional analysis of ability were not due to any fact about
abilities, but rather to a shortcoming of conditional analyses
generally. One way of overcoming this problem, if this diagnosis
is correct, is to analyze abilities directly in terms of
dispositions.


Such an analysis is proposed by Fara 2008, who claims:

S has the ability to A in circumstances C
  iff she has the disposition to A when, in
  circumstances C, she tries to A. (Fara 2008, 848)

  


The similarity of this analysis to the hypothetical analyses
canvassed earlier are clear. This raises several immediate
questions, such as whether this analysis can overcome the problem of
sufficiency that plagued those approaches (see Fara 2008, 851–852 for
an affirmative answer, and Clarke 2009, 334–336 for some doubts).
What is most striking about the new dispositionalists, however, is how
they bring this sort of account of ability to bear on some cases
familiar in the free will debates.


Consider how the new dispositionalism bears on ‘Frankfurt
cases’. These are cases due to Frankfurt 1969, where an agent
chooses to and performs some action A while at the same time
there is some other action B such that, had the agent been
about to choose B, an ‘intervener’ would have
altered the agent's brain so that the agent would have chosen,
and performed, A instead. One question about such cases is
whether the agent, in the actual sequence of events, had the ability
to B.  Frankfurt's intuition, and that of most others,
is that she did not. Given the further claim that the agent is
nonetheless morally responsible for doing A, this case
appears to be a counterexample to the intuitive principle that an
agent is morally responsible for Aing only if she had the
ability to perform some action other than A (what Frankfurt
dubs the ‘Principle of Alternate Possibilities’).


The new dispositionalists disagree. Let us focus on Fara's
diagnosis of the case. The question of whether the agent had the
ability to B turns, for Fara, on the question of whether she
was disposed to B when she tried to B. Fara claims,
plausibly, that she does have such a disposition. The presence
of the intervener is, on Fara's view, like the aforementioned
styrofoam packaging in a crystal glass. It masks the
disposition of the glass to break when struck, but does not
remove that disposition. Similarly, Fara argues, the presence
of the intervener masks the agent's disposition
to B when she tries to B, but does
not remove that disposition.  (There is some disagreement
among the new dispositionalists about whether this is a case of
finking or masking; see Clarke 2009, 340 for
discussion). So, pace Frankfurt, the agent does have the
ability to B after all. And so we have, in this case at least, no
counterexample to the Principle of Alternate Possibilities.


A natural worry at this point is that the new dispositionalist has
simply changed the subject. For it seems clear that, at
least in the sense of ability that is most central to the free will
debates, Frankfurt's agent lacks the ability to do
otherwise. An account of ability which denies this seems to be
speaking of some other concept altogether. One way of bringing
out what is missing is the idea that there seems to be a connection
between my abilities, in the sense of ability that is relevant to free
will, and what is up to me. Clarke claims, plausibly,
that this sort of connection fails on the new dispositionalist view of
ability:

   Although the presence of a fink or mask that would prevent
   one's Aing is compatible with having a general capacity
   (the unimpaired competence to A), there is an ordinary
   sense in which in such circumstances an agent might well be unable
   to A … If there is something in place that would
   prevent me from Aing should I try to
   A, if it is not up to me that it would so prevent me, and
   if it is not up to me that such a thing is in place, then even if I
   have a capacity to A, it is not up to me whether I exercise that
   capacity. (Clarke 2009, 339)

   


Thus the objection is that, while the new dispositionalist has
perhaps offered a theory of something, it is not a theory of
ability, at least insofar as ability is relevant to the free will
debates.


How should the new dispositionalist respond? Here it is
natural, again, to draw a distinction between two sorts of projects the
compatibilist may be undertaking, which we may call
descriptive and revisionary compatibilism (compare
Strawson 1959). The descriptive compatibilist purports to give
a theory of ability that vindicates all of our common-sense judgments
about ability while also revealing ability to be compatible with the
truth of determinism. If this is what the new dispositionalist
means to do, there are serious doubts about whether she will succeed,
for the reasons just given. But the revisionary compatibilist
purports to do something different. She purports to give an
account of ability that is both compatible with determinism and
vindicates enough of our ordinary judgments about ability to
play that role; it is, as it were, the ‘best deserver’ for
the ‘ability role’ in a deterministic world. (Compare
Jackson 1998, 44–45). If this is how the new dispositionalist
project is understood, namely as a defense of compatibilism that is
partly revisionary about our ordinary judgments about ability,
then it may be that it is robust against some of the objections to it
raised above.


Recent years have yielded further work by both new dispositionalists
and their opponents. Ann Whittle (Whittle 2010) develops a distinct
and important challenge to the new dispositionalist program. A recent
monograph by Kadri Vihvelin (Vihvelin 2013), extending her work cited
above, defends compatibilism by arguing that determinism is compatible
with the possession of abilities, once ability is properly
understood. Finally, another recent monograph, by Dana Nelkin (Nelkin
2011), similarly defends compatibilism by an appeal to what she calls
‘rational abilities’. While Nelkin does not herself put
weight on the supposed analogy between abilities and dispositions, she
shares certain theses with the new dispositionalists, notably that an
agent in a ‘Frankfurt case’ does retain her
rational abilities. 
5.3 Methodological possibilities


The compatibilist has traditionally appealed to a theory of ability in
her defense of compatibilism. We have now surveyed some problems for
that strategy. The first is one implicit in the discussion in
Sections 3 and 4,
namely the difficulty of actually giving an extensionally adequate
theory of ability. In this section we have encountered some further
problems that arise for the compatibilist even if such a theory were
available. First, there is van Inwagen's point, namely that arguments
for the incompatibility of abilities and determinism are, inter
alia, arguments against any theory of ability that is congenial
to the compatibilist. Second, there is the point that we encountered
in the discussion of the new dispositionalism, which is that our
thinking about ability involves platitudes that appear recalcitrant to
compatibilist treatments. Taken together, these points seem to pose a
serious obstacle to any theory of ability that is both compatible with
determinism and in accord with our ordinary judgments about what
ability requires.


Here one recourse available to the compatibilist is to appeal to
some of the distinctions between compatibilist projects made
above. The appeal to a theory of ability involved in the defenses
of classical compatibilism has been both ambitious and
descriptive in the senses given above. That is,
compatibilists have attempted to give an account of our ordinary notion
of ability which reveals that notion to be compatible with
determinism. For the reasons already given, there are serious
doubts about whether that project can succeed. But we have also
seen that that is not the only project available to the
compatibilist. The compatibilist may aim for a more
modest compatibilism, which shows to her own satisfaction what
ability is, and how it can be compatible with determinism. The
compatibilist may also aim for a more revisionary
compatibilism, which frankly departs from our ordinary thinking about
ability and instead introduces a concept of ability which is
close to our ordinary concept but is also compatible with
determinism. The boundary between these projects is not a sharp
one, and it is likely that they will to a certain extent coincide:
insofar as our ordinary concept of ability is of something incompatible
with determinism, it is likely that any account of ability involved in
a modest defense of compatibilism will also be, to that degree, a
revisionary one.


Even these compatibilist aspirations, however, may be overly
optimistic, or at least premature. For in surveying theories of
ability we have turned up serious difficulties, for both hypothetical
and non-hypothetical approaches, which do not appear to turn on issues
about determinism. So it may be that the best hope for progress
is to pursue theories of ability while setting to one side the problems
raised in the free will debates. For given the difficulties posed
by abilities, and given the significance of theories of ability for
areas of philosophy quite removed from the free will debates, there is
something to be said for pursuing a theory of ability while embracing,
if only temporarily, a certain quietism about the puzzles that
determinism may pose.