It is widely supposed that every entity falls into one of two
categories: Some are concrete; the rest abstract. The distinction is
supposed to be of fundamental significance for metaphysics and
epistemology. This article surveys a number of recent attempts to say
how it should be drawn.

 
1. Introduction


The abstract/concrete distinction has a curious status in
contemporary philosophy. It is widely agreed that the distinction is of
fundamental importance. And yet there is no standard account of how it
should be drawn. There is a great deal of agreement about how to
classify certain paradigm cases. Thus it is universally acknowledged
that numbers and the other objects of pure mathematics are abstract (if
they exist), whereas rocks and trees and human beings are concrete.
Some clear cases of abstracta are classes, propositions, concepts,
the letter ‘A’, and Dante’s Inferno. Some clear
cases of concreta are stars, protons, electromagnetic fields, the
chalk tokens of the letter ‘A’ written on a certain 
blackboard, and James Joyce’s copy of Dante’s Inferno.


The challenge is to say what underlies this dichotomy, either by
defining the terms explicitly, or by embedding them in a theory that
makes their connections to other important categories more explicit. In
the absence of such an account, the philosophical significance of the
contrast remains uncertain. We may know how to classify things as
abstract or concrete by appeal to intuition. But in the absence of
theoretical articulation, it will be hard to know what (if anything)
hangs on the classification.


It should be stressed that there need not be one single
“correct” way of explaining the abstract/concrete
distinction. Any plausible account will classify the paradigm
cases in the standard way, and any interesting account will draw a
clear and philosophically significant line in the domain of objects.
Yet there may be many equally interesting ways of accomplishing
these two goals, and if we find ourselves with two or more accounts
that do the job rather well, there will be no point in asking which
corresponds to the real abstract/concrete
distinction. This illustrates a general point: when
technical terminology is introduced in philosophy by means of examples
but without explicit definition or theoretical elaboration, the
resulting vocabulary is often vague or indeterminate in
reference. In such cases, it is normally pointless to seek a
single correct account. A philosopher may find himself asking
questions like, ‘What isisis idealism?’ or ‘What
isisis a substance?’ and treating these questions as
difficult questions about the underlying nature of a certain
determinate philosophical category. A better approach is to
recognize that in many cases of this sort, we simply have not made up
our minds about how the term is to be understood, and that what we seek
is not a precise account of what this term already means, but rather a
proposal for how it might fruitfully be used in the
future. Anyone who believes that something in the vicinity of the
abstract/concrete distinction matters for philosophy would be well
advised to approach the project of explaining the distinction with this
in mind.
2. Historical Remarks


The contemporary distinction between abstract and concrete is not an
ancient one. Indeed, there is a strong case for the view that despite
occasional anticipations, it played no significant role in philosophy
before the 20th century. The modern distinction bears some
resemblance to Plato’s distinction between Forms and
Sensibles. But Plato’s Forms were supposed to be causes par
excellence, whereas abstract objects are generally supposed to be
causally inert in every sense. The original
‘abstract’/‘concrete’ distinction was a
distinction among words or terms. Traditional grammar distinguishes
the abstract noun ‘whiteness’ from the concrete noun
‘white’ without implying that this linguistic contrast
corresponds to a metaphysical distinction in what these words stand
for. In the 17th century this grammatical distinction was
transposed to the domain of ideas. Locke speaks of the general idea of
a triangle which is “neither Oblique nor Rectangle, neither
Equilateral, Equicrural nor Scalenon [Scalene]; but all and none of
these at once,” remarking that even this idea is not among the
most “abstract, comprehensive and difficult” (Essay
IV.vii.9). Locke’s conception of an abstract idea as one that is
formed from concrete ideas by the omission of distinguishing detail
was immediately rejected by Berkeley and then by Hume. But even for
Locke there was no suggestion that the distinction between abstract
ideas and concrete or particular ideas corresponds to a distinction
among objects. “It is plain, …” Locke
writes, “that General and Universal, belong not to the real
existence of things; but are Inventions and Creatures of the
Understanding, made by it for its own use, and concern only signs,
whether Words or Ideas” (III.iii.11).


The abstract/concrete distinction in its modern form is meant to
mark a line in the domain of objects or entities. So conceived, the
distinction becomes a central focus for philosophical discussion only
in the 20th century. The origins of this development are
obscure, but one crucial factor appears to have been the breakdown of
the allegedly exhaustive distinction between the mental and the
material that had formed the main division for ontologically minded
philosophers since Descartes. One signal event in this development is
Frege’s insistence that the objectivity and aprioricity of the truths
of mathematics entail that numbers are neither material beings nor
ideas in the mind. If numbers were material things (or properties of
material things), the laws of arithmetic would have the status of
empirical generalizations. If numbers were ideas in the mind, then the
same difficulty would arise, as would countless others. (Whose mind
contains the number 17? Is there one 17 in your mind and another in
mine? In that case, the appearance of a common mathematical subject
matter is an illusion.) In The Foundations of Arithmetic
(1884), Frege concludes that numbers are neither external
‘concrete’ things nor mental entities of any sort. Later,
in his essay “The Thought” (Frege 1918), he claims the same status for
the items he calls thoughts—the senses of declarative
sentences—and also, by implication, for their constituents, the
senses of subsentential expressions. Frege does not say that senses are
‘abstract’. He says that they belong to a ‘third realm’ distinct both
from the sensible external world and from the internal world of
consciousness. Similar claims had been made by Bolzano (1837), and
later by Brentano (1874) and his pupils, including Meinong and Husserl.
The common theme in these developments is the felt need in semantics
and psychology as well as in mathematics for a class of objective
(i.e., non-mental) supersensible entities. As this new ‘realism’ was
absorbed into English speaking philosophy, the traditional term
‘abstract’ was enlisted to apply to the denizens of this ‘third
realm’.


Philosophers who affirm the existence of abstract objects are sometimes
called platonists; those who deny their existence are
sometimes called nominalists.
This terminology is lamentable, since these words have
established senses in the history of philosophy, where they denote
positions that have little to do with the modern notion of an abstract
object. However, the contemporary senses of these terms are
now established, and so the reader should be aware of them. (In
Anglophone philosophy, the most important source for this
terminological innovation is Quine. See especially Goodman and Quine
1947.) In this connection, it is essential to bear in mind that modern
platonists (with a small ‘p’) need not accept any of the
distinctive metaphysical and epistemological doctrines of Plato, just
as modern nominalists need not accept the distinctive doctrines of the
medieval nominalists. Insofar as these terms are useful in
a contemporary setting, they stand for thin doctrines:
platonism is the thesis that there is at least one abstract object;
nominalism is the thesis that the number of abstract objects is exactly
zero (Field 1980). The details of this dispute are
discussed in the article on nominalism in metaphysics. (See also the entry on 
 platonism in metaphysics.)
The aim of the present article is not to describe the case for or
against the existence of abstract objects, but rather to say what an
abstract object would be if such things existed.
3. The Way of Negation


Frege’s way of drawing the abstract/concrete distinction is an
instance of what Lewis (1986a) calls the Way of
Negation, according to which abstract objects are defined as
those which lack certain features possessed by paradigmatic
concrete objects. Nearly every explicit characterization in
the literature follows this model. Let us review some of the
options.


According to the account implicit in Frege’s writings,

An object is abstract if and only if it is both non-mental and
non-sensible.


Here the first challenge is to say what it means for a thing to be
‘non-mental’, or as we more commonly say,
‘mind-independent’. The simplest approach is to
say that a thing depends on the mind when it would not (or could not)
have existed if minds had not existed. But this entails that
tables and chairs are mind-dependent, and that is not what philosophers
who employ this notion have in mind. To call an object
‘mind-dependent’ in a metaphysical context is to suggest
that it somehow owes its existence to mental activity, but not in the
boring ‘causal’ sense in which ordinary artifacts owe their
existence to the mind. What can this mean? One promising
approach is to say that an object should be reckoned mind-dependent
when, by its very nature, it exists at a time if and only if it
is the object or content of some mental state or process at that
time. This counts tables and chairs as
mind-independent, since they might survive the annihilation of thinking
things. But it counts paradigmatically mental items, like the
purple afterimage of which I am now aware, as mind-dependent, since it
presumably lies in the nature of such items to be objects of conscious
awareness whenever they exist. However, it is not clear
that this account captures the full force of the intended notion.
Consider, for example, the mereological fusion of my afterimage and
your headache. This is surely a mental entity if anything
is. But it is not necessarily the object of a mental state. (The
fusion can exist even if no one is thinking about
ititit.) A more generous conception would allow for
mind-dependent objects that exist at a time in virtue of mental activity
at that time, even if the object is not the object of any single mental
state or act. The fusion of my afterimage plus your headache
is mind-dependent in the second sense but not the first.
That is a reason to prefer the second account of mind-dependence.


If we understand the notion of mind-dependence in this way, it is a
mistake to insist that abstract objects be mind-independent. To strike
a theme that will recur, it is widely supposed that sets and classes
are abstract entities—even the
impure sets whose urelements are concrete objects. Any
account of the abstract/concrete distinction that places set-theoretic
constructions like {{\{Alfred, {{\{Betty, {{\{Charlie,
Deborah}}}}}}\}\}\} on the concrete side of the line will be seriously
at odds with standard usage. With this in mind, consider the set whose
sole members are my afterimage and your headache, or some more complex
set-theoretic object based on these items. If we suppose, as is
plausible, that an impure set exists at a time only when its members
exist at that time, this will be a mind-dependent entity in the
generous sense. But it is also presumably an abstract entity.


 A
similar problem arises for so-called abstract
artifacts, like Jane Austen’s novels and the characters
that inhabit them. Some philosophers regard such items as
eternally existing abstract entities that worldly authors merely
‘describe’ or ‘encode’ but do not
create. But of course the commonsensical view is that
Austen created Pride and Prejudice and Elizabeth Bennett, and
there is no good reason to deny this (Thomasson 1999; cf. Sainsbury
2009). 

If we take this commonsensical approach, there will be a clear sense
in which these items depend for their existence on Austen’s
mental activity, and perhaps on the mental activity of subsequent
readers. These items may not count as mind-dependent in either of the
senses canvassed above, since Pride and Prejudice can
presumably exist at a time even if no one happens to be thinking at
that time. (If the world took a brief collective nap,
Pride and Prejudice would not pop out of existence.) But
they are obviously mind-dependent in some not-merely-causal
sense. And yet they are still presumably abstract objects.
For these reasons, it is probably a mistake to insist that abstract
objects be mind-independent. (For more on mind-dependence,
see Rosen 1994.)


Frege’s proposal in its original form also fails for other
reasons. Quarks and electrons are neither sensible nor
mind-dependent. And yet they are not abstract objects. A
better version of Frege’s proposal would hold that:


An object is abstract if and only if it is both non-physical and
non-mental.


This approach may well draw an important line; but it inherits the
familiar problem of saying what it is for a thing to be a
physical object (Crane and Mellor 1990). For discussion,
see the entry on physicalism.
3.1 The Non-Spatiality Criterion


Contemporary purveyors of the Way of Negation typically amend
Frege’s criterion by requiring that abstract objects be
non-spatial, causally inefficacious,
or both. Indeed, if any characterization of the abstract deserves
to be regarded as the standard one, it is this:

An object is abstract if and only if it is non-spatial and causally
inefficacious.


This standard account nonetheless presents a number of
perplexities.


Consider first the requirement that abstract objects be non-spatial (or
non-spatiotemporal). Some of the paradigms of abstractness
are non-spatial in a straightforward sense. It makes no
sense to ask where the cosine function was last Tuesday. Or if it
makes sense to ask, the only sensible answer is that it was
nowhere. Similarly, it makes no good sense to ask when the
Pythagorean Theorem came to be. Or if it does make sense to ask,
the only sensible answer is that it has always existed, or perhaps
that it does not exist ‘in time’ at all. These
paradigmatic ‘pure abstracta’ have no non-trivial spatial
or temporal properties. They have no spatial location, and they
exist nowhere in particular in time.


However, some abstract objects appear to stand in a more interesting
relation to space. Consider the game of chess, for example. Some
philosophers will say that chess is like a mathematical object,
existing nowhere and ‘no when’—either eternally or
outside of time altogether. But that is not the most natural view. The
natural view is that chess was invented at a certain time and place
(though it may be hard to say exactly where or when); that before it
was invented it did not exist at all; that it was imported from India
into Persia in the 7th century; that it has changed over
the years, and so on. The only reason to resist this natural account
is the thought that since chess is clearly an abstract
object—it’s not a physical object, after all!—and since
abstract objects do not exist in space and time—by
definition!—chess must resemble the cosine function in its
relation to space and time. And yet one might with equal justice
regard the case of chess and other abstract artifacts as
counterexamples to the hasty view that abstract objects possess only
trivial spatial and temporal properties.


Should we then abandon the non-spatiotemporality criterion? Not
necessarily. Even if there is a sense in which some abstract
entities possess non-trivial spatiotemporal properties, it might still
be said that concrete entities exist in spacetime in a distinctive
way. If we had an account of this distinctive
manner of spatiotemporal existence characteristic of concrete
objects, we could say: An object is abstract (if and) only if it
fails to exist in spacetime in that way.


One way to implement this approach is to note that paradigmatic
concrete objects tend to occupy a relatively determinate spatial volume
at each time at which they exist, or a determinate volume of spacetime
over the course of their existence. It makes sense to ask of such
an object, ‘Where is it now, and how much space does it
occupy?’ even if the answer must sometimes be somewhat
vague. By contrast, even if the game of chess is somehow
‘implicated’ in space and time, it makes no sense to ask
how much space it now occupies. (To the extent that this does
make sense, the only sensible answer is that it occupies no space at
all, which is not to say that it occupies a spatial
point.) And so it might be said:

An object is abstract (if and) only if it fails to occupy anything like
a determinate region of space (or spacetime).


This promising idea raises several questions. First, it is
conceivable that certain items that are standardly regarded as abstract
might nonetheless occupy determinate volumes of space and
time. Consider, for example, the various sets composed from
Peter and Paul: {{\{Peter, Paul},{},{\}, \{Peter, {{\{Peter, {{{{\{\{Paul}}}}}}}}\}\}\}\},
etc. We don’t normally ask where such things are, or how
much space they occupy. And indeed many philosophers will
say that the question makes no sense, or that the answer is a
dismissive ‘nowhere, none’. But this answer is
not forced upon us by anything in set theory or
metaphysics. Even if we grant that pure sets stand
in only the most trivial relations to space, it is open to us to hold,
as some philosophers have done, that impure sets exist where and when
their members do (Lewis 1986a). It is not unnatural to say
that a set of books is located on a certain shelf in the library,
and indeed, there are some theoretical reasons for wanting to say this
(Maddy 1990). On a view of this sort, we face a choice: we
can say that since impure sets exist in space, they are not abstract
objects after all; or we can say that since impure sets are abstract,
it was a mistake to suppose that abstract objects cannot occupy
space.


One way to finesse this difficulty would be to note that even if impure
sets occupy space, they do so in a derivative manner. The set
{{\{Peter, Paul}}\} occupies a location in virtue of the fact that its concrete
elements, Peter and Paul, together occupy that location. The set
does not occupy the location in its own right.
With that in mind, it might be said that:

An object is abstract (if and) only if it either fails to occupy space
at all, or does so only in virtue of the fact some other
items—in this case, its urelements—occupy that region.


But of course Peter himself occupies a region in virtue of the fact
that his parts—his head, hands, etc.—together
occupy that region. So a better version of the proposal would
say:

An object is abstract (if and) only if it either fails to occupy space
at all, or does so of the fact that some other items that are not
among its parts occupy that region.


This approach appears to classify the cases fairly well, but it is
somewhat artificial. Moreover it raises a number of
questions. What are we to say about the statue that occupies a
region of space, not because its parts are arrayed in space,
but rather because its constituting matter occupies that
region? And what about the unobserved electron, which according to some
interpretations of quantum mechanics does not really occupy a
region of space at all, but rather stands in some more exotic relation
to the spacetime it inhabits? Suffice it to say that a
philosopher who regards ‘non-spatiality’ as a mark of the
abstract, but who allows that some abstract objects may have
non-trivial spatial properties, owes us an account of the
distinctive relation to space and spacetime that sets
paradigmatic concreta apart.


Perhaps the most important question about the
‘non-spatiality’ criterion concerns the classification of
the parts of space itself. Let us suppose that space or spacetime
exists, not just as an object of pure mathematics, but as the arena in
which physical objects and events are somehow arrayed. Physical
objects are located ‘in’ or ‘at’ regions of
space, and so count as concrete according to the non-spatiality
criterion. But what about the points and regions of space
itself? There has been some debate about whether a commitment to
spacetime substantivalism is consistent with the nominalist’s
rejection of abstract entities (Field 1980, 1989; Malament
1982). If we define the abstract as the
‘non-spatial’, this debate reduces to the question whether
space itself is to be reckoned ‘spatial’. But surely
that is a verbal question. We can extend existing usage so as to
allow that points and regions of space are located ‘at’
themselves—or not, according to taste. The philosopher
who thinks that there is a serious question about whether the parts of
space count as concrete would thus do well to characterize the
abstract/concrete distinction in other terms.
3.2 The Causal Inefficacy Criterion


According to the most widely accepted versions of the Way of
Negation:

An object is abstract (if and) only if it is causally
inefficacious.

Concrete objects, whether mental or physical, have causal powers;
numbers and functions and the rest make nothing happen. There is no
such thing as causal commerce with the game of chess itself (as
distinct from its concrete instances). And even if impure sets do in
some sense exist in space, it is easy enough to believe that they make
no distinctive causal contribution to what transpires. Peter
and Paul may have effects individually. They may even have effects
together that neither has on his own. But these joint effects are
naturally construed as effects of two concrete objects acting jointly,
or perhaps as effects of their mereological aggregate (itself a
paradigm concretum), rather than as effects of some set-theoretic
construction. Suppose Peter and Paul together tip a balance. If we
entertain the possibility that this event is caused by a set, we shall
have to ask which set caused it: the set containing just Peter and
Paul? Some more elaborate construction based on them? Or is it perhaps
the set containing the molecules that compose Peter and Paul? This
proliferation of possible answers suggests that it was a mistake to
credit sets with causal powers in the first place. This is good news
for those who wish to say that all sets are abstract.


(Note, however, that some writers identify ordinary physical
events—causally efficacious items par excellence—with
sets. For David Lewis, for example, an event like the fall of Rome is
an ordered pair whose first member is a region of spacetime, and whose
second member is a set of such regions (Lewis 1986b). On this
account, it would be disastrous to say both that impure sets are
abstract objects, and that abstract objects are non-causal.)


The idea that causal inefficacy constitutes a sufficient
condition for abstractness is somewhat at odds with standard
usage. Some philosophers believe in ‘epiphenomenal
qualia’: objects of conscious awareness (sense data), or
qualitative conscious states that may be caused by physical processes
in the brain, but which have no downstream causal consequences of their
own (Jackson 1982; Chalmers 1996). These items are causally
inefficacious if they exist, but they are not normally regarded as
abstract. The proponent of the causal inefficacy criterion
might respond by insisting that abstract objects are distinctively
neither causes nor effects. But this is
perilous. Abstract artifacts like Jane Austen’s novels (as
we normally conceive them) come into being as a result of
human activity. The same goes for impure sets, which come into
being when their concrete urelements are created. These items are
clearly effects in some good sense; yet they remain abstract
if they exist at all. It is unclear how the proponent of the strong
version of the causal inefficacy criterion (which views causal
inefficacy as both necessary and sufficient for abstractness) might
best respond to this problem.


Apart from this worry, there are no decisive intuitive
counterexamples to this account of the abstract/concrete distinction.
The chief difficulty—and it is hardly decisive—is rather
conceptual. It is widely maintained that causation, strictly
speaking, is a relation among events or states of affairs. If we
say that the rock—an object—caused the window to break,
what we mean is that some event or state (or fact or condition)
involving the rock caused the break. If the rock itself is
a cause, it is a cause in some derivative sense. But this derivative
sense has proved elusive. The rock’s hitting the window is an event in
which the rock ‘participates’ in a certain way, and it is because the
rock participates in events in this way that we credit the rock itself
with causal efficacy. But what is it for an object to
participate in an event? Suppose John is thinking about the
Pythagorean Theorem and you ask him to say what’s on his mind. His
response is an event—the utterance of a sentence; and one
of its causes is the event of John’s thinking about the theorem. Does
the Pythagorean Theorem ‘participate’ in this event? There is surely
some sense in which it does. The event consists in John’s
coming to stand in a certain relation to the theorem, just as the
rock’s hitting the window consists in the rock’s coming to stand in a
certain relation to the glass. But we do not credit the Pythagorean
Theorem with causal efficacy simply because it participates in this
sense in an event which is a cause. The challenge is therefore to
characterize the distinctive manner of ‘participation in the causal
order’ that distinguishes the concrete entities. This problem has
received relatively little attention. There is no reason to believe
that it cannot be solved. But in the absence of a solution, this
standard version of the Way of Negation must be reckoned a work in
progress.
4. The Way of Example


In addition to the Way of Negation, Lewis identifies three main
strategies for explaining the abstract/concrete distinction. According
to the Way of Example, it suffices to list paradigm
cases of abstract and concrete entities in the hope that the sense of
the distinction will somehow emerge. If the distinction were primitive
and unanalyzable, this might be the only way to explain it. But as we
have remarked, this approach is bound to call the interest of the
distinction into question. The abstract/concrete distinction matters
because abstract objects as a class appear to present certain general
problems in epistemology and the philosophy of language. It is supposed
to be unclear how we come by our knowledge of abstract objects in a
sense in which it is not unclear how we come by our knowledge of
concrete objects (Benacerraf 1973). It is supposed to be unclear how we
manage to refer determinately to abstract entities in a sense in which
it is not unclear how we manage to refer determinately to other things
(Benacerraf 1973, Hodes 1984). But if these are genuine problems, there
must be some account of why abstract objects as such should be
especially problematic in these ways. It is hard to believe that it is
simply their primitive abstractness that makes the difference. It is
much easier to believe that it is their non-spatiality or their causal
inefficacy or something of the sort. It is not out of the question that
the abstract/concrete distinction is fundamental, and that the Way of
Example is the best we can do by way of elucidation. But if so, it is
quite unclear why the distinction should make a difference.
5. The Way of Conflation


According to the Way of Conflation, the
abstract/concrete distinction is to be identified with one or another
metaphysical distinction already familiar under another name: as it
might be, the distinction between sets and individuals, or the
distinction between universals and particulars. There is no doubt that
some authors have used the terms in this way. (Thus Quine 1953 uses
‘abstract entity’ and ‘universal’
interchangeably.) This sort of conflation is however rare in
recent philosophy.
6. The Way of Abstraction


The most important alternative to the Way of Negation is what Lewis
calls the Way of Abstraction. According to a longstanding
tradition in philosophical psychology, abstraction is a distinctive
mental process in which new ideas or conceptions are formed by
considering several objects or ideas and omitting the features that
distinguish them. For example, if one is given a range of white things
of varying shapes and sizes; one ignores or ‘abstracts
from’ the respects in which they differ, and thereby attains the
abstract idea of whiteness. Nothing in this tradition requires that
ideas formed in this way represent or correspond to a distinctive kind
of object. But it might be maintained that the distinction between
abstract and concrete objects should be explained by reference to the
psychological process of abstraction or something like it. The
simplest version of this strategy would be to say that an object is
abstract if it is (or might be) the referent of an abstract idea,
i.e., an idea formed by abstraction.


So conceived, the Way of Abstraction is wedded to an outmoded
philosophy of mind. But a related approach has gained considerable
currency in recent years. Crispin Wright (1983) and Bob Hale (1987)
have developed an account of abstract objects that takes leave from
certain suggestive remarks in Frege (1884). Frege notes (in effect)
that many of the singular terms that appear to refer to abstract
entities are formed by means of functional expressions. We speak of
the shape of a building, the direction of a line,
the number of books on the shelf. Of course many singular
terms formed by means of functional expressions denote ordinary
concrete objects: ‘the father of Plato’, ‘the capital of France’. But
the functional terms that pick out abstract entities are distinctive in
the following respect: Where ‘f(a)f(a)f(a)’ is
such an expression, there is typically an equation of the form
f(a)=f(b) if and only if Rab,f(a)=f(b) if and only if Rab,
f(a) = f(b) \text{ if and only if } Rab,



where RRR is an equivalence relation. (An equivalence
relation is a relation that is reflexive, symmetric and transitive.)
For example:


The direction of a=a=a = the direction of bbb if and
only if aaa is parallel to bbb.

The number of FFFs = the number of GGGs if and only if
there are just as many FFFs as GGGs.


Moreover, these equations (or abstraction principles) appear
to have a special semantic status. While they are not strictly
speaking definitions of the functional expression that occurs
on the left hand side, they would appear to hold in virtue of the
meaning of that expression. To understand the term
‘direction’ is (in part) to know that ‘the direction
of aaa’ and ‘the direction of bbb’ refer to the
same entity if and only if the lines aaa and bbb are
parallel. Moreover, the equivalence relation that appears on the right
hand side of the equation would appear to be semantically and perhaps
epistemologically prior to the functional expression on the left
(Noonan 1978). Mastery of the concept of a direction presupposes
mastery of the concept of parallelism, but not vice versa.


The availability of abstraction principles meeting these conditions
may be exploited to yield an account of the distinction between
abstract and concrete objects. When ‘fff’ is a
functional expression governed by an abstraction principle, there will
be a corresponding kind KfKfK_f such that:
x is a Kf if and only if, for some y,x=f(y).x is a Kf if and only if, for some y,x=f(y).
x \text{ is a } K_f \text{ if and only if, for some } y, x = f(y).



For example, xxx is a cardinal number if and only if for some concept
F,x=F,x=F, x = the number of FsFsFs. The simplest version of this approach to the
Way of Abstraction is then to say that

xxx is an abstract object if (and only if) xxx is an
instance of some kind KfKfK_f
whose associated functional expression ‘fff’ is
governed by a suitable abstraction principle.


The strong version of this account—which purports to
identify a necessary condition for abstractness—is
seriously at odds with standard usage. As we have noted, pure sets are
paradigmatic abstract objects. But it is not clear that they satisfy
the proposed criterion. According to naïve set theory, the
functional expression ‘set of’ is indeed characterized by a
putative abstraction principle.

 The set of FFFs = the set of GGGs
if and only if, for all x,(xx,(xx, (x is FFF if and
only if xxx is G)G)G).


But this principle is inconsistent, and so fails to characterize an
interesting concept. In contemporary mathematics, the concept of a set
is not introduced by abstraction. It remains an open question whether
something like the mathematical concept of a set can be characterized
by a suitably restricted abstraction principle. (See Burgess 2005 for a
survey of recent efforts in this direction.) Even if such a principle
is available, however, it is unlikely that the epistemological priority
condition will be satisfied. (That is, it is unlikely that mastery of
the concept of set will presuppose mastery of the equivalence relation
that figures on the right hand side.) It is therefore uncertain whether
the Way of Abstraction so understood will classify the objects of pure
set theory as abstract entities (as it presumably must).


 Similarly, as Dummett (1973) has noted, in many
cases the standard names for paradigmatically abstract objects do not
assume the functional form to which the definition adverts. Chess is an
abstract entity. But we do not understand the word ‘chess’ as
synonymous with an expression of the form ‘f(x)f(x)f(x)’
where ‘fff’ is governed by an abstraction principle. Similar
remarks would seem to apply to such things as the English language,
social justice, architecture, and Charlie Parker’s style. If so,
the abstractionist approach does not provide a necessary
condition for abstractness as that notion is standardly understood.


More importantly, there is some reason to believe that it fails to
supply a sufficient condition. A mereological fusion of
concrete objects is itself a concrete object. But the concept of a
mereological fusion is governed by what appears to be an abstraction
principle:


The fusion of the FFFs = the fusion of the GGGs if and
only if the FFFs and GGGs cover one another,


where the FFFs cover the GGGs if and only if every part of every
GGG has a part in common with an FFF. Similarly, suppose a train
is a maximal string of railroad carriages, all of which are connected
to one another. We may define a functional expression, ‘the
train of xxx’, by means of an ‘abstraction’
principle: The train of x=x=x = the train of yyy iff (if and only
if) xxx and yyy are connected carriages. We may then say that
xxx is a train iff for some carriage yyy, xxx is the train of
yyy. The simple account thus yields the consequence that trains are
to be reckoned abstract entities.


It is unclear whether these objections apply to the more
sophisticated abstractionist proposals of Wright and Hale, but one
feature of the simple account sketched above clearly does apply to
these proposals and may serve as the basis for an objection to this
version of the Way of Abstraction. The neo-Fregean approach seeks
to explain the abstract/concrete distinction in semantic
terms: We said that an abstract object is an object that falls in the
range of a functional expression governed by an abstraction principle,
where ‘fff’ is governed by an abstraction
principle when that principle holds in virtue of the meaning
of ‘fff’. This notion of a statement’s
holding in virtue of the meaning of a word is notoriously
problematic (see the entry on the 
 analytic-synthetic distinction).
But even if this notion makes sense, one may still complain: The
abstract/concrete distinction is supposed to be a metaphysical
distinction; abstract objects are supposed to differ from other objects
in some important ontological respect. It should be possible,
then, to draw the distinction directly in metaphysical terms: to say
what it is in the objects themselves that makes some things
abstract and others concrete. As Lewis writes, in response to a related
proposal by Dummett:



 Even if this … way
succeeds in drawing a border, as for all I know it may, it tells us
nothing about how the entities on opposite sides of that border differ
in their nature. It is like saying that snakes are the animals that we
instinctively most fear—maybe so, but it tells us
nothing about the nature of snakes. (Lewis 1986a: 82)



The challenge is to produce a non-semantic version of the
abstractionist criterion that specifies directly, in metaphysical
terms, what the objects whose canonical names are governed by
abstraction principles all have in common.


One response to this difficulty is to transpose the abstractionist
proposal into more metaphysical key. We begin with the idea that each
Fregean number is, by its very nature, the number of some Fregean
concept, just as each Fregean direction is, by its very
nature, at least potentially the direction of some concrete line.  In
each case, the abstract object is essentially the value of an
abstraction function for a certain class of arguments. This is not a
claim about the meanings of linguistic expressions. It is a claim
about the essences or natures of the objects themselves. (For the
relevant notion of essence, see Fine 1994). So for example, the
Fregean number two (if there is such a thing) is, essentially, by its
very nature, the number that belongs to a concept FFF if and only if
there are exactly two FFFs. More generally, for each Fregean
abstract object xxx, there is an abstraction function fff, such
that xxx is essentially the value of fff for every argument of a
certain kind.


Abstraction functions have two key features. First, for each
abstraction function fff there is an equivalence relation RRR such that it
lies in the nature of fff that f(x)=f(y)f(x)=f(y)f(x) = f(y) iff Rxy.
Intuitively, we are to think that RRR is metaphysically prior to fff, and
that the abstraction function fff is defined (in whole or in
part) by this biconditional. Second, each abstraction
function is a generating function: its values are essentially
values of that function. Many functions are not generating
functions. Paris is the capital of France, but it is not
essentially a capital. The number of solar planets, by
contrast, is essentially a number. The notion of an
abstraction function may be defined in terms of these two features:



fff is an abstraction function iff


a.

for some equivalence relation RRR, it lies in the nature of fff
that f(x)=f(y)f(x)=f(y)f(x) = f(y) iff RxyRxyRxy; and


b.

for all xxx, if xxx is a value of fff, then it lies in the
nature of xxx that there is (or could be) some object yyy such
that x=f(y)x=f(y)x = f(y).



We may then say that


xxx
is an abstraction if and only if, for some abstraction
function fff, there is or could be an object yyy such that x=f(y)x=f(y)x = f(y)

And


xxx
is an abstract object if (and only if) xxx is an abstraction.



This account tells us a great deal about the distinctive natures of
these broadly Fregean abstract objects. It tells us that
each is, by its very nature, the value of a special sort of function,
one whose nature is specified in a simple way in terms of an associated
equivalence relation. It is worth stressing, however, that
it does not supply much metaphysical information about these
items. It doesn’t tell us whether they are located in space, whether
they can stand in causal relations, and so on. It is an
open question whether this somewhat unfamiliar version of the
abstract/concrete distinction lines up with any of the more
conventional ways of drawing the distinction outlined above.
7. Further Reading


Putnam (1975) makes the case for abstract objects on scientific
grounds. Field (1980, 1989) makes the case against abstract
objects. Bealer (1993) and Tennant (1997) present a priori
arguments for the necessary existence of abstract entities. Balaguer
(1998) argues that none of the arguments for or against the existence
of abstract objects is compelling, and that there is no fact of the
matter as to whether abstract things exist. The dispute over the
existence of abstracta is reviewed in Burgess and Rosen (1997). Fine
(2002) is a systematic study of abstraction principles in the
foundations of mathematics. A general theory of abstract objects is
developed axiomatically in Zalta (1983; 2016 in Other Internet
Resources).  Wetzel (2009) examines the type-token distinction, argues
that types are abstract objects while the tokens of those types are
their concrete instances, and shows how difficult it is to paraphrase
away the many references to types that occur in the sciences and
natural language. (See the entry on 
 types and tokens.) 
Moltmann (2013) investigates the extent to which abstract objects are
needed when developing a semantics of natural language.