Alain LeRoy Locke is heralded as the “Father of the Harlem
Renaissance” for his publication in 1925 of The New
Negro—an anthology of poetry, essays, plays, music and
portraiture by white and black artists. Locke is best known as a theorist, critic, and interpreter of African-American literature and art. He was also a
creative and systematic philosopher who developed theories of value, pluralism and cultural relativism that informed and were reinforced by his work on aesthetics. Locke saw black aesthetics quite differently than some of the leading Negro intellectuals of his day; most notably W. E. B. Du Bois, with whom he disagreed about the appropriate social function of Negro artistic pursuits. Du Bois thought it was a role and responsibility of the Negro artist to offer a representation of the Negro and black experience which might help in the quest for social uplift. Locke criticized this as “propaganda” (AOP 12) and argued that the primary responsibility and function of the artist is to express his own individuality, and in doing that to communicate something of universal human appeal.


Locke was a distinguished scholar and educator and during his lifetime an
important philosopher of race and culture. Principal among his
contributions in these areas was the development of the notion of
“ethnic race”, Locke's conception of race as
primarily a matter of social and cultural, rather than biological,
heredity. Locke was in contemporary parlance a racial revisionist, and
held the somewhat controversial and paradoxical view that it was often
in the interests of groups to think and act as members of a
“race” even while they consciously worked for the
destruction or alteration of pernicious racial categories. Racial
designations were for Locke incomprehensible apart from an
understanding of the specific cultural and historical contexts in which
they grew up. A great deal of Locke's philosophical thinking and
writing in the areas of pluralism, relativism and democracy are aimed
at offering a more lucid understanding of cultural or racial
differences and prospects for more functional methods of navigating
contacts between different races and cultures.


Locke, like Du Bois, is often affiliated with the pragmatist
philosophical tradition though somewhat surprisingly—surprising
because Locke's actual views are closer substantively to pragmatist
thinkers Like Dewey, James, and Royce than are Du Bois's—he does
not receive as much attention in the writings of contemporary
pragmatist philosophers as does Du Bois.  Regardless, he is most
strongly identified with the pragmatist tradition, but his
“critical pragmatism”, and most specifically his value
theory, is also influenced by Hugo Münsterberg, F.S.C. Schiller,
Alexius Meinong, Frantz Brentano, and Christian von Erhenfels. From
early on in his education at Harvard University, Locke had an affinity
for the pragmatist tradition in philosophy. Locked developed his
mature views on axiology well in advance of many leading
pragmatists—e.g., Dewey and James.  Among pragmatists, Locke has
arguably the most developed and systematic philosophy of value, and
offers many critical insights concerning democracy.
 
1. Chronology

1885  Born Arthur Locke
September 13 to Pliny Ishmael Locke and Mary Hawkins Locke in
Philadelphia, PA.
1902  Graduated from
Central High School in Philadelphia during that same year Locke was
afflicted by rheumatic fever, which did permanent damage to his
heart.
1904  Graduates with
Bachelor of Arts degree from Philadelphia School of Pedagogy first in
his class. Publishes “Moral Training in Elementary
Schools,” his first known publication.
1904–07 
Locke attends Harvard University, earning his second Bachelor of Arts
degree and graduating magna cum laude. During his time at
Harvard Locke was elected to the Phi Beta Kappa Honor Society and
studied under Josiah Royce, George Herbert Palmer, Hugo Münsterberg,
and Ralph Barton Perry. Though he was a member of the faculty at the
time Locke never actually studied with William James. While at Harvard
Locke received the Bowdoin Prize in English for an essay
composed on Tennyson entitled “The Prometheus Myth: A Study in
Literary Tradition.” It was while at Harvard that Locke first met
Horace Kallen, who worked as an instructor.
1907–09 
In 1907 Locke was chosen as the first-ever African-American
Rhodes Scholar. Even though he held a right to admittance to an Oxford
college as a Rhodes Scholar he encountered some difficulty in this
regard until he was finally admitted to Hertford College. While at
Oxford Locke studied philosophy, Greek, and literature. It was while at
Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar that Locke first met and became friends with
Pixley Ka Isasha Seme. In 1907 and 1908, Horace Kallen was also at
Oxford as a Sheldon Scholar.
1910–11 
Following his studies at Oxford University and
before returning to Harvard University to complete his PhD, Locke
studied at the University of Berlin under the German sociologist Georg
Simmel, where he was reacquainted with his Harvard professor Hugo Münsterberg.
While at the University of Berlin Locke deepened his
interest in value theory, particularly in the work of theorists such as
Alexius Meinong, Christian Freiherr von Ehrenfels, and Frantz
Brentano.
1912–14 
Appointed as assistant professor of English,
philosophy, and education to Teachers College at Howard
University.
1915 
Gives a series of lectures to the Howard chapter of the NAACP
on the scientific study of race and race relations entitled “Race
Contacts and Interracial Relations: Lectures on the Theory and Practice
of Race.”
1917 
Doctoral dissertation entitled The Problem of
Classification in Theory of Value submitted to adviser Ralph
Barton Perry September 17, 1917.
1918 
Receives PhD in philosophy from Harvard University.
1925 
Fired from Howard University following efforts to achieve pay
equity between black and white faculty. December of that year Locke
publishes The New Negro: An Interpretation perhaps
his most famous work and earns himself recognition as a leading
African-American literary critic and aesthete.
1928 
Returns to Howard University following the appointment of
Mordecai W. Johnson, the university's first African-American
president.
1935 
Reportedly it was in this year that Locke renewed his
interest in writing philosophy as signaled by the publication of
“Values and Imperatives,” in American Philosophy, Today
and Tomorrow edited by Horace M. Kallen and Sidney Hook.
1942 
Publishes two edited volumes and an article: When Peoples
Meet: A Study in Race and Culture edited with Bernhard J. Stern,
Color: The Unfinished Business of Democracy special volume of
Survey Graphic and “Who, and What, Is
Negro?”.
1943 
Delivers a series of lectures entitled “The
Contribution of the Negro to the Culture of the Americas,” under
the auspices of the Haitian Ministry of Public Instruction as the
Exchange Professor for the Committee for Inter-American Artistic and
Intellectual Relations.
1953 
Retired from Howard University and moved to New York.
1954 
Died June 9 in Mount Sinai Hospital, New York from persistent
heart trouble.

2.  Axiology/Value Theory


Locke's seminal essay in value theory, “Values and
Imperatives” is as ambitious in its aims as it is pioneering. In
it Locke states what he takes to be the central problem for axiology;
details the reasons for the failure of American philosophy,
particularly pragmatism, to make anything more than a minimal
contribution to the development of the philosophical study of values;
argues that values are primarily rooted in human attitudes; and
provides an elaborate theoretical account of value formation and the
functional role of values.

A value, according to Locke, is “an emotionally mediated form of experience.” Locke issues the following warning:


[i]n dethroning our absolutes, we must take care not to exile
our imperatives, for after all, we live by them. We must realize more
fully that values create these imperatives as well as the more
formally super-imposed absolutes, and that norms guide our behavior as
well as guide our reasoning.  (VI 34)


Values are an important and necessary part of human
experience. Values are an essential part of human existence as all
human persons are inherently valuing beings. He writes:

[t]he
common man, in both his individual and group behavior, perpetuates the
problem in a very practical way. He sets up personal and private and
group norms as standards and principles, and rightly or wrongly
hypothesizes them as universals for all conditions, all times and all
men. (VI 35)


Valuations of multiple kinds pervade nearly every
aspect of our lives; our aesthetic, moral and religious evaluations and
judgments.


On Locke's estimation,
the gravest problem of
contemporary philosophy is how to ground some normative principle or
criterion of objective validity for values without resort to dogmatism
and absolutism on the intellectual plane, and without falling into
their corollaries, on the plane of social behavior and action, of
intolerance and mass coercion. (VI 36)

 This is the central and
driving question of Locke's axiology and as such it points to
some of the crucial aspects of his overall philosophical view, but his
theory of value specifically, and importantly his social and political
philosophy. On the axiological plane the question is reformulated as
whether or not the fundamental value modes automatically or
dispositionally set up their end values prior to evaluative judgment.
If value modes automatically or dispositionally set up their own ends,
then there would exist a more direct approach to the apprehension of
values. Moreover, if a connection can be discovered between certain
psychological states and particular valuations then that might yield at
least one avenue for an objective assessment of values and valuations.
On the social and political plane—the practical plane where
persons actually form valuations and act on them in myriad
ways—the question is formulated in terms of how  best to
avoid a theory of value that is static, arbitrary and overly formulaic
in ways that impede the theory's ability to provide an adequate
understanding of value phenomena. To do this, a functional analysis of
value norms is required, and normative principles must be the result of
the immediate context of valuation. This we will see in the following
sections is the major thrust of Locke's value pluralism and
relativism. 
2.1 Value-Feelings and Value-Modes
Locke begins by considering what he takes to be the most basic feature of values; their emotional character. He writes

the value-mode establishes for itself, directly through
feeling, a qualitative category which, as discriminated by its
appropriate feeling-quality, constitutes an emotionally mediated form
of experience. (VI 38)

 There is a particular feeling or feeling-quality associated with
each value-mode. In fact, Locke contends that value-modes differ in
virtue of differences in feeling-qualities. The value-mode, or perhaps
better, the mode of valuing, refers to the qualitative character of a
particular way of experiencing as mediated by a given emotion or
attitude which Locke terms the feeling-quality. This has several
important implications for the general theory of value: predicating a
value to a subject depends on the feeling-quality associated with it;
values are immediately recognized through an apprehension of their
emotional quality; value-predicates are determined by the affective
and volitional influence of the feeling-quality; and the imperatives
of a given value are given immediately once the primary
feeling-quality has been established.


Locke claims that there is a necessary connection between the
feeling-quality and the value-mode with the former determining the
later. The value-mode is normally established as the value is being
apprehended. If this were not the case, the value-mode would be
indeterminate even while its immediate quality is being felt. The basic
categories of value are not rational: one cannot simply reason
one's way to an understanding of them. In developing and
articulating his axiology, Locke looks for the categories of value in
the actual valuations of human beings. Rather than predetermining the
categories of valuation and attempting to cram experiences of values
into them, his theory begins with our concrete valuations and
determines which if any features they have in common. It is then on the
basis of the commonalities observed to obtain between particular
experiences of values that they are classed together as members of the
same class. Locke writes,

[f]lesh and blood values may not be as
universal or objective as logical truth or schematized judgments, but
they are not thereby deprived of some relative objectivity and
universality of their own. The basic qualities of values…pertain
to psychological categories. They are not grounded in types of realms
of value, but are rooted in modes or kinds of valuing. (VI
38)



Locke is aware that it is not easy to demonstrate that the
fundamental identity and unity of a value-mode depends on a
feeling-quality. It may be that the position thus far articulated is
merely hypothetical and speculative and requires an experimental
methodology to prove it. Locke notes that the main objections to the
position have been addresses by developments in the Gestalt psychology
insofar as it has established an empirical basis for a comprehensive
perceptual scheme functioning in recognition, comparison and choice.
Further circumstantial evidence is offered for the position by the
phenomenon of transvaluation (see section 2.3 below).
2.2 A Functional View of Values


On Locke's view, though the value-mode is determined
immediately by the affective character of the value, this is not the
final determination of the value. Even after the value-mode has been
ascertained, the legitimacy of the value may still be in question, its
place in the overall value scheme may be unclear, and particular
aspects of the context of valuation may be uncertain. This leads Locke
to conclude that the primary normative character of value norms is best
sought in their functional role as stereotypes of feeling attitudes and
as habitual impulses toward certain choices of actions. This would make
them culturally specific, as well as temporally and geographically
contingent as values can only be habituated and function with any
degree of reliability in specific contexts. Moreover, as in the case of
apprehending value-modes, the functionality of a given value is to be
discovered experientially; rather than, postulated a priori.
Values, then, would only become absolutes—should they become
absolute at all—because reason and judgment secondarily
re-enforce them as such. In their immediate character and quality
values are affective, but they are further mediated by reason and
judgment. Value predication depends on reason and judgment; but the
predicates themselves are determined by the modal quality of the value.
So, the judgment that an object is beautiful or ugly involves reason
and judgment, but that the object is experienced as aesthetic depends
on its affective apprehension; its being experienced aesthetically.
 


Commenting on his own preference for a functional theory of value
Locke writes:

I confess at the outset to a preference for a
functional theory of value, but my brief for a functional analysis of
value norms is not completely parti pris, but is made
rather because a functional approach, even should it lead to a
non-functionalist theory of value, of necessity treats the value
varieties in terms of their interrelationships, guaranteeing a
comparative approach and a more realistic type of value analysis.
(FVVU 81)

 Moreover, a functional account of value has the theoretical
advantages of being able to account for parallels between values, value
interchangeability, and transvaluation. It is perhaps in taking a
functional view of values and their associated imperatives where
Locke's theory of value is most pragmatic. A functional view of
values emphasizes the fact that values are an essential feature of our
lived-experiences. At its most basic level value functionality aims to
provide a way of understanding how particular values operate as
coordinating mechanisms for individual and collective action. Some
values have a specific social role; a societal aim or goal that they
have been modified and adapted over time to help achieve or maintain.
Such values are often codified in the customs and traditions of a
culture and can sometimes remain ritualized long after their functional
role is obsolete. The importance and usefulness of a functional view of
values in Locke's social and political philosophy is further
explored in section 3.2 below.
2.3 Transvaluation


Transvaluation is a central tenet of Locke's axiology. He
writes:

[t]he further we investigate, the more we discover that
there is no fixity of content to values, and the more we are bound,
then, to infer that their identity as groups must rest on other
elements. (VI 40)

 The feeling-quality of a given value
necessarily establishes the mode of valuation, i.e., the type of value in
question (for example, aesthetic, religious, moral etc.) as well as the
appropriate value-predicates. However, there is no necessary connection
between a given object that serves as the content of a value and any
particular emotional response to that object. One and the same object
may affect the same person differently at different times, or may at
the same time elicit from multiple people different emotional
reactions. Transvaluation, then is most simply valuing something in a
different way, which requires, at first, having an atypical emotional
association with the object of value. There are multifarious potential
causes of such transformations in one's affective responses to an
object, and those causes can be immediate or unfold over time.
“The changed feeling-attitude creates a new value” says
Locke “and the type-form of the attitude brings with it its
appropriate value category. These modes co-assert their own relevant
norms; each sets up a categorical imperative of its own” (VI
41).


Locke treats transvaluation as inevitable; values are dependent upon
social and cultural forces that are always in a state of flux and
subject to myriad transformative influences at any given time, hence
static values are implausible. Value transformation can take place on
the individual level or on the level of widespread social or cultural
values. Locke's hope is that this analysis will bring us closer
to a practical understanding of value and the mechanism of valuation,
which he hopes will bring us closer to understanding the grounds for
both agreements among values and value conflict.
2.4 Taxonomy of Values

Locke offers a schematization of four traditional
values—religious, moral, logical and aesthetic—to
demonstrate how his theory classifies values into types according to
their characteristic feeling-quality (see the table below) (VI 43). The
schema also charts the value-predicates and the positive and negative
poles associated with each value-type (type of value). Finally, the
schema further divides each value according to its directionality;
that is, whether the value is primarily introverted, functioning
inwardly on the individual subject, or is extroverted, functioning
externally in a social context.

Locke contends that his position has certain advantages over more
logical theories of value. In particular, it is better able to explain
certain value phenomena that are troubling for the latter type of
theories. Phenomena such as transvaluation, value merging, and value
conflict are able to be explained in terms of the basic doctrine that
the mode of valuation is determined by the character of a
subject's affective response in a value context. Locke claims
that logical theories of value have historically had difficulty
accounting for phenomena such as the aesthetic appraisal of a logical
or mathematical proof; moral commitment to aesthetic production; or
aesthetic appreciation of religious practice. In particular, logical
theories have struggled to make sense of assigning predicates from one
value-type to objects that are traditionally the content of a different
value-type as when a proof in logic is deemed beautiful or ugly.
Traditional theories treat such value predication as merely
metaphorical or analogical. 





Modal Quality
Value Type
Value Predicates
Value Polarity

 
Positive
Negative



Exaltation: (Awe Worship)

a. Introverted: Inner EcstasyReligious
Holy—UnholyHolinessSin
b. Extroverted: Religious Zeal
Good—EvilSalvationDamnation


Tension: (Conflict Choice)

a. Inner Tension of “Conscience”
Ethical
Good—BadConscienceTemptation
 b. Outer Tension of Duty
Moral
Right—WrongRightCrime


Acceptance or Agreement:
(Curiosity—Intellectual Satisfaction)

a. Inner Agreement in Thought
Logical Truth
Correct—IncorrectConsistencyContradiction
b. Outer Agreement in Experience
Scientific Truth
True—FalseCertaintyError


Repose and Equilibrium

a. Consummation in Contemplation
Aesthetic
Beautiful—UglySatisfactionDisgust
b. Consummation in Creativity
Artistic
Fine—UnsatisfactoryJoyDistress



Locke explains value conflict in terms of a more fundamental
psychological incompatibility. Not only does the value-feeling
determine the qualitative character of a given value, it also
establishes broader categories of value by grouping values according to
their common affective quality. As he puts it “[c]hange the
attitude, and, irrespective of content, you change the value-type; the
appropriate new predicates automatically follow” (VI 44).
 Value
attitudes can be psychologically incompatible, and where they are Locke
contends that a hierarchical ranking of values will not resolve the
incompatibility. In fact, he suggests that people resolve the
incommensurability of their various value attitudes by shifting from
one mode of valuation to another. This is why a functional account of
values that determines the various value-modes on the basis of
underlying psychological states is desirable. Such a theory is better
able to achieve a reflective equilibrium with our actual value
practices. All values have associated with them a set of imperatives.
Locke does not have a great deal to say about how imperatives are
formed. Presumably, imperatives are determined, at least in part, by
the qualitative character of the value in question. People begin by
forming a value-attitude based on one's initial affective
response to the object of valuation. As a mediating form of experience
a value supplies motivational drives toward acting and refraining from
acting in certain ways. Values provide normative direction not only for
cognition and psychological drives, but also for action. Imperatives
are partially in place as soon as the affective quality of the value is
apprehended.
3.  Pluralism
Locke's philosophical worldview is pervaded by a concern for
diversity. Locke takes pluralism in all its form—religious,
cultural, value etc.—as a basic feature of the world. His primary
focus then becomes one of understanding the multiplicity of ways in
which peoples meet, and providing some normative guidance concerning
how best to act when they do. Values organize, coordinate, mediate and
direct experience. In so doing, they serve both a valuable epistemic as
well as existential function. Values direct and guide our activity, but
more than that they color the nature of our encounters with other
persons, and frequently function as a source of conflict between
individual persons and groups of human beings. The common mistake among
valuers that leads to a “totalizing” of values as
“absolutes” or “ultimates” is to forget that
any given value encompasses only an aspect of reality and ought not to
be treated as transcendent or reducible to that reality. This is a
fundamental insight of Locke's philosophy of value as it is applied to
social theory. And Locke believes that if he is correct in asserting
that
“[a]s derivative aspects of the same basic reality, value
orders cannot reasonably become competitive and rival realities”
that he will have provided the necessary theoretical foundation for a
more latitudinarian exchange between diverse human collectives (VI 47).
Locke's presentation of his pluralist position proceeds as a
response to three obstacles or barriers to pluralism: absolutism,
(counter) uniformitarianism, and arbitrary dogmatism. If individual
valuers or value groups are able to avoid these three pitfalls, then
either may possibly develop a pluralistic value orientation.
3.1 Three Barriers to Pluralism
The first barrier to pluralism is absolutism. Values and their
associated imperatives are absolute when they are thought to apply to
all human beings, at all times irrespective of social or historical
conditions. This is because absolutist conceptions of values are
derived from, and ultimately justified by something other than the
lived-experiences of human beings, be it God, or human rationality.
Whereas pluralism is intended to accommodate a wide array of contending
values, absolutism countenances one, and only one set of values
universally applicable to all human beings. Locke claims that
“absolutism has come forward again in new and formidable
guise,” and he warns us to be on guard for “social
and political forms of it, with their associated intellectual tyrannies
of authoritarian dogmatism and uniformitarian universality” (PID
53). These newer forms of absolutism, Locke claimed, are the products
of older ones. When values are held to be absolute there often results
a tendency to discount the legitimacy of rival values. Pluralism avoids
conceiving of values in absolutist terms. Setting various value
conceptions on equal footing is the aim of Locke's
pluralism.
Uniformitarianism, the second obstacle to pluralism, is the view
that values ought to be uniform within a given community or group. The
experiences of members of a given group are filtered through the same
forms of mediation to produce value uniformity. Values are ascribed a
single form for all members of a group; rather than allowing for a
multiplicity of mediated experiences. Value uniformity can be achieved
violently, coercively or peacefully, but in all instances it is an
attempt to replace diversity with homogeneity. Locke suspects that it
is the desire to defend one's own culture and to create consensus
among competing value claims that is at the root of the quest for
uniformity. Unfortunately, that motivation can easily lapse into an
attempt to force one's own value system onto others without
justification. Uniformitarianism is a refusal to accommodate the myriad
value forms that are essential to pluralism.
Finally, Locke warns us to avoid the pitfalls of arbitrariness and
dogmatism. Value commitments are arbitrary when one forms
them—thereby rejecting viable alternatives—in the absence
of any justification for choosing them over other available options.
One holds her values dogmatically when she takes them to be
indisputable and is closed-off to the possibility of taking a critical
view of her value commitments that could possibly result in her
altering or rejecting them.
3.2 Pluralism as a Functional Base
Locke describes pluralism as a functional base, one that can
function as a foundation from which to achieve a rapprochement of
conflicting values. Pluralism, as Locke envisions it, has the potential
to create agreement among competing and conflicting values, through the
recognition of common features of various values and value systems. A
closer look at Locke's analysis of values; in particular, the three
concepts of basic human values, basic equivalence, and functional
constancy will illuminate what it means for pluralism to function in
this way.
First, is the concept of basic human values, by which
Locke means those values that are common to many, or all value systems;
values such as belief in god, commitment to one's cultural
community, respect for human life, etc. which though they may have
multifarious manifestations, are in a more general way common to most,
if not all groups. Of course, value communities differ, and no two
value communities will be exactly alike, but there does exist
substantial overlap of a subset of values across values communities.
Basic human values then, are basic and human in virtue of their common
expression in a plurality of value contexts and their pertaining to the
lives of human beings, and not as a matter of their universal
applicability across all of humanity.
The next two concepts—basic equivalence and functional
constancy—are perhaps best understood as two sides of a
distinction between formal and functional equivalence. Basic
equivalence refers to a similarity of form and functional constancy
refers to a similarity in function. Basic equivalence is a formal
resemblance owing to a corresponding value-mode. It is a similarity in
the type of value, or better, being particular values of the same type.
This notion rests on drawing a distinction between the object of
valuation and the way the object is valued. The object may differ where
the value mode does not. As a consequence a single object can be valued
multiple ways, and many different objects can be valued in the same
way. Take for example the institution of marriage as the object of
valuation. Marriage is valuable in least two senses, first, it may be
valued as the religious union of a man and a woman, and secondly, the
marriage ceremony itself could be valued as a ritualized aesthetic
experience. In both cases one and the same phenomenon is the content of
two different value modes. In the first instance, marriage is valued
religiously; the characteristic quality of the value, its form, is
spiritual. In the second instance, marriage could be valued because of
the elegant décor, grandiose ceremony, and beautiful
arrangements that characterize the event. The example goes to
illustrate the fact that different ways of valuing can be applied to
the same object by the same person or by different people. Valuation
works the other way as well, that is, different objects can be valued
the same way. As for example, a marriage, a baptism, or a christening
can all be valued religiously or aesthetically. One can recognize a
similarity in the form of competing values even though their objects
may differ, or a difference in form where the object stays the same.
Basic equivalence then speaks to an identity of form not of content. It
is a conceptual tool that enables persons to recognize that their
respective value expressions are species of the same genus. Locke
speaks of the objective comparison of basic human values which leads
one to think that his claim is that different groups may regard
different sets of values as basic to human beings though these may not
be identical, but rather, formally equivalent values.
The other side of the formal/functional equivalence distinction is
the notion of functional constancy. By functional
constancy is meant the ability of basic equivalent values to
operate as stable features of value processes and activity within
various value communities. Locke envisions that what will be found
beneath potentially vast differences in content, and beyond a
similarity of form, is a comparable utility of various values across
contexts. Every value has an attendant function; a role that it plays
within a given value community. Values that differ either in form or in
content may still be equivalent as regards their function. These
functional constants are discovered through comparison of fundamental
values found across value groups.
Thus functional equivalence provides a constancy of two sorts:
first, the function is constant within a given value community insofar
as it plays the same role for different members of the same value
group, and second, the function can be a common feature across value
groups. Think here again of the example of marriage. Admittedly, there
is a wide variety of particular manifestations of such a value, and
there can be differences in the form as well as the content of such
values. But it is still the case that such variation results in a
similar function within a value community. Children are reared,
networks of support are maintained, property is held in common and
bequeathed to successive generations etc. and these social roles are
served by a myriad of expressions of familial ties in the community.
Moreover, family values function in this way across cultures. To be
sure, there may not be an exact equivalence of function across value
communities, or even within them for that matter, but to a large extent
this equivalence of function is there to be observed. It may be the
case that there exist social functions for a given value in one context
that are absent in another: if so, there is no equivalence to be made.
All values have a function, but as there is no necessary connection
between a given value and a particular function, it does not follow
from this that every value function can be found in every culture.
4.  Relativism
Relativism, for Locke, begins as a systematic approach to the
recognition of the sorts of value equivalence discussed earlier, and is
then able to militate against the pernicious forms of valuing that
often turn cultural exchanges into intractable problems. The view is
termed relativist because it makes a comprehensive and accurate
understanding of the values of a given culture dependent—at least
in part—on that culture being viewed in relation to other
cultures. Moreover, Locke claims that cultural relativism can serve as
“a scientifically impartial interpreter of human values, and
sometimes even as a referee and mediator among conflicting
values” (CRIP 70).
4.1 The Principle of Cultural Equivalence
Relativism, on Locke's view, is not a negative skeptical position
that is predicated upon the belief that one is unable to make a
satisfactory determination about the relative worth of value
communities. Instead, it is a positive and affirmative position
concerning the relative worth of distinct value traditions and
cultures. Locke formulates his relativism in terms of the three
principles of cultural equivalence, cultural reciprocity, and cultural
convertibility. He claims that the three principles are derivable from
this larger relativist outlook and will enable “a more objective
and scientific understanding of human cultures and…more
reasonable control of their interrelationships” (CRIP 73).
 The first of the three principles is:

The principle of cultural equivalence, under which we
would more wisely press the search for functional similarity in our
analyses and comparisons of human cultures; thus offsetting our
traditional and excessive emphasis upon cultural differences. Such
functional equivalences, which we might term
‘culture-cognates’ or ‘culture-correlates,’
discovered underneath deceptive but superficial institutional
divergence, would provide objective but soundly neutral common
denominators for intercultural understanding and cooperation. (CRIP
73)

The effect of the first principle is to lay bare the fact that the
seemingly vast differences between cultures is more a matter of our
selective preferences; that is, the habits of mind we have cultivated
for being more keenly attuned to difference rather than similarity. The
first stage of relativism, then, is to reorient our focus in favor of
the similarity to be found across value communities. Cultural cognates
and correlates are objective because they are discovered to be real
features of multiple value systems. They are in an important sense
“there” to be discovered both by internal and external
observers of the value group. The reason that these value cognates
count as neutral is that they do not, in virtue of their being
objective, privilege any value-type or value-content over any other. At
this stage they are taken as mere facts of the matter about the values
that exist within communities.
4.2 The Principle of Cultural Reciprocity
The second principle of cultural relativism is:

The principle of cultural reciprocity, which, by a general
recognition of the reciprocal character of all contacts between
cultures and of the fact that all modern cultures are highly composite
ones, would invalidate the lump estimating of cultures in terms of
generalized, en bloc assumptions of superiority and inferiority,
substituting scientific, point-by-point comparisons with their
correspondingly limited, specific, and objectively verifiable
superiorities or inferiorities. (CRIP 73)

This aspect of Locke's relativism requires a
“beneficent neutrality between divergent positions” (CRIP
70–71). It begins by fostering a disposition toward cultural
toleration in the hope that such toleration will lead to mutual
respect, which would in turn serve as a foundation upon which to base
reciprocal exchanges between cultures. In the most likely case, these
initial exchanges will be centered around specific values that form
narrowly defined communities of agreement. In the end, if cultural
relativism is able to foster reciprocity between value communities to a
sufficient degree, then cultural relativism may well establish a
foundation of mutual understanding and appreciation to support active
cooperation between value groups. The principle of cultural reciprocity
restrains the inferences that we are able to make as a result of the
principal of cultural equivalence in at least two ways: first, its
emphasis on point-by-point comparisons limits the scope of the value
cognates that are discovered, and second, it issues an injunction
against identifying or connecting specific values with specific
cultures or value communities. Relativism is to borrow from an
idealized model of scientific practice; a point of view that does not
prejudge the results of a given observation before it is carried out.
Moreover, it points out that the discovery of cognates and correlates
is not likely to be wholesale, but instead, specific and
contextualized.
4.3 The Principle of Cultural Convertibility
Finally, we have the principle of cultural convertibility:

The principle of limited cultural convertibility, that, since
culture elements, though widely interchangeable, are so separable, the
institutional forms from their values and the values from their
institutional forms, the organic selectivity and assimilative capacity
of a borrowing culture becomes a limiting criterion for cultural
exchange. Conversely, pressure acculturation and the mass transplanting
of culture, the stock procedure of groups with traditions of culture
‘superiority’ and dominance, are counterindicated as
against both the interests of cultural efficiency and the natural
trends of culture selectivity. (CRIP 73)

All value-types are independent of any given value-content; any
given value-type can be joined with any value-content. This fact of
valuation is what grounds cross-cultural transformation. The extent to
which cultures are modified by their interactions with other cultures,
is in part a function of how stringently the cultures in question
associate their own value-forms with specific value-content. At a
higher level, Locke indicates that associations might even be made
between a value and its institutional form, by which he seems to mean
the manner in which the value is organized into the social structure of
a value community. If specific values are correlated with particular
institutional forms, a necessary connection may be assumed to exist
between them where it does not.
5. Aesthetics
Locke is perhaps best known for his work in aesthetics, in
particular, his role as both an intellectual purveyor of Negro art and
literary critic. Locke managed to position himself at the forefront of
one of the most significant and important artistic rebirths in American
history. His seminal work, The New Negro, was ground-breaking
in its presentation of Negro art as thoroughly self-expressive of the
individual artist, and not as merely representative of aesthetic,
cultural and social possibilities. Locke's publication of The
New Negro was in many ways in direct defiance and contradiction of
the black intellectual elite of his day, most notably W. E. B. Du Bois,
as well as being the advance guard of the aesthetic sentiments of the
average Negro of his day. There is evidence of his philosophical views,
especially in the areas of axiology, culture, race and ethnicity
throughout his writings on aesthetics. Major themes in Locke's
aesthetics include: universal human appeal and the relationship of
universal and particular; the transition from folk art to high art; the
centrality of individual expressivity; and cross-cultural
communicability through the aesthetic.
5.1 The New Negro
Prior to the period of individual expression characteristic of the
Harlem Renaissance, Negro art in Locke's estimation had as its
primary function representation of a Negro type that was socially
acceptable and laudably ideal. The aim of much Negro art was to advance
presentations of the Negro as civilized, cultured, and capable of
making a worthwhile contribution to American society, or to portray
blacks in America as a progressive people, needing only to be
liberated from slavery or Jim Crow segregation to realize their true potential. In
discharging this representative function, Negro art was consumed with
the promulgation of stereotypes and counter-stereotypes. It had
constantly to react against negative portrayals and stifling social
pressures; to attempt to make out of Negro life and experience
something worthy of respect, a fitting object of honor and emulation.
As Locke put it, 


for generations in the mind of America, the
Negro has been more of a formula than a human being—a something
to be argued about, condemned or defended, to be 
‘kept down,’ or 
‘in his place,’ or 
‘helped up,’
to be worried with or worried over, harassed or patronized, a social
bogey or a social burden. (NN 3–4)

 The primary consequence
of this social environment on black aesthetics in the United States
according to Locke was its Ghettoization. In dealing with this
specialized subject matter of social uplift Negro aesthetics segregates
itself from the broader American social context and fails to achieve
universal human appeal. “The thinking Negro,” by whom Locke
seems to have Du Bois primarily in mind, “has been induced to
share this same general attitude, to focus his attention on
controversial issues, to see himself in the distorted perspective of a
social problem” (NN 3–4).
 Art at its best on Locke's view is not propaganda, and though
there may be some initial phase in which art is forced to perform such
a function that is not the ultimate goal. “Until
recently,” Locke comments “lacking self-understanding, we
have been almost as much of a problem to ourselves as we still are to
others.” Yet as “the thinking few know” as that
self-understanding is achieved and worked into artistic expression the
result is “that in the reaction the vital inner grip of
prejudice has been broken” (NN 4). This is the first significant
change in the social environment that produces the “New
Negro”; namely, the attitude of young Negro artist to racial
segregation.
Another change in American society that had a profound impact on
the aesthetic advancement of African-Americans at the time of
Locke's publication of The New Negro was the Great
Migration. One major consequence of “that shifting of the Negro
population” was that it “made the Negro problem no longer
exclusively or even predominantly Southern” (NN 5). Locke did not
however regard the cause of the great migration as chiefly racial; that
is, escape from the segregation of the South was not the major
motivation behind the mass African-American exodus from the South to
the North and Mid-West. Instead,

The tide of Negro migration, northward and city-ward, is not to be
fully explained as a blind flood started by the demands of war industry
coupled with the shutting off of foreign migration, or by the pressure
of poor crops coupled with increased social terrorism in certain
sections of the South and Southwest…The wash and rush of this
human tide on the beach line of the northern city centers is to be
explained primarily in terms of a new vision of opportunity, of social
and economic freedom, of a spirit to seize, even in the face of an
extortionate and heavy toll, a chance for the improvement of
conditions. (NN 6)
The Great Migration brought with it a need for a plurality of
social adjustments as the droves of African-Americans flooded into
Northern cities. Principal among this was the realization that the
Negro was

rapidly in process of class differentiation, [and] if
it ever was warrantable to regard and treat the Negro en masse
it is becoming with every day less possible, more unjust and more
ridiculous. (NN 5–6)

 Negro life in America according to
Locke is comprised of many diverse elements. The plurality of groups
that congregated in places like Detroit, Chicago, Philadelphia and
Harlem all with varying motivations and group specific aims constituted
some of the largest concentrations of diverse segments of the Negro
population. These circumstances coupled with the oppressive effects of
prejudice forced myriad sectors of the African-American population to
discover and interact with one another. Prior to that Locke claims that


it must be admitted that the American Negroes have been a race
more in name than in fact, or to be exact, more in sentiment than in
experience. The chief bond between them has been that of a common
condition rather than a common consciousness; a problem in common
rather than a life in common. (NN 6–7)
Locke explains that in part the artistic endeavors of the Negro
have failed to achieve universal resonance because the Negro himself
has been so poorly understood. He readily admits that “[i]t does
not follow that if the Negro were better known, he would be better
liked or better treated[,]” and goes on to note that despite this
fact “mutual understanding is basic for any subsequent
cooperation and adjustment” predicated upon, or in pursuit of an
understanding of the universality of Negro experiences as expressed in
art. Moreover, 

effort towards this will at least have the effect
of remedying in large part what has been the most unsatisfactory
feature of our present stage of race relations in America, namely the
fact that the more intelligent and representative elements of the two
race groups have at so many points got quite out of vital touch with
one another (NN 8–9)

 And in addressing that crucial fact,
such efforts may go a long way towards facilitating an appreciation of
Negro art as expressive both of the peculiar racial, ethnic, and
cultural experiences of African-Americans, and as expressive of
ubiquitous aspects of human experience. It is a mere
“fiction…that the life of the races is separate,”
and a dangerously divisive one at that, “[t]he fact is that they
have touched too closely at the unfavorable and too lightly at the
favorable levels” (NN 9). Hence, it is not simply a failure of
contact, but a failure of the right sort of contact that accounts for
the under appreciation of the aesthetic life of black peoples.
For his part, Locke argues, the 
“New Negro” in
recognizing “the necessity for fuller, truer
 self-expression,…[and] the realization of the unwisdom of
 allowing discrimination to segregate him mentally, and a counter
 attitude to cramp and fetter his own living” has played a vital role in demolishing “the
‘spite-wall’ that the intellectuals built over the
‘color-line[.]’” (NN, 9–10).
  Life for the
Negro in the early 1920's was steadily progressing toward the ideals
of American democracy. The Negro of the time was also characterized by
a new vein; one around which there was a growing consensus primarily
of feeling and attitude; rather than opinion or program. As Locke has
it:

Up to the present one may adequately describe the Negro's
‘inner objectives’ as an attempt to repair a damaged group
psychology and reshape a warped social perspective. Their realization
has acquired a new mentality for the American Negro. And as it matures
we begin to see its effects; at first, negative, iconoclastic, and then
positive and constructive. In this new group psychology we note the
lapse of sentimental appeal, then the development of a more positive
self-respect and self-reliance; the repudiation of social dependence,
and then the gradual recovery from hyper-sensitiveness and
‘touchy’ nerves, the repudiation of the double standard of
judgment with its special philanthropic allowances and in the sturdier
desire for objective and scientific appraisal; and finally the rise
from social disillusionment to race pride, from the sense of social
debt to the responsibilities of social contribution, and offsetting the
necessary working commonsense acceptance of restricted conditions, the
belief in ultimate esteem and recognition. Therefore, the Negro today
wishes to be known for what he is, even in his faults and shortcomings,
and scorns a craven and precarious survival at the price of seeming to
be what he is not (NN 11).

Locke ends his exposition of what is characteristic of the New
Negro with the observation that the reception of black aesthetic
products is an experiment in democracy. As African-American art resists
ghettoization and increasingly makes its presence felt in the American
artistic mainstream it seeks to establish itself as a subset of
American art; rather than, the totality of Negro American art. And since,
according to Locke,

 [d]emocracy itself is obstructed and
stagnated to the extent that any of its channels are closed…the
choice is not between one way for the Negro and another way for the
rest, but between American institutions frustrated on the one hand and
American ideals progressively fulfilled and realized on the
other. (NN 12)

The North American Negro artist in being ‘new’ is a living instantiation of the fact
that no culture, people, race, or society is a static one. Such
entities are always in process of transformation, and always a
composite of myriad cultural, ethnic, racial, and social influences.
The emergence of the new is at once a presentation of what has been and
an indication of what the future may hold. This is a deeply pragmatic
current running through Locke's aesthetic philosophy. Locke is
later critical of the Harlem Renaissance because it failed to sustain a
cyclical process of rebirth. In the years following the height of the Harlem Renaissance he remarked later that that a new Negro
must be born every decade or two.
5.2 The Young Negro
Locke explains that the aesthetic renaissance that took place in
Harlem and elsewhere was primarily a movement of young artists. The
youth, Locke claims, speak in distinctive overtones, and “out of
a unique experience and with particular representativeness” (NN
47). The experiences of young American Negroes is uniquely representative
because

 [a]ll classes of people under social pressure are
permeated with a common experience; they are emotionally welded as
others cannot be. With them, even ordinary living has epic depth and
lyric intensity, and this, their material handicap, is their spiritual
advantage. (NN 47)

 Here we find an interesting problem in
Lockean exegesis: How is it that the aesthetic contribution is at once
characterized by a disavowal of representativeness, while at the same
time being uniquely representative? Locke goes on to note that

[r]acial expression as a conscious motive, it is true, is fading
out of our latest art, but just as surely the age of truer, finer group
expression is coming in—for race expression does not need to be
deliberate to be vital. Indeed, at its best it never is. (NN 47)


Locke's resolution of the seeming paradox comes by way of
recognizing that “[o]ur poets have now stopped speaking for the
Negro[;]” the sort of representativeness characteristic of past
aesthetic pursuits and instead now “speak as Negroes” (NN
48). The main difference being that “[w]here formally they spoke
to others and tried to interpret,” the experiences of
African-Americans for white or other nonblack audiences “they now
speak to their own and try to express.” “They have” he notes
“stopped posing, being nearer the attainment of poise” (NN
48). With this change in the mind of the Negro artist the aim of art is
no longer the presentation of an ideal type, or an effective
counter-stereotype; instead, it is the expression of the universal
truth contained in the particularity of Negro experiences.
This is a major theme that runs throughout all of Locke's
aesthetic philosophy; the idea that within a particular manifestation
of human experience can be found something of universal human
significance. Indeed, this is the quintessential marker of “high
art” or “classical art”. In the case of the young
Negro artist Locke claims “[r]ace for them is but an idiom of
experience, a sort of added enriching adventure and discipline, giving
subtler overtones to life, making it more beautiful and interesting,
even if more poignantly so. When viewed from this more objective
attitude and “so experienced, it affords a deepening rather than
narrowing of social vision” (NN 48).
The youth “constitute a new generation, not because of years
only, but because of the new aesthetic and a new philosophy of
life” (NN 49). Locke explicates this new aesthetic philosophy by
way of comparison to “[t]he elder generation of Negro
writers” who were resigned to expressing themselves in
“cautious moralism and guarded idealizations” (NN 49). This
generation of artists, with

 the repercussions of
prejudice…heavy on its heart…felt art must fight social
battles and compensate social wrongs; “Be representative”:
put the better foot foremost, was the underlying mood. (NN 50)


This hampered both the individual expressivity of the older generation
of artists as well as their ability to communicate cross culturally the
truth of black experiences. The artist was not free to speak his
heart or mind, but had to remain cognizant of the way he presented the
Negro yet again. With the youth of the Harlem Renaissance there came a
“newer motive,” for the younger generation of American Negro artists
the aim “in being racial is to be so purely for the sake of
art.” (NN 51) The new artist does not take folksy racial types
to be emblematic of anything but the individual artist. Locke sees this
manifested in the artist's ability to make of “the racial
substance something technically distinctive,” a method of giving
expression to a specific type of experience that allows for full
expression of that experience across cultural, racial, or ethnic
boundaries. In this way techniques that exist as “an idiom of
style may become a contribution to general resources of art”;
(NN 51) available in the end, not only to those who created,
cultivated and refined them, but to any artist who wished to deal with
that particular idiom.
5.3 The Negro Spirituals
In Locke's estimation, the spirituals are the quintessential
Negro contribution to American art and culture; manifesting as they do
so much, not only about the North American Negro and his aesthetic and cultural
heritage and evolution, but also in standing as a paragon of processes
of aesthetic transition and development.

The spirituals are really the most characteristic product of the
race genius as yet in America. But the very elements which make them
uniquely expressive of the Negro make them at the same time deeply
representative of the soil that produced them. Thus, as unique
spiritual products of American life, they become nationally as well as
racially characteristic. It may not be readily conceded now that the
song of the Negro is America's folksong; but if the spirituals are what
we think them to be, a classical folk expression, then this is their
ultimate destiny. Already they give evidence of this classic quality.
Through their immediate and compelling universality of appeal, through
their untarnishable beauty, they seem assured of the immortality of
those great folk expressions that survive not so much through being
typical of a group or representative of a period as by virtue of being
fundamentally and everlastingly human. (NN 199)

The best evidence, Locke seems to think, in support of the
spirituals' claim to universality is that they have withstood the
test of time. As an art form they have outlived not only the
generations that produced them but the peculiar social environment that
enlivened them. Beyond this the spirituals have survived

the contempt of the slave owners, the conventionalizations of formal
religion, the repressions of Puritanism, the corruptions of
sentimental balladry, and the neglect and disdain of second-generation
respectability. (NN 199)

 In short, they have successfully made
the transition from folk art to formal music.
The spirituals at once exemplify all of the three major themes of
Locke's aesthetic philosophy: they are expressive of the
individuality of a given artist—think of the distinctiveness of
Paul Robeson's baritone renderings of “Swing Low, Sweet
Chariot”; they have universal human appeal; and they epitomize
the process of transition from a folk art to high or classical art.
“In its disingenuous simplicity, folk art is always despised and
rejected at first; but generations after, it flowers again and
transcends the level of its origin” (NN 199).
Negro folk music or spirituals contain the raw material for myriad
new musical developments. That material was at the time of the
publication of The New Negro to Locke's mind
underdeveloped, but as Negro artists grew in sophistication and craft
Locke saw the potential for them to complete the conversion of so
fundamentally American and pedestrian an art form into an avenue for
insight into some of the most deeply emotional aspects of
humanity.
Locke credits Du Bois with being among the first to give the
spirituals “a serious and proper social interpretation,”
with his chapter in The Souls of Black Folks on the Sorrow
Songs. “But underneath the broken words, childish imagery,
peasant simplicity, lies” Locke notes

 as Dr. Du Bois
pointed out, and epic intensity and a tragic profundity of emotional
experience, for which the only historical analogy is the spiritual
experience of the Jews and the only analogue, the Psalms. (NN
200)

 But whatever they may lack in terms of poetic form, they more
than compensate for in their ability to embody the religious mood. This
North American Negro folk form is replete with the spirit of exaltation. The
spirituals are remarkable for their ability to transcend the profound
tragedy that gives birth to them and offer up a model of enduring
hopefulness in this world or the next. “Their words are
colloquial,” Locke notes, being the products of unlettered folk
“but their mood is epic” giving emotive expression to
experiences that exemplify the possibilities of humanity at its best
(NN 201). The spirituals “are primitive, but their emotional
artistry is perfect” (NN 201).
Historically, Negro colleges were the mechanism through which the
spirituals were popularized. The travelling choirs of Negro
institutions such as Hampton University, Wilberforce University, Fisk
University and Tuskegee University performed the spirituals across the
country as a means of raising funds for their respective institutions,
all the while bringing to black and white audiences in the United
States knowledge and appreciation of this indigenous musical form. Many
of these university choirs also recorded compilations of Negro
spirituals and published them. It was thus, as Locke has it, that the
spirituals were able to avoid simply falling out of fashion and failing
to survive “that critical period of disfavor in which any folk
product is likely to be snuffed out by the false pride of the
second-generation” (NN 202). This, by Locke's lights, is
not an uncommon situation for folk arts to face, finding it necessary
as they often do to resist being disavowed by subsequent generations
wishing to distance themselves from the supposedly deficient quality of
the folk expression.
Emotions and attitudes form the very foundation of Locke's
philosophy of value: undoubtedly, one reason that Locke was so enamored
with the spirituals was that as he understood them their primary
artistic virtue was their deeply emotive character.
“Emotionally,” he points out, “these songs are far
from simple” (NN 205). There is to be found in the spiritual folk
music of the American Negro the entire range of human moods and
emotions, and within a given spiritual there can be a drastic change in
mood from the deepest sorrow to glorious praise, as each and every song
is infused with religious sentiment. Surprisingly, when it comes to the
problem of classification of the spirituals, Locke does not insist upon
the primary mode of classification being the feeling-quality of the
song as his value theory might suggest. In fact, Locke argues that

[i]nteresting and intriguing as was Dr. Du Bois's analysis of their
emotional themes, modern interpretation must break with that mode of
analysis, and relate these songs to the folk activity that they
motivated, classifying them by their respective song-types. (NN
205)

 In the case of the spirituals Locke is in favor of a different
method of classification because contemporary interpreters of the
Negro's music tend to mischaracterize, or characterize in a way
that is not true to the folk that produced it, the music of the Negro.
Locke laments the fact that “at present many a half secularized
ballad is mistaken for a ‘spiritual,’ and many a
camp-meeting shout for a folk hymn” (NN 205). He believed the
folk music of the Negro is best categorized according to the sort of
activity they inspired. “From this point of view” Locke
claims

 we have essentially four classes, the almost ritualistic
prayer songs for pure spirituals, the freer and more unrestrained
evangelical shouts or Meeting songs, the folk ballad so overlaid with
the tradition of the spirituals proper that the distinctive type
quality has almost been unnoticed until late, and the work and labor
songs of strictly secular character. (NN 205)

However, discriminating Negro folk music into types on the basis of
the folk activity that underlies them is not necessarily to exclude
the emotive content of the song. In fact, it seems that what is really
being discriminated is the active expression of the underlying
emotional content, i.e., the activity that is most commonly associated
with a particular emotion or mood. And here we see perhaps the most
direct effect that Locke's axiology has on his assessment of
spirituals discriminating them as he does into types in terms of their
feeling-quality, but also linking each form with a set of imperatives
in this case, a practical imperative understood by the type of
activity that each song is used to motivate.
Locke sees as a major problem with the scholarship on Negro folk
music in his day the tendency to overemphasize one of the various
distinctive elements of the music over the others. The result was a
jaundiced view of Negro music. “Strain out and emphasize the
melodic element” Locke informs

 and you get only the
sentimental ballad; emphasize the harmonic idiom, and you get a cloying
sentimental glee; overemphasize the rhythmic idiom and instantly you
secularize the product into syncopated dance elements. (NN
206)

5.4 Who, and What, is “Negro”?


Lurking in the background of all of this talk of the “New
Negro” is the assumption that there is something distinctively
Negro about at least some American art. As to what that is, or could
be, answers are sometimes extremely hard to come by. But, Locke warns



[s]ooner or later the critic must face the basic issues involved
in his use of risky and perhaps untenable terms like ‘Negro
art’ and ‘Negro literature’ and answer the
much-evaded question unequivocally,—who and what is Negro?
 (WWN 209)


 Beyond this Locke thinks it a meaningful query to
ask whether the racial concept has any place in art at all. Perhaps it
would be better to understand art as a cultural or social mode of
production that cuts across racial and ethnic divisions.
5.4.1 Who is Negro


In answering the question “Who is Negro?” Locke begins
by exposing a common misguided assumption in such queries:

 [t]he
fallacy of the ‘new’ as of the ‘older’ thinking
is that there is a type Negro who, either qualitatively or
quantitatively, is the type symbol of the entire group. (WWN
210)

 Locke sees this as the unfortunate consequence of the past need
to proffer counter-stereotypes to combat demeaning stereotypes of Negro
persons. Counter-stereotypes may well contain some element of truth,
but they fail to convey the whole truth about as diverse a population
of human beings as Negroes in the United States, let alone the Americas
or Negroes the World over. There is no distinctive singular Negro type.
The answer then to the question posed “who is Negro?” is no
Negro in particular. The Negro is a dynamic and multifaceted population
admitting of myriad cultural and social forms characterized as those are
by variegated linguistic, religious and artistic elements. This is
important for Locke to note as the Negro of his day was thought to be
classless, undifferentiated, and ethnically homogeneous. In fact, Locke
himself thought it possible (and actual) for human beings biologically
similar in the way that American race thinking presupposes to be
members of different races. A full and accurate artistic portrayal of
who is Negro would, Locke argued, have to picture the many diverse
Negro strands in their own right, weaving together from these diverse
threads a multifaceted presentation of Negro experiences.
5.4.2 What is Negro?


“Turning to the other basic question,—what is
Negro,” Locke begins by narrowing the question to “what
makes a work of art Negro, if indeed any such nomenclature is
proper,—its authorship, its theme or its idiom?” (WWN 211).
In other words, what gives a particular work of art its distinctive, if
any, racial character: the racial identity of its author, its treatment
of themes characteristic of a particular racial experience in a
particular place, or its use of styles and modes of expression peculiar
to a given people? Of these three candidates for the foundation of
Negro art Locke claims each has had its day depending on the social
environment that was prevalent at the time. Locke dismisses nearly out
of hand the first option remarking that many a Negro artist has
produced the most amateurish works of art due primarily to their poor
mastery of Negro idioms, and inadequate treatment of Negro themes. What
is more, some white (or at least non-Negro) artist have been quite
adept in either their use of characteristically Negro styles, or their
dealings with Negro motifs. Of course, it stands to reason that artist
steeped in the cultural, ethnic and racial environments that give rise
to these idioms and themes are most likely to master their use and
expression, and that persons who do so are most likely to be members of
these communities, having the same racial, ethnic or cultural
identities as other members. However, such communal membership is not a
necessary condition for the work of a particular artist to count
amongst the works that comprise a racially distinctive body of art such
as might be called “Negro art.”
6. Philosophy of Race


Locke understood race as primarily a product of social culture.
Locke denies as do nearly all contemporary race theorists that races
are biologically distinct categories of human beings. Locke maintained
that culture and race were distinct, but often overlapping categories.
There is no tight causal or otherwise necessary connection between race
and culture. The two are mutually exclusive even though they do
sometimes vary together or otherwise correspond. Race, for Locke, is
not determinative of culture or civilization.  Locke's
position on race does not deny, as some of his contemporaries concerned
with the notion of race and culture did, that there ever is a
significant connection between racial and cultural factors, nor does it
deny that “race stands for significant social characters and
culture-traits or represents in given historical contexts
characteristic differentiations of culture-type” (CRASC 188).
This is primarily a cautionary observation on Locke's part seeing
as how

 [i]t is too early to assume that there is no significant
relationship between race and culture because of the manifestly false
and arbitrary linkage which has previously been asserted. (CRASC
189)

 Locke has some hesitation about the prudence and possibility of
completely eradicating racial categories. He states,

 [i]n some
revised and reconstructed form, we may anticipate the continued even if
restricted use of these terms as more or less necessary and basic
concepts that cannot be eliminated altogether, but that must
nevertheless be so safe-guarded in this continued use as not to give
further currency to the invalidated assumption concerning them.
(CRASC 189)



Locke attributes the original idea that race is a primary
determining factor in culture to the work of Arthur de Gobineau, though
he thinks the main scientific justification for the view has been
offered by those who seek to interpret culture in evolutionary terms
such as the social evolutionism of Herbert Spencer. Positing a fixed
link between race and culture was useful for such theorists in
developing a step-by-step account of the development of cultures. But
even in Locke's day, the supposed scientific foundations of such
theoretical positions faced challenges. In light of that Locke thinks
it understandable for some to want to correct this misinterpretation of
the facts by insisting that there is no connection at all between race
and culture. We see here again perhaps some of the influence that
pragmatist thinkers, in this case Dewey, may have had on Locke, as
Dewey was apt to point out on numerous occasions the shortcomings of
Spencer's social Darwinism, and chiefly its attempt to offer a
universal account of all aspects of human development. Locke worried
that extreme cultural relativism

 leaves an open question as to
the association of certain ethnic groups with definite culture traits
and culture types under circumstances where there is evidently a
greater persistence of certain strains and characteristics in their
culture than of other factors.

 It is “[t]he stability of
such factors and their resistance to direct historical
modification” Locke thought, which

 marks out the province
of that aspect of the problem of race which is distinctly ethnological
and which the revised notion of ethnic race must cover. (CRASC
190)
6.1 The Concept of Ethnic Race


Locke held that race was in point of fact a social and cultural
category rather than a biological one. For this reason he developed the
notion of ethnic race or culture group. By ethnic race, I take Locke to
mean a peculiar set of psychological and affective responsive
dispositions, expressed or manifested as cultural traits, socially
inherited and able to be attributed through historical
contextualization to a specifiable group of people. The concept of
ethnic race is a way of preserving the demonstrated distinctiveness of
various groupings of human beings in terms of characteristic traits,
lifestyles, forms of expression; without resulting to the
scientifically invalidated notion of biological race.
“Race,” Locke argues “would have been regarded as
primarily a matter of social [as opposed to biological]
heredity,” if only the science of his day had reached a more
tenable understanding of the relationship of race to culture which
would likely have resulted from focusing more on the ethnic; rather
than, anthropological factors. The distinctiveness of a given race
would be understood as the result of “the selective psychological
“set” of established cultural reactions” (CRASC 191).
“The best consensus of opinion” on the basis of
Locke's study of the past, and for his day current, sociological,
anthropological, and psychological scholarship on the subject of race,
was that,


race is a fact in the social or ethnic sense, that it has
been very erroneously associated with race in the physical sense and is
therefore not scientifically commensurate with factors or conditions
which explain or have produced physical race characters and
differentiation, that it has a vital or significant relation to social
culture, and that it must be explained in terms of social and
historical causes such as have caused similar differentiations of
culture-type as pertain in lesser degree between nations, tribes,
classes, and even family strains. Most authorities are now reconciled
to two things,—first, the necessity of a thorough-going
redefinition of the nature of race, and second, the independent
definition of race in the ethnic or social sense together with the
independent investigation of its differences and their causes apart
from the investigation of the factors and differentiae of physical
race. (CRASC 192)



The notion of ethnic race is better able to capture the myriad
differences between culture groups in terms of the actual social,
cultural and historical conditions that give rise to such variation,
and without the scientifically indefensible reliance on biological
factors. On this view, race is no longer thought to be the progenitor
of culture; instead race is understood to be a cultural product. Locke
held that the more objective analysis of culture he advocated would
likely result in the development over time of distinctive culture-types
for which it may prove possible to work out some principle of
development or evolution. This he thought might eventually make it
possible to develop “a standard of value for relative culture
grading” (CRASC 194).


Nearly every culture is highly composite; consisting as most due in
the union of various social and historical influences; moreover, every
ethnic group in the unique outcome of a specific social history. A more
scientific understanding of man replaces the abstract artifice of
biological race, and requires that we deal with concrete culture-types
which are frequently complex amalgamations of supposed races united
principally by entrenchment of customary reactions, standardized
practices, traditional forms of expression and interaction, in sum, the
specific history of a given people in a particular place. It is
noteworthy and perhaps illuminating of Locke's conception of
ethnic or social race that the groupings of human persons formerly
thought to constitute “races” in the biological sense such
as “Negro,” “Caucasian,” or “Asian”
are in fact each composed of several different social or ethnic races.
On Locke's view there are many so-called “Negro,”
“Caucasian,” or “Asian” races. This revised
understanding of culture constitutes in Locke's estimation a
fundamental paradigm shift in the study of human cultures ”[s]o
considerable…[in] emphasis and meaning that at times it does
seem that the best procedure would be to substitute the term
race the term culture group“ (CRASC 194).
 Locke
quickly notes while the notion of race has been invalidated as an
explanation of culture groups understood as totalities, race does help
to explain various cultural components within a given culture.
“Race operates as tradition,” Locke noted, “as
preferred traits and values,” changes in these aspects of culture
in a distinctive way by a subset of a culture group constitutes
“ethnic remoulding” (CRASC 195). Race becomes a term that
designates the specific outcome of the “peculiar selective
preferences” in favor of some, and against other, culture-traits
of a given group. “Such facts” Locke observed

nullify two of the most prevalent popular and scientific
fallacies, the ascription of a total culture to any one ethnic strain,
and the interpretation of culture in terms of the intrinsic rather than
the fusion of its various constituent elements. (CRASC 195)