Two older Indian philosophical traditions, the early Nyāya
(grounded in Gautama Akṣapāda’s
Nyāya-sūtra, c. 100 C.E., and dealing mainly
with logic, epistemology, and the theory of debate) and the
Vaiśeṣika (grounded in Kaṇāda’s
Vaiśeṣika-sūtra, c. 100 B.C.E., dealing
mainly with ontology), developed in parallel until, at some point in
the 11th or 12th century, they merged to form a new school, called
“Navya-Nyāya”, the new Nyāya or “new
reason” school (Ganeri 2011). Despite its name, Navya-Nyāya
incorporates and develops classical Vaiśeṣika metaphysics
as well as classical Nyāya epistemology. The Navya-Nyāya
authors also develop a precise technical language through the
employment of which many traditional philosophical problems could be
clarified and resolved.  Navya-Nyāya techniques proved to be so
versatile that they were employed, not just by philosophers, but also
in poetics, linguistics, legal theory, and other domains of medieval
Indian thought. The foundational text of this school was
Gaṅgeśa’s brilliant and innovative Jewel of Reflection
on the Truth (Tattvacintāmaṇi). The school
continued to develop for about four centuries, reaching its heights
with the works of Raghunātha, Jagadīśa and
Gadādhara (Ganeri 2014). The sophisticated use this school made
of its technical vocabulary made it increasingly inaccessible, and so,
in the 17th and 18th centuries, several manuals or compendia were
written to explain in simplified language the basic tenets of the
school. I will describe the philosophical principles of
Navya-Nyāya based on a synopsis of the most successful of these,
Annambhaṭṭa’s
The Manual of Reason (Tarkasaṃgraha;
henceforth TS), together with its auto-commentary, the
Dīpikā (henceforth TSD), This text was
nicknamed Bāla-gādādharī, a sort
of ‘Beginners Guide to Gadādhara’. As well as
presenting the Vaiśeṣika theory of categories (a mixture
of physical theory, metaphysics and philosophy of psychology), and the
epistemological, methodological, and logical techniques of the new
Nyāya system, The Manual of Reason interjects
fascinating discussions on a wide variety of topics of philosophical
interest, making the text an enjoyable and informative introduction to
later Indian analytical philosophy (trans. G. Bhattacharya 1983; for
discussion of the text, see also Athalye 1930, Atreya 1948, C.
Bhattacharya 1966, Foucher 1949, Shastri 1961).
 
1. The Vaiśeṣika System of Categories
1.1 Methodology and Theory of Definition


Most Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika texts are structured in
one of two ways. They either follow a traditional
Vaiśeṣika pattern, in which the categories and their
various sub-groups are discussed in order, or else they follow a
pattern employed by the Buddhist logician Diṅnāga, and
copied by Gaṅgeśa, in which each of the sources of
knowledge is treated in turn. The Manual of Reason, however,
adopts a style of analysis due to Vātsyāyana (the first
commentator on the Nyāya-sūtra).
Vātsyāyana stated that:


This [Nyāya] system will follow a three-fold procedure, viz.
enumeration (uddeśa), definition
(lakṣaṇa) and examination
(parīkṣā). Of these,
‘enumeration’ means the act of referring to each object [to
be analysed] by name; ‘definition’ means [citing] a
characteristic of the named object which distinguishes it from all
other objects; ‘examination’ means ascertaining, with the
help of the pramāṇas, the appropriateness of
the distinguishing characteristic for the object defined
(Bhāṣya before NS 1.1.3).


The heart of this method lies in the use it makes of definitions,
conceived of as differentiating marks of the thing defined. The
Manual of Reason (TSD 3d) refines the idea: it defines a
‘definition’ of a class of things as any characteristic
which is co-extensive with that class. A defining characteristic of the
class ‘cow’ is the property ‘having dewlap’.
Note that this does not tell us what the essence of the class
is—it merely supplies us with a syndrome or trait by means
of which we can identify the thing in question. The Naiyāyikas,
we might say, have a ‘diagnostic’, rather than an
‘essentialist’, conception of definition. The purpose of
the ‘examination’ now becomes clear: it is to see whether
the alleged defining trait really is co-extensive with the class to be
defined, or whether it is faulty, either by ‘over-covering’
(cf. ativyāpti; applying to things outside the
definiendum) or by ‘under-covering’ (cf.
avyāpti; not applying to everything within the
definiendum), or both. A properly defining characteristic has to be, to
use modern terms, both a necessary and a sufficient property of the
thing to be defined. We see the pattern of enumeration, definition, and
examination repeated again and again in Navya-Nyāya texts like
The Manual of Reason.
1.2 What is the Vaiśeṣika System of Categories?


The Vaiśeṣika system of ‘categories’
(padārtha) is an attempt to classify in a systematic
way all the different types of existent. Navya-Nyāya lists seven
‘categories’ of object: substance (dravya),
quality (guṇa), motion or action (karma),
universal (sāmānya), particularity or
differentiator (viśeṣa), inherence
(samavāya), and absence (abhāva). Of
these, the first six comprise the classical list of categories, found
even in the Vaiśeṣika-sūtra, while the
seventh (absence) is a distinctive addition by the later school. Most
of these types are themselves subject to sub-division: thus, there are
nine types of substance, twenty four types of quality, etc.


One main question concerning this list of categories is whether we
can discern any underlying structure or organising principle. This is
related with another important question: just what is a category?
The Manual of Reason answers this second question by giving
the etymological analysis of the term
‘padārtha’ (category):
‘padārtha’ is the artha or meaning
of a pada or word. The claim is that the
Vaiśeṣika categories are in some way the metaphysical
correlates of linguistic structures. One way to make this claim more
precise would be to note the existence of striking similarities between
the Vaiśeṣika system and Sanskrit grammar (cf. esp.
Faddegon 1918). Another way is to observe a distinctive pattern of
argument employed, in which the hypothesis that a certain type of
substance, quality, etc. exists is supported on the ground that it
explains some feature of our linguistic practice (for example, the
argument that space exists as it explains our use of directional
terms.)


An alternative approach would be to seek some purely
apriori rationale behind the list. Athalye (1930: 75) offers
one such:


A notion is either positive or negative, and so the external object
of a notion might be ‘existent’ (bhāva) or
‘non-existent’ (abhāva).
‘Existent’ things again are of two kinds, properties and a
common substratum in which they reside. The latter is
‘substance’ (dravya). Of the properties, again,
some reside in many objects conjointly, others in individual things
singly. The first is ‘universal’
(sāmānya), while the latter class is again
divisible into properties that are stationary and those that are
evanescent, i.e. ‘quality’ (guṇa)
and ‘motion’ (karma). The remaining two
categories, ‘inherence’ (samavāya) and
‘particularity’ (viśeṣa) are
assumed to explain the special theories of the
Vaiśeṣikas.


This reconstruction of the Vaiśeṣika system is not
quite satisfactory, for it relies on an unexplained and perhaps
question-begging distinction between stationary and evanescent
properties, and leaves two of the categories completely unaccounted
for. Another reconstruction (also deficient) is offered by Potter
(1977). When we look at The Manual of Reason’s own
definitions of the individual categories, it seems to be following this
approach. The Manual of Reason’s definitions are
as follows:


Substance

(i) that which possesses the universal substance-hood;
(ii) that which possesses qualities (TSD 3)


Quality

(i) that which possesses universals, and isn’t a substance or
motion; (ii) that which possesses the universal quality-hood (TSD 4)


Motion

(i) that which causes conjunctions (between substances);
(ii) that which possesses the universal motion-hood (TSD 5)


Universal

that which is eternal, unitary, and inherent in many things (TS 82)


Differentium
that which exists in eternal substances and functions
as their differentiator (TS 83)


Inherence
that thing which is eternal and a relation (TS 84)


Absence
[No general definition given]




There are certain problems with this series of definitions, read as
an apriori reconstruction of the categories. In particular,
the definitions of ‘substance’ and ‘quality’
seem to be jointly circular, unless we take as already given universals
such as substance-hood, which make the definitions somewhat vacuous. I
will give another reconstruction, one which roughly follows the great
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika author Udayana (cf. Tachikawa
1981).
1.3 The Underlying Structure of the List


First divide things up into the existents and the non-existents, the
latter corresponding to the category ‘absence’. Now take
inherence to be a primitive, fundamental relation. Given such a
relation, the following three-fold division is exhaustive:

things which do not inhere in others, but are inhered in,
things which both inhere in others, and are themselves inhered
in,
things which inhere in others, but are not inhered in by
anything.



We want group (a) to correspond to the category
‘substance’. Unfortunately, the Vaiśeṣikas
claim that wholes are distinct from, and inhere in, their parts. The
only substances which do not inhere in anything are the atomic
substances (which for the Vaiśeṣikas correspond with the
eternal substances). Group (c) corresponds to the category
‘universal’, for universals are said to inhere in things
(substances, qualities and motions) but do not have anything inhering
in them. Group (b) comprises, the non-atomic substances, the qualities
and the motions. Let us now divide this group into two: those which are
inhered in only by universals, and those which are inhered in by other
things as well. The former corresponds to the categories
‘quality’ and ‘motion’, for substances are
inhered in, not only by universals, but also by qualities, motions, as
well as by other substances. Finally, we must find a way to sub-divide
the former group into qualities and motions. More traditional
Naiyāyikas preserve the distinction by saying that motions, but
not qualities, cause the substances in which they inhere to come into
contact with (or break away from) each other. This, however, appeals to
the idea of ‘contact’, which cannot itself be defined in
terms of our primitive relation inherence. Some radical
Naiyāyikas (especially Bhāsaravajña) claim that
motions are just a kind of quality, as their properties are so similar.
The only remaining category is ‘differentium’
(viśeṣa), whose members reside in and
individuate the eternal substances i.e. the atoms. The point, perhaps,
is that all other things are individuated by the universals and wholes
that inhere in them, but two atoms of the same substance are in all
respects identical. But if objects are individuated by means of
what inheres in them, then there must be something inhering in each
atom which distinguishes it from the others—a
‘differentium’ (see §10.2).


This is a rough sketch, omitting many technicalities, of how the
Vaiśeṣika philosophers tried to build their system of
categories on logical principles (for an example of such
technicalities, see TSD 3(c). The Manual of Reason points out
that a substance cannot be defined as the substratum of qualities,
because of the Vaiśeṣika doctrine that substances do not
possess any qualities at the moment when they are created.)
2. Physical Substance
2.1 The Five Primary Physical Substances


Vaiśeṣika distinguishes, among nine acknowledged
types of substance, a sub-class of five—earth, water, fire, air
and ākāśa—to which it gives the name
“bhūta” (‘physical substance’).
A bhūta is defined as a substance which possesses a
specific sensible quality—odour, taste, colour, touch and sound.


It was, perhaps, originally thought that the five physical
substances and the five sensible qualities are directly correlated,
each quality residing in one and only one substance, odour just in
earth, taste just in water etc. (such a view is reported by
Vātsyāyana under NS 3.1.65-6). This may give some insight
into the origins of the ‘five physical substances’ theory,
but it was realised very early on that it is extremely implausible to
maintain that earth, for example, is invisible, or else that its colour
is always due to intermixture with fire (Bhaduri 1947: 133). The set of
correlations between physical substances and sensible qualities is more
complex in the Vaiśeṣika-sūtras and
later texts, and is indicated in the following chart:




odour
taste
colour
touch
sound


earth
x
x
x
x



water

x
x
x



fire


x
x



air



x



ākāśa




x





The orthodox Vaiśeṣika view is that each physical
substance is characterised by the possession of a particular type of
sensible quality and the absence of certain others. Thus, earth is the
substance endowed with odour, water with taste but not odour, fire with
colour but not taste or odour, etc. A drawback of such definitions is
that we cannot infer, from the detection of a sensible quality, which
type of substance is present. Later Vaiśeṣika
therefore looks for a diagnostic set of definitions, one which seeks to
find, for each substance, a particular sensible quality whose presence
is indicative of that substance. The Manual of Reason (TS
10–14):


Earth is (specifally) endowed with odour

Water is (specifically) endowed with cold touch

Fire is (specifically) endowed with hot touch

Air is (specifically) endowed with touch without colour

ākāśa is (specifically) endowed with
sound.




Thus, although earth, water, and fire are all tactile, only
water allegedly has cold touch. It seems that it could find no positive
distinguishing trait for air, and thus reverted to the older style of
definition.


It is perhaps surprising to find a ‘five elements’
theory defended still in the seventeenth century. Some modern writers
have tried to represent these substances as metaphors for different
‘states’ of matter—solid (earth), liquid (water), gas
(air), and temperature (fire). This is, however, improbable, for it is
nowhere said that a particular substance can turn from earth to water
to air. Perhaps it is a mistake to see the theory as belonging to
physics at all; instead, bearing in mind the way the substances are
defined in terms of their sensible qualities, we might see it as an
exercise in the logical analysis of the data presented by the various
sense modalities to construct a (metaphysical) theory of the world.
Such a theory would, for example, explain the fact that there are
correlations between what we see and what we touch by positing that
there must be types of things which can be both seen and touched.
Likewise, the occurrence of tactile sensations with no correlated
visual sensations leads us to postulate the existence of substances
which can be felt but not seen (air), and so on for the other
substances. It is, after all, the existence of such correlations
between different sense modalities which grounds an objective
conception of the world (phenomena accessible only by one sense are
more likely to be thought of as subjective in origin).
2.2 Vaiśeṣika Atomism

The Manual of Reason (TS 10–14) repeats the
conventional Vaiśeṣika theory that the first four
substances (earth, water, air, fire) are each of two types, atomic and
composite. An atom (paramāṇu) is indestructible
(anitya), indivisible (i.e. non-composite), and has a special
kind of dimension, called “small” (aṇu).
The Vaiśeṣikas’ standard argument for atomism is
as follows. It is an empirically established truth that whatever is
perceived is composite. Thus even the smallest perceptible thing,
namely, a fleck of dust in a sun-beam, has parts, which are therefore
invisible. The Vaiśeṣikas call the smallest perceptible
thing a “triad” (tryaṇuka) and claim that
it has three parts, each of which is called a “dyad”
(dyaṇuka). Does each of these parts itself have parts?
Yes—for it is another empirically established truth that the parts of
a visible thing themselves have parts (e.g. a piece of cloth, whose
parts, the threads, are themselves composite). The
Vaiśeṣikas say that a dyad has two parts, each of which
is an atom.


This argument establishes that there are objects too small to be
seen, but it does not demonstate that some of them are non-composite.
Why cannot the process of sub-division be continued ad infinitum?
The Manual of Reason’s intriguing answer is that if such
were the case then Mount Meru and a mustard seed would have the same
size, as each would have the same (infinite) number of constituent
parts! An implicit premise here (articulated by other
Vaiśeṣikas) is that the size of a whole is a function of
the size, number and spatial arrangement of its parts.


The argument seems to be question-begging, for the implicit premise
is only true if atomism is already accepted. A non-atomist will say
that the size of an object is determined, not by its constituents, but
by the spatial boundaries of the ‘stuff’ it is made of.
2.3 The Metaphysics of Number (saṃkhyā)


The Navya-Nyāya account of number has been likened in content
and sophistication to that of Frege, and is indeed fascinating. The
Manual of Reason says only that numbers are qualities
(guṇa-s), that they are the ground for numerical
judgements, and that they range from 1 to a very high number called
parārdha (1014. Note here again discomfort with the
idea of infinity). The view that numbers are qualities is in fact
associated with old Vaiśeṣika, and turned out to be
irreconcilable with the structure of the Vaiśeṣika
ontological system. We may speak of there being three horses in the
field, but also of there being 24 qualities in the
Vaiśeṣika system. Yet a quality cannot by definition
reside in another quality—hence numbers cannot be qualities. This
problem led the Navya-Naiyāyikas to develop a new account of
numbers, based on a new type of relation called the
paryāpti or ‘completing’ relation.


Here is a summary of their theory. Consider the following pair of
sentences:

The table has wooden legs
The table has four legs.



The similarity between (1) and (2) suggests that we think of
number-words as akin to other adjectives, i.e. as attributing some
property to the object/s they qualify. The Nyāya say that, in
(1), the property of being wooden resides in the legs of the table by
the relation of inherence. Can we analyse (2) the same way, as stating
that a universal property four-hood inheres in the legs? The new
Nyāya (esp. Raghunātha and Jagadīśa) answer
in the negative. For note that (1) entails

Each leg is wooden.



However, (2) does not entail,

Each leg is four.



The solution offered is to postulate a new relation,
‘completion’, which relates the property fourhood to the
four legs jointly, but not to each leg individually.
Raghunātha remarks that “the ‘completion’
relation, whose existence is indicated by constructions such as
“This is one pot” and “These are two”, is a
special kind of self-linking relation.” His commentator
Jagadīśa adds:


It might be thought that the ‘completion’ relation is
nothing but inherence…So Raghunātha states that
‘completion’ is a another relation….In a sentence
like “These are two pots”, ‘completion’ relates
the property two-hood by delimiting it as a property which resides in
both pots. Otherwise, it would follow that there is no difference
between saying “These are two” and “Each one
possesses two-hood”.


The proposal is that number properties are related jointly to objects
by the many-one relation ‘completion’. I think we can
simplify this proposal a little without losing its essential
structure. Rather than saying, in a sentence like “Mars is a
planet”, that the property planethood resides in Mars by the
inherence relation, we would now say that the predicate
“…is a planet” is true of Mars, so to speak
building the inherence relation (or copula) into the predicate. In an
entirely analogous way, we can build the completion relation into the
number-predicate, which then becomes, if the number is n,
an n-place relation. Thus the sentence “Venus and Mars
are two” asserts of Venus and Mars that they stand in a certain
2-place relation, the relation which is the number 2. The Nyāya
idea, then, is that number-adjectives are n-place relational
predicates, and that numbers are n-place relations holding jointly
between n distinct objects. It in no way follows from the statement
that the relation 2 holds between Venus and Mars, that it holds just
with Venus, any more than it follows from the statement
that X is to the left of Y, that X is to
the left, full stop. On the Nyāya proposal, then, it looks as
though the troublesome inference is blocked because its conclusion is
not even well-formed, since the phrase “Venus is two”,
like the phrase “X is to the left”, is an
incomplete or unsaturated expression.


The Nyāya, we have seen, distinguish two relations, the
inherence and completion relations. Their motive is, as we might now
say, to account for the distinction between collective and distributive
properties. For the recognition that the inference from “These
are two pots” to “Each pot is two” is invalid is just
the recognition that the predicate two does not distribute over plural
subjects. The Nyāya idea is to analyse collective predicates
like ‘…are two’, not as one-place predicates of
aggregates or sets, but as n-place relational predicates, true of n
objects jointly. But since such relational predicates still take
objects as subjects, this indeed shows that recognising the distinction
between distributive and collective predicates does not force us to
abandon the adjectival view. The Nyāya, indeed, have a term for
collective properties: they call them
vyāsajya-vṛtti-dharma or ‘properties
which occur jointly’.
3. Space, Time and Motion
3.1 Space (dik)

The Manual of Reason’s remarks on the nature of space
and time are sketchy in the extreme. We must supplement them with
details from other Vaiśeṣika and Nyāya authors.
Even then, the theories of space and time found in
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika texts have been studied very
little, and we can only form a rough and inadequate picture at the
present time. The Manual of Reason’s observations
concerning the notion of space are as follows:

Space is a substance (TS3)
Space is the ‘ground’ for statements such as
“this is east of that” etc. (TS 16)
Space is unique, ubiquitous, and eternal (TS16).
Space is an instrumental cause of every effect (TSD16).
‘Nearness’ (aparatva) and
‘farness’ (paratva) are spatial qualities of
objects.



Space is conceived of as that substance in virtue of which statements
attributing distance and direction, such as “A is to
the east of B” (or “A is near
to B”, “A is nearer to B than
to C”, etc.)  are objectively true or false.  Space is
thus an explanatory postulate: it is argued that we must postulate the
existence of a new (spatial) substance to explain the fact that
objects stand in spatial relations with one another. The problem is to
make sense of this claim. Bhaduri (1947: 216–7) does so as
follows (I paraphrase his account):


Imagine a sequence of
objects A, B, C, D,
…, F, each in contact with the next, arranged in a
line. Now A is to the left of B, and B is
to the left of C, and since “being to the left
of” is a transitive relation, A is to the left
of C, etc. But, although A is in contact
with B, and B is in contact with C, it is
not true that A is in contact with C—contact is
atransitive. Thus contact cannot be what spatially relates
objects. What then?  “According the Vaiśeṣika, it is
space which brings [A and C] into relation. Both are
in conjunction with space and thus with each other through its
mediation. Space is that which turns the relation of conjunction into
a transitive relation” (Bhaduri).


This explanation has a problem. It assumes that between any two bodies
there is a chain of touching material objects. But, given this
assumption, we do not need to postulate a new substance with which
everything is in contact, in order to create a transitive relation
from contact. For we can define “being to the left of”
thus: x is to the left of y iff there are distinct
objects p, q, r,…t such
that x is in contact with p, p is in
contact with q, …, t is in contact
with y.


Potter (1977: 92) refines the argument. We say that A is
nearer to D than to F because there are more
intervening objects between A and F than there are
between A and D. Suppose however that
between D and F there is no chain of material
objects. How is it that we can still say “A is nearer
to D than to F”? Potter answers: “In
order to provide the material to explain this comparative judgement we
must postulate an intervening series of entities, and these must be
spatial”. Note that this explains, not the transitivity of
directional relations like “to the left of”, but rather
the magnitude of distance relations like “near
to”. “Near to” is not a transitive relation. It
accepts the basic premise that the distance between two objects is
measured in terms of the number of intervening entities, and
postulates a series of “spatial entities” when there are
no material ones present.



This explanation also has a problem, for space is supposed to be a
single entity. Perhaps it should say that the two objects are in
contact with a ‘segment’ of space, and spatial segments
have magnitude.


Perhaps the best way to construe the argument is as offering an
explanation of spatial separation without having to postulate
a series of mediating bodies. Thus, if A is nearer
to D than F, and there is nothing either
between A and D or between A
and F, the best explanation is that D is in contact
with a nearer part of space than F.


The Manual of Reason says that space is
‘ubiquitous’ (vibhu), which it defines as
‘being in contact with every sample of earth, air, fire, water
(and ‘mind’) (TS14). This raises the question: is space
infinite in dimension, or the same size as the cosmos? If space is
defined in terms of the relations between physical objects, then it
would seem to have the same size as the cosmos. There are however
Vaiśeṣika arguments that it is infinite. The
Vaiśeṣikas say that most bodies are either
‘long’ (dīrgha) or ‘short’
(hrasva) in dimension (TS25, Bhaduri 1947: 118), but that a
body’s having ‘long’ or ‘short’ dimension
is unintelligible unless it has bounding, perimeter parts. Space,
however, has no parts and hence no boundary. Some
Vaiśeṣikas conclude that space has no finite dimension
(i.e. is infinite); others that it has a special dimension called
‘paramadīrgha’ or ‘maximal
length’.
3.2 Time (kāla)

The Manual of Reason says of time that it is the ground for
statements about the past, present and future, that it is unique,
eternal and ubiquitous, and that it is the container of everything and
a instrumental cause of every effect (TS15+D). The conception of time
mirrors that of space: it is that in virtue of which statements of the
form “A is earlier than B” are objectively true of false.
Time is said to differ from space, and thus not be identical with it,
in the following respect: whereas what is spatially near or far varies
from person to person, what is temporally near or far is the same for
all persons (cf. Bhaduri 1947, Mohanty 1992). But why should we
restrict our attention only to presently existing persons?


In the Nyāya-sūtra, Gautama mentions an
argument against the possibility of present time remarkably similar to
(and perhaps even derived from) Nāgārjuna’s
arguments against motion. NS 2.1.39 (paraphrased): There is no such
thing as the present time, because, when an object is falling to the
ground, each point on its descent belongs either to the
already-traversed sector or to the yet-to-be-traversed sector. There is
therefore, no point on the trajectory to which the present time can be
attributed. The present time is an imaginary point of demarcation
between the past and the future. Gautama replies (NS 2.1.40-42) to this
by saying (i) that the concepts of ‘past’ and
‘future’ are relative to that of the ‘present’,
and not to each other, and (ii) that the denial of the present has an
absurd consequence, that nothing can be known perceptually, as
perception functions in the present. The point of (i), perhaps, is that
even if the present is just a boundary, it is not thereby
imaginary.
3.3 Vaiśeṣika Dynamical Theory: The Nature and Causes of Motion


Beginning with Praśastapāda (6th century
C.E.), the early Vaiśeṣika authors took a rational and
scientific interest in the behaviour of projectiles and other moving
bodies. Their theory bears comparison with Philoponus’
“impetus” theory, which was responsible for a paradigm
shift in Western scientific thought. The Manual’s
account substantially agrees with that already found in
Praśastapāda, which is partially traceable to the
Vaiseṣika-sūtra itself. The content of the
relevant stanzas can be summarized as follows:



Motion is the non-inherent cause of conjunction and disjunction. It
is of five types, four volitional (throwing upwards, throwing
downwards, contraction, expansion) and the fifth comprising all
non-volitional motion (including falling, rotating, flowing, etc.) (TS
5, 81).


Weight (gurutva) is the non-inherent cause of the initial
falling motion of a body (TS 30).


Fluidity (dravatya) is the non-inherent cause of (initial?)
flowing (TS 31).



‘Impetus’ (vega) is a dispositional
property (saṃskāra), as is
‘elasticity’ (sthitisthāpaka) (TS
80). ‘Impetus’ is the non-inherent cause of the
second and subsequent falling motions of a body (TS 30). Elasticity is
that which restores something to its original state after it has been
distorted.


Here is a brief summary of the theory. A moving body possesses, at
each moment in time, a particular ‘motion’, which is to be
thought of as a momentary, quality-like property of the body. Motions
are defined to be the cause of conjunctions or disjunctions. A
conjunction with a (stationary) body is brought about by displacement
in space. We are thus to think of the motion of a body as being either
identical with, or else the cause of, its displacement in space between
two moments in time. A motion cannot be caused by another motion (as
that would lead to perpetual motion). A body is set in motion by its
possession of a quality like ‘weight’ or
‘fluidity’. It persists in motion by having a dispositional
property, ‘impetus’ or ‘elasticity’, which is
the continuous cause of subsequent motions. It is brought to rest by
coming into contact with other objects.


The role of ‘impetus’ in this account is particularly
interesting. It is illustrated with reference to two examples: (i) a
fruit falling from a tree; (ii) a javelin thrown obliquely upwards.


At time t0 the fruit is stationary at place
s0. Its weight is counterbalanced by its contact
with its stalk. At t1, its stalk breaks and its
weight causes it to move to point s1. At this time
too there is produced in the fruit a dispostional
‘impetus’. At t2, the impetus in the
fruit causes a second motion, from s1
to s2, and so on for all subsequent times. Note
that the ‘weight’ of the fruit is the cause of its initial
motion, but then ceases to be operative. The cause of all subsequent
motion is the ‘impetus’ impressed into the fruit by the
initial motion. It is this idea, that the subsequent motion of the
fruit is the result, not of an external force, but of the internally
impressed vega, which licenses us to describe the
Vaiśeṣika account as an impetus theory.
When the javelin is thrown, the initial volitional push imparts
into the javelin an initial motion and an impetus. The upwards impetus
counteracts the javelin’s weight and causes its upwards motion.
When this impetus is exhausted by contact with the air, the
javelin’s weight imparts a downwards impetus and the javelin
falls. The horizontal motion of the javelin is caused by its having a
horizontal impetus which again decreases as a result of contact with
the air. The amount of impetus initially acquired by the javelin is
proportional to the applied volitional push. Once again, its is the
javelin’s having impetus, rather than the action of some external
force, which accounts for its continued motion through the air.



The Vaiśeṣikas extend this model to explain certain
other kinds of motion. (1) The initial cause of the flowing of water is
alleged to result from a force called ‘fluidity’ (rather
than the weight of the water). The subsequent flowing is the result of
the water’s acquired impetus. (2) Interestingly, the impetus of a
body moving in a straight line was thought to be ontologically of the
same type as the elasticity of a bent stick—a fact which reveals that
impetus was thought of as a kind of internal force, not as inertia. (3)
The Vaiśeṣikas mention various other kinds of motion:
the movement of an iron needle towards a magnet, the upward motion of
flames, the movement of air, and the initial motion of the atoms at the
beginning of creation. Given the above model, there must be some
‘force’ which initially gives rise to each of these
motions, yet none of the ‘forces’ so far isolated
(weight/gravity, fluidity, elasticity) will do. The
Vaiśeṣikas therefore speak of a new force,
‘adṛṣṭa’ (the
‘unseen’ force), alleged to account for such motions.
4. Selves: Human and Divine


The eighth of the nine Vaiśeṣika types of substance
is ‘self’ (ātman), defined as the
substratum of mental states such as believing, knowing, etc. (The ninth
is ‘mind’ (manas), a distinct element in the
ontology of the mental.) Selves are divided into two types—human
(jīva) and divine (paramātman;
īśvara). The Manual of Reason supplies
arguments (all traceable back to earlier authors) for the existence of
both types of self.
4.1 A Causal Argument for God’s Existence


A properly formulated Nyāya argument has three components:
thesis, reason (hetu) and example
(dṛṣṭānta). The thesis, again, has two
components: the ‘locus’ (pakṣa) or place of
the inference, and a property (sādhya) whose presence in
the locus is to be inferred. Thus every Nyāya argument exhibits
the same pattern: p has S, because it
has H; e.g., d.  (For example: “The mountain (
= p) has fire (= S), because it has smoke (
= H); e.g. the kitchen ( = d). See further
§8). A sound argument must fulfil at least three criteria: (i)
the reason property must be uncontroversially present in the locus;
(ii) the reason property and the inferred property must be
appropriately related, roughly such that wherever the reason is
present, so is the inferred property; (iii) the example must be an
uncontroversial place where both the reason property and the inferred
property are present.


With this in mind, let us consider The Manual of
Reason’s argument for the existence of God:


A dyad of earth etc. has a maker, because it is an effect; e.g. a
pot (TSD 17b).


Here, the locus of the inference is a dyad, the smallest composite
entity. The reason is “being an effect”
(kāryatva), and the inferred property is “having
a maker” (kartṛ-janyatva). The Manual of
Reason carefully defines what it means by a ‘maker’: a
thing which is non-inferentially aware of the inherent or material
cause of the thing to be made, has a desire to make it, and acts
accordingly. In this sense, the potter, but not the potter’s
wheel or the clay or any other causally relevant feature, is the maker
of the pot, for it is the potter who sees the clay (= material cause of
the pot), desires to make a pot, and acts accordingly by using the
wheel and stick.


Comments: (1) Why does The Manual of Reason take dyads to
be the locus of the inference? This is, in fact, a clever move.
Obviously, we cannot take God to be the locus (e.g. God exists,
because…), for then the first criterion on a sound inference
will not be met—the reason property, whatever it is, cannot be
uncontroversially present in a locus whose very existence is
controversial. We can’t take the locus to be “everything in
the world”, for many such things are not effects (e.g. atoms,
space) and so The Manual of Reason’s desired reason will
again not be unequivocally present in the locus. Hence, we must pick
some particular thing. We had better not choose a human artefact, for
the inference, even if sound, would then establish nothing about God.
From the class of non-artefacts, the choice of dyads is a good one
here, for (a) they are the most basic things made out of the atoms, and
hence out of which everything else is made, and (b) if The Manual
of Reason can show that these have a maker, then it follows that
the maker is aware of everything (from the definition of a maker and
(a) above). Thus, God’s omniscience will be a corollary of the
proof of his existence.


(2) The argument takes the picture of causation used in the
“potter-pot” example and extends it to cover all natural
phenomena. God’s function is to make things out of the given and
uncreated ingredients (the atoms, cf. the clay), which are the
products’ material cause. Matilal accordingly describes the
Nyāya as having a “potter model” of God, in contrast
with a “spider model”, in which God spins the world out of
his own essence, or a “magician” model, in which the world
is an illusion conjured up by God. The argument, however, rests upon an
anthropomorphic and agentive view of causation. The Buddhist
Dharmakīrti ridiculed the argument by likening the pot to an
anti-hill (another thing made of clay): should we say that this
admittedly complex and intricate construction is the product of
intelligent agents? And even if we do, why should not the world, like
an ant-hill be a product of collective agency, rather than produced by
a single agent?


(3) The argument might be thought of as an argument based on
induction, induction from the class of artefacts to the class of
natural products. What licenses the induction from things seen to have
a maker to things not so seen? Dharmakīrti (cf. Vattanky 1984:
56-8) says that we are licensed to infer that an object has a maker
only if we have seen other objects of the same type being made. Thus,
we can infer that the Pyramids had a maker, not because we can see that
maker, but because the Pyramids belong to a type (buildings) other
instances of which we have seen made. The Naiyāyika makes a
bolder inductive claim, that two object belong to the same
‘type’, in this sense, if they are both effects.
4.2 An Argument for the Existence of the Human Self


Vaiśeṣika defines the human self as the substratum of such
psychological qualities as believing, etc., as well as of happiness
and other emotions, which God does not have. There is an implicit
appeal, here too, to the “potter” model of causation: just
as, in the sentence “The potter makes the pot”, the
property “….making the pot” resides in the potter,
so too in “I believe that p”, the property
“….believes that p” resides in me. Given
that the self is defined as that substance, whichever it is, in which
a person’s psychological qualities reside, the question is
whether we can identify this substance as a physical one, for example,
the person’s body or their senses, or whether we must postulate
some new type of substance. Vaiśeṣika’s argument for
the existence of the self as a new substance is by elimination of two
rival candidates.


(1) The substratum of beliefs, etc. is the person’s body.
The Manual of Reason makes the case for this as follows: If I
say, “I am cold”, “I am running”, it is my
body to which the predicate applies. Therefore, when I say “I
believe that p”, the subject likewise is my
body. The Manual’s reply is that if this were true,
then


there would be the difficulty that with the destruction of a hand, a
foot, etc., there will be the destruction of the body and it will
follow that there will also be the destruction of the self.


Clearly, I can lose part of my body without ceasing to believe and
know things. But losing part of my body does not entail losing my body,
as a whole. So this argument fails. A better argument is found in the
Nyāya-sūtra: the very phrase “my
body” shows that I am not identical with my body. But this
doesn’t work either, for I can also say “my soul”!
There is no clear argument against physicalism here.


(2) The substratum of beliefs etc. is the person’s
sense-faculties [recall that every physical substance was divided into
three: pertaining to body, sense-faculty, and (inanimate) object]. This
rather strange claim might be taken to include the view of the
Buddhists, that a person is reducible to a stream of momentary mental
events, including sense-data etc. The Manual of Reason’s
argument against such a view (a repetition of an argument already found
in the Nyāya-sutra) is a strong one:


Were this the case, there would be no re-identifying awareness
(anusandhāna), e.g. “I who saw that pot am now
touching it”, for there cannot be any recognition by one of what
is apprehended by another.


The idea here is that the possibility of recognitive experience
presupposes the existence of a unitary enduring self. There are really
two arguments compressed here. One is this: I cannot remember
an object unless I have seen it earlier—I cannot remember what you
have seen (cf. Locke’s account of personal identity in terms of a
continuity of memory experiences). The other argument is more
intricate. The Abhidharma Buddhist claims that a person is just an
aggregate of experiences, some visual, some tactile, etc. The problem
raised for such an account by the Naiyāyika is that it is
possible to make trans-modality judgements, in which the deliverances
of one sense-faculty are compared with another. Suppose that
V(o1) is a visual experience of an object
o1, and T(o2) is a
tactile experience of an object o2. It is possible
to judge “o1
= o2”, but this judgement does not belong to
the sphere of any one sense-faculty.  Hence, it must be located in
some other substance. The self is here conceived of as that which
collates, organises and compares the deliverances of the individual
senses. See Ganeri 2012, chapters 11, 15, 16 for an expanded discussion.


This is a convenient place at which to introduce the last of the
nine substances, the ‘mind’ (manas). It is defined
by The Manual of Reason (TS18) as a sixth sense-faculty, one
by which a person ‘perceives’ their inner mental objects
(beliefs, pleasure sensations etc.) In other words, it is a faculty of
introspection. Naturally, we need an argument why this faculty cannot
be identified as belonging to the self, and the usual Nyāya
claim is that the self is the agent of cognising, while the mind is an
instrument for cognising, just as we must distinguish between the
axe-man, who is the agent chopping the tree, and the axe, which is the
instrument for chopping. The Nyāya also claim that the mind has
another function, which is to ‘switch’ between the
different sense-faculties, it being assumed that, while we are being
subjected to sense-impressions from different faculties simultaneously,
we only attend to one at a time.

The Manual of Reason (TS 79) says that eight of the
Vaiśeṣika qualities reside only in the self, and in no
other substance. They are cognition, memory, pleasure or happiness
(sukha), pain or unhappiness (duḥkha), desire
(icchā), aversion (dveṣa), merit
(dharma) and demerit (adharma) (TS 73-78). The first
two we will discuss later (§§ 5.2-3). As regards happiness
and unhappiness, Matilal (1986: 301), summarizes the
Vaiśeṣika view when he says that “the essential
characteristic of pleasure or happiness consists in its being
experienced as favourable to us or being in accord with us, i.e. with
our body or mind or our very existential situation
(anukūla)”, which makes it distinct from knowing
or perceiving or apprehending something, and that it is an
“inner disposition on account of which the external world
becomes agreeable or desirable”. Desire is the state of craving
for something. Merit is that which is produces by meritorious action
(karma). See further Ganeri 2012, chapters 13, 14.
5. Philosophical Psychology
5.1 Overview of Philosophical Psychology


Study of the nature, content and causes of cognition (buddhi,
jñāna, upalabdhi) lies at the very centre of the
Nyāya philosophical method. In epistemology, the question asked
is: how do we distinguish between true and false cognitions, and under
what conditions does a true cognition arise? In logical theory, the
issue is: when does one cognition ‘follow’ from another, in
some suitably articulated sense. In philosophy of language, the
assumption is that sentence structure mirrors cognitive structure, and
hence that an inquiry into sentence meaning proceeds via an analysis of
the cognitions sentences ‘express’. The importance of this
topic is reflected by The Manual of Reason, for although
‘cognition’ is technically just one of twenty-four types of
quality in the Vaiśeṣika schema, its analysis accounts
for nearly half of the book (TS 34–74).


The term ‘cognition’ is used by the Naiyāyikas to
refer to any intentional (sa-viṣayaka;
object-directed) mental state, including states of perceiving,
inferring, doubting, guessing, remembering, etc., but excluding
desiring, hoping, suffering, etc. (cf. Matilal 1968: 7–8).
Because we say that the subject has such states, they are thought to be
‘qualities’ (in the technical Vaiśeṣika
sense) of the soul. The Manual of Reason states that a
cognition is the “ground for all linguistic practice” (TS
34), reflecting the Nyāya conception of language as primarily an
instrument for transmitting true thoughts from speaker to hearer.


From the point of view of epistemology, the most important division,
within the class of cognitions, is between those which are true and the
rest. However, the standard Nyāya classification of the species
of cognition, repeated by The Manual of Reason, begins with
another division, between memory cognitions (smṛti)
and the remainder (anubhava; nonrecollective cognition). The
full classification is as follows:


cognition







nonrecollective
(anubhava)
memory
(smṛti)






true
(pramā)
not true
(apramā)
‘true’
(yathārtha)
‘not true’
(ayathārtha)



perceptual
inferential
comparison-based
testimony-based

false (viparyaya; 4 types)
doubt (saṃśaya)
tarka






Nyāya epistemology is in effect a theory of the true
nonrecollective cognitions, and their division into four types on the
basis of the different accredited epistemic means
(pramāṇa-s) by which they are produced. (What
about accidentally true cognitions, e.g. the result of a lucky guess?
There are well-discussed problems with incorporating them into the
above schema). It is clear that, no matter how generally reliable are
our epistemic methods, it will always be possible for misfires to issue
occasionally in false cognitions (e.g. perceptual illusions, beliefs
resulting from a reporting error, etc.). The Manual of
Reason’s example (TS 72) is of the false pseudo-perceptual
judgement “This is a piece of silver” on seeing an
oyster-shell. I will discuss the epistemology of perception, inference
and testimony in §§ 7, 8 and 9 respectively. Here, I will
examine in more detail three types of cognition which, though very
important within the Nyāya framework, are subsidiary to its
epistemology. They are: memory, ‘doubt’ and tarka.
(Where do dreams fit in the schema? TS 70 states that they belong in
the category of ‘false’ cognitions. This, however, is odd,
since they are not the product of any of the four
pramāṇas misfiring. Neither are they memories
or states of doubt. According to Praśastapāda, dreams are
the result of the free movement of the ‘mind’ when it is
not connected with the external sense-faculties, influenced by
adṛṣṭa, ‘unseen’
forces.)
5.2 Memory


Memory is considered in the western tradition to be an important
means by which an individual can justify her beliefs about the past. It
is striking then to note that the Nyāya at the outset separate
memory states from knowledge-yielding beliefs and deny to them the
status of knowledge-hood. The Manual of Reason has the
following to say about memory:



A memory state is one which results solely from a ‘mental
disposition’ (bhāvanā) (TS 35).


A ‘mental disposition’ is a quality of the soul which is
caused by a nonrecollective cognition and causes a memory cognition (TS
80).


Memories are either ‘true’ or ‘false’, as
the originating cognition is true or false (TS 74).



The general theory is that an initial cognition, e.g. a perceptual
experience of an object, generates a dispositional mental state, which
has the capacity, when certain other causal factors are present, to
trigger an active memory of that object. (The whole process might be
likened to that of someone who, having learned to swim, has a
dispositional capacity to swim, which they exercise on certain
occasions.) The resultant memory state has the same content as the
originating perceptual experience, and can be said derivatively to be
‘true’ or ‘false’, depending on whether the
original perception was veridical or not. Memory, on this account is
represented as an entirely infallible faculty: there is no mention of
the possibility of what is called “false memory”, i.e.
having memories without any originating experience, or of “faulty
memory”, in which the content of the memory does not exactly
match that of the originating experience.


Given this account, in which memory is seen merely as reproducing a
past knowing experience, there is perhaps a sense in which the memory
does not itself count as knowledge, any more than an exact reproduction
of a Picasso counts as a Picasso. The Naiyāyikas state that
memories lack ‘independence’. The idea, perhaps, is this.
In general we establish the veracity of an experience by examining the
way in which it was caused (my perception of the table is veridical,
because my eyesight is good, the lighting is adequate, etc.). In the
case of a memory, however, we must go via the originating experience.
Memory is conceived of as a mere surrogate for the original experience,
and its veracity is ‘dependent’ on that of the original. We
might think, however, that memory in fact does more than merely
reproduce the original experience. It may represent the experienced
event as happening in the past, and thus have a different content.
5.3 Doubt (saṃśaya)


The concept of doubt has an important theoretical role in Nyāya,
for a state of doubt is claimed to be a necessary precondition for any
philosophical enquiry. Doubt is one of the sixteen topics listed
under Nyāya-sūtra 1.1.1, which determine the
content of the entire text. In particular, a doubt is the first step
in a properly formulated inference: is there a fire on the
mountain?—Yes, because there is smoke there. The Manual of
Reason gives a very precise definition of a doubt (TS 71): a
cognition of two incompatible qualifiers in the same qualificand, for
example the cognition “Is this (dimly perceived or distant
object) a person or a tree-stump?” Schematically, then, a doubt
is a cognition whose content is of the form “x
is F or not-F?”.


Two points are worth noting. (i) Although doubts are classified as
non-true (apramā) cognitions, they are not false. A
false cognition is one whose content is “x
is F” when in fact x is not F. (ii)
Doubts are distinguished from other cognitions by virtue of having a
special type of content, rather than by being propositional attitudes
of a special kind. The Nyāya do not here say that we can take one
of a series of attitudes towards the same proposition, believing,
disbelieving, doubting, etc. Yet if the only thing which distinguishes
a doubt is its having a content of the form specified in TS 71, then
what differentiates the doubt that x is F from the
belief that x is both F and not-F?
Vardhamāna replies by drawing a distinction between actually
having a contradictory belief and merely believing that one has a
contradictory belief. The former is supposedly impossible, the
supposedly contradictory belief that x is both F and
not-F is really a belief that I have a belief whose
qualificand is x and whose qualifiers are F and
not-F. Since there are no genuine contradictory beliefs,
there are no beliefs with the same content as doubts.
5.4 Tarka “Suppositional Thinking”


The term ‘tarka’ is often used loosely in the
sense of hypothetical or reductio-ad-absurdum reasoning, but The
Manual of Reason gives it a much more precise and technical
sense:

Tarka is the ‘ascription’
(āropa) of the ‘pervader’
(vyāpaka) by the ascription of the
‘pervaded’ (vyāpya). For example, ‘if
there is no fire, then there is no smoke’(TS 73).


The terms in this definition require explanation. The technical
sense of ‘ascription’ (āropa) is
‘counterfactual or suppositional cognition’
(āhāryāropa), defined as a cognition
whose qualifier is an property the opposite of which is known to reside
in the qualificand. In other words, it is a counterfactual assumption.
‘Pervader’ and ‘pervaded’ are notions taken
from the Nyāya theory of inference. When we say that wherever
there is smoke, there is fire, this can be re-expressed as that fire
pervades smoke, i.e. that the property of being a
smoke-possessing-thing has a narrower extension than the property of
being a fire-possessing-thing. So here, fire is the pervader and smoke
is the pervaded. Thus, tarka consists in a cognition of
smoke’s absence given the counterfactual assumption that
fire is absent. It is the cognition of a conditional “if p then
q”, or “were p to be true
then q would be true”, assuming that
‘p’ is false.


One main function of tarka is said to be the elimination of
doubt. Suppose one has the doubt
“Is x F?”. One might then judge
“if x is not F then x is
not G”, and if one also knows that x
is G, it will follow that x is F. The
Naiyāyikas recognise this function but deny nevertheless
that tarka is a source of knowledge
(pramāṇa). Their reason, it seems, is that there
is a distinction between citing positive empirical evidence for a
thesis and merely eliminating the contrary possibility by a priori
methods. This is reflected, perhaps, in the fact that no example is
cited in arguments based on tarka to buttress the
inference. The Manual of Reason, it seems, goes even further
and denies that the counterfactual conditional is a true cognition,
which implies, since they are not false either, that counterfactual
conditionals do not have a truth-value.


Udayana claims that tarka is of five types, namely
‘self-dependence’
(ātmāśraya), ‘mutual
dependence’ (anyonyāśraya),
‘circle’ (cakraka), ‘infinite regress’
(anavasthā), and ‘having an undesirable
consequence’ or reductio-ad-absurdum
(aniṣṭāprasaṅga). These are
basically self-explanatory – the fifth,
‘prasaṅga’ is the one used to great effect
by Nāgārjuna and other Mādhyamika Buddhists. Other
authors give slightly different lists (see S. Bagchi 1953 for
details).
6. Causation and the Causal Theory of Knowledge
6.1 Overview of Causation


The study of causation is an important part of Indian philosophical
thought. One reason for this is the early interest in cosmological
speculation: “We should remember that philosophic activity in
India arose out of the cosmogonic speculations of the Vedas and the
Upaniṣads. The all-important business of philosophy was to
attempt to discover some simple, unitary cause for the origin of this
complex universe” (Matilal 1985: 287). Another reason is that
Indian linguistics (especially the Pāṇinian system of
‘kārakas’ or relations between verb and
noun, which greatly influenced Nyāya,
Mīmāṃsā and Buddhist thinkers) is based on
an underlying causal model, in which the verb in a sentence designates
an event, for the production of which each such object as is designated
by a noun has a particular causal role. This same model informed and
influenced Indian epistemology, and led to the development of the
theory of ‘pramāṇas’, the causal
means or processes leading to an epistemically accredited
awareness-event (pramā). In the Nyāya tradition,
four such pramāṇas are recognised: perception
(pratyakṣa), inference (anumāna),
‘analogical identification’ or ‘comparison’
(upamāna) and testimony (śabda). The
accounts given of each of these employ an extremely causalistic idiom,
typical questions being ‘what causes a perceptual
experience?’, ‘what are the distinguishing causal factors
of true and false perceptual experiences?’, ‘under what
conditions does knowledge of the premises of an argument cause
knowledge of the conclusion?’, etc.


The choice of examples undoubtedly influences one’s causal
theory. The Naiyāyikas almost invariably illustrate their
discussions with one of the following three examples: (i) The
potter-pot example. The effect is the finished pot. Some of its
causes are the pot-halves (which the potter joins to form the pot), the
potter, his wheel and stick, the contact between each of the
pot-halves, and between them and the stick, etc. (ii) The
thread-cloth example. Here the effect is the piece of cloth. Among
its causes are the threads from which it is woven, the weaver, the
shuttle, the loom, various contacts, etc. (iii) The axe-tree
example. The effect, i.e. the felling of the tree, is caused by
the axe, its contact with the tree, the axeman, etc. Some of the
questions we would like to ask here are these. Can all instances of
causation be fitted into the general pattern illustrated by these
examples (e.g. is there always an ‘agent’)? Do the
Naiyāyikas have an adequate account of causation even for these
examples (i.e. can they distinguish between those factors which are,
and those factors which are not, causes of the effect)? Can both
objects and events be causes? Are causal relations singular or based on
repeatable regularities? Attempts to answer such questions as these led
to increasingly sophisticated accounts of causation as the Nyāya
school evolved.
6.2 The Three Types of Cause


The Nyāya-Vaiśeṣikas traditionally held that,
within the total collection (sāmagrī) of causal
factors leading to an event, there are three distinguishable types of
cause, namely ‘substrate’ or ‘inherence’ causes
(samavayi-kāraṇa), ‘non-substrate’
or ‘non-inherence’ causes
(a-samavayi-kāraṇa), and
‘instrumental’ causes
(nimitta-kāraṇa). This classification is
repeated by The Manual of Reason (TS 43). A substrate cause is
a substance in which the effect inheres. The substrate cause of a pot
would be the pot-halves; of a cloth, the threads. This is because the
Nyāya say that a whole inheres in its parts, and, so, if the
effect (e.g. the pot) is a whole, its substrate causes are the parts in
which it inheres. If the effect is an object’s coming to have a
new property (e.g. the tree’s being felled), the substrate cause
is the object (the tree). Note that, in spite of a certain similarity,
the notion of a substrate cause is not the same as Aristotle’s
“material” cause, for (i) the parts of an object are not
necessarily identical with the material from which it is composed, and
(ii) even an immaterial substance can be a substrate cause, for example
the soul, which is the substrate cause of epistemic events.


All other causal factors are either ‘non-substrate’
causes or ‘instrumental’ causes. A non-substrate cause is
one which inheres in the substrate cause. Thus, though not being the
substrate, it is closely connected with it. The conjunction of threads
is said to be a non-substrate cause of a piece of cloth. Another
example is often cited. The non-substrate cause of the colour of a
piece of cloth is the colour of the threads (which colour inheres in
the threads, in which inheres the effect, the colour of the cloth). Any
other causal factor is called an instrumental cause, for example, the
weaver’s shuttle or the weaver herself. Why did the
Naiyāyikas distinguish between non-substrate causes and the
remainder? Perhaps it was an attempt to differentiate between those
causes which must continue to exist for the effect to exist, and those
which need not. If the threads were to lose their colour, then the
cloth would lose its, and if the threads were to become disjoint, the
cloth would cease to exist altogether. If, however, the weaver dies,
having already woven the cloth, or if the shuttle is subsequently
destroyed, it will not affect the continued existence of the
effect.


It does not follow from these definitions that anything which
inheres in the substrate is a non-substrate cause, or that anything
which does not is an instrumental cause. In other words, we still need
to define “being a cause”. First, however, two more types
of causal factor are distinguished by the Nyāya. These are the
‘special’ instrumental cause (karaṇa) and
the ‘operating condition’ (vyāpāra)
We often speak of the cause of an effect, and
in doing so pick out one factor from the total collection of causal
factors as being particularly salient or important in bringing about
the effect. Intuitively, the idea is that, even if we have the
substrate cause (the pot-halves), the non-substrate cause (the contact
between the halves), and even some of the instrumental causes (the
potter, etc.), we will not get the effect (the pot) unless the potter
acts or ‘operates’ to bring it about. In a sense, then, it
is the potter’s actually using his stick which is the
cause of the pot. The Naiyāyikas try to capture this idea by
saying that one of the instrumental causes is the ‘special’
(asādhāraṇa) cause of the effect, and
they call it the ‘karaṇa’. This notion is
particularly important to the Nyāya epistemology (see below).
What constitutes the ‘special’ nature of this cause? The
Navya-nyāya (cf. TS 54) answer is as follows. They introduce
first the notion of an ‘operative condition’
(vyāpāra), defined as that cause which
immediately precedes the effect. For example, the operative condition
for a pot is the conjunction of the pot-halves; for the felling of a
tree, it is the final contact between axe and tree before the tree
falls. The ‘special’ cause is defined as that factor which
‘brings about’ this operative condition. In other words, it
is the factor whose operation directly brings about the effect. In the
examples, it would be the axe or the potter’s stick. These
objects are, for the Nyāya, the true instruments by means of
which the effect is produced.
6.3 What is a Cause?


The Naiyāyikas build up in this way a model of causation, in
which different causal factors have different types of causal role. The
model reflects (or is reflected in) the Indian grammatical analysis of
causal statements, such as “The potter throws a pot with her
stick”, “The lumberjack fells a tree with her axe”,
in which one distinguishes, apart from the verb designating the event,
an agent (kartṛ), object (karman), instrument
(karaṇa), and so on. We do not yet know, however, how
to distinguish between causes and non-causes. The Manual of
Reason (TS 41) provides the Navya-Nyāya answer. Given two
entities, c and e,

c is a causal factor for e iff


i.
 c exists before e,
ii.
 c exists ‘regularly’ (niyata)
with e, and
iii.
 c is ‘relevant’
(ananyathāsiddha) to e.




The first clause is to prevent self-causation. The import of the
second condition is that entities similar to c must always
exist with entities similar to e. There must be an invariable
or constant conjunction between c-type entities
and e-type entities. This rules out objects which just happen
to be there, such as, to give the Naiyāyikas’ example, a
donkey happening to wander past the pottery just as the potter goes to
work. This feature of the account, the insistence that a causal
relation instantiates a regularity, resembles a Humean account of
causation. The Naiyāyika, however, recognised the possibility of
‘accidental’, non-causal regularities, such as day always
preceding night, or (the example given by The Manual of
Reason), the colour of the thread always preceding the
cloth. Although the occurrence of a cloth is invariably preceded, not
just by threads, but by the presence of thread-colour as well, we
would not want to say that thread-colour is a cause of cloth.  The
third clause is their attempt to eliminate such accidental
regularities. The same clause is supposed to stop the cause of a cause
(e.g. the potter’s parents) from being a cause. Its meaning,
however, is not quite clear. Literally, it states that a cause must be
‘not established otherwise’. Kalidas Bhattacharya says
that “an invariable antecedent is irrelevant if knowledge of it
is not required for any anticipative knowledge of the origination of
the effect” (see Potter 1977: 67). Matilal says that an
antecedent is irrelevant if “it is possible to find a reasonable
explanation of its appearance” (1985: 290). The Manual of
Reason states that an antecedent is irrelevant if its antecedence
is only established along with some other entity. We know that
thread-colour precedes cloth only because we know that it occurs with
the thread (which we know to precede cloth); hence the thread-colour
is irrelevant in this sense.  This highlights an asymmetry between the
two regularities, the threadcolour-cloth regularity and the
thread-cloth regularity. For while we can establish the latter
directly by observing correlations between thread and cloth, we
establish the former by observing the correlation between threadcolour
and thread. Thus the former supposedly depends on the latter but not
vice versa. It is not clear, however, that the dependence does not run
the other way too. In any case, in using this criterion to block
transitivity, the Naiyāyikas seem to seeking a definition not of
causality per se (which most regard as a transitive relation), but
rather an epistemic notion of ‘causal explanation’ or
‘causal salience’.
6.4 Causation and Knowledge


Cognitions that are not memories are classified under two headings:
true and false. If we can find factors invariably preceding
true cognitions, then we will have the beginnings of a causal
theory of knowledge. We will be able to say that a cognition is a
knowledge-episode iff it is (i) true and (ii) preceded by a causal
factor which invariably precedes true cognitions (i.e. its truth will
not be an accident). The Nyāya (TS 39) claim to find four, and
only four, invariable correlations: perception, inference, comparison,
and testimony. To each they apply the model of causation outlined
above. In particular, they isolate, in each case, a
‘special’ instrumental cause (karaṇa), to
which they give the name ‘pramāṇa’.
In the case of perception, for example, it is the senses. Note that an
invariable correlation between two entities, in the sense defined
above, does not entail that whenever the first is present, so is the
second—the potter is invariably connected with a pot, but only causes
a pot when he is actually ‘operating’. Similarly, a
pramāṇa, e.g. the eyes, only causes a true
cognition when it is actually operating. In other words, the
pramāṇa is a necessary but not a sufficient
cause for true cognitions. To get a sufficient cause, the Nyāya
(TSD 69 iii) says:


The causal condition that is ‘special’ to true cognition
is called a ‘guṇa’ [an epistemic
excellence]; the causal condition that is ‘special’ to
false cognition is called ‘doṣa’ [an
epistemic defect]. In the perceptual case, the guṇa [of
a true cognition ‘x is F’] is the
sensory connection with an object [x] possessing a property
[F], etc.


This is, in effect, the operative condition for true
perceptual cognitions. Thus, the occurrence of all the usual factors
(substrate causes, non-substrate causes, general instrumental causes,
etc.) together with an epistemic excellence (guṇa) is
a necessary and sufficient causal condition for the occurrence of a
true cognition (see also Philips and Tatacharya 2003).
7. Perception, Concepts and Sense-Object Relations


Noticing something coiled up in the corner of the room, I perceive
it to be a piece of rope. Looking out of the window, I see that the sky
is blue and see also, perhaps, the blueness of the sky. I see too that
the air is cold, and that there is nobody on the street. What do all
these experiences have in common, in virtue of which they are all acts
of perception? The Manual of Reason (TS 46) gives the
classical Nyāya answer:

Principle 1: In each case of perceptual experience,
the experience has as its special instrumental cause a
‘connection’ (sannikarṣa) between the
object perceived and the perceiver’s sense-faculty.


All seeings are the product of a sensory connection (of a type to be
specified) with the thing seen. This basic idea must be embellished in
two ways before it is can serve as a proper a theory of perception: (i)
some account must be given of the fact that, in all the cases cited
above, the content of perception is semantically structured (e.g. that
the thing in the corner is a piece of rope), for otherwise perceptual
experiences would not be capable of being true, and hence fail to
qualify as knowledge-episodes; (ii) an account must be given of the
type of ‘connection’ involved here. Only then can we
evaluate the merits of the Nyāya theory.
7.1 ‘Qualificative Perception’ and the Role of Concepts


A structured perception, of an object a as having a certain property
f (e.g. seeing the thing in the corner as being a piece of
rope), is called by the Naiyāyikas ‘qualificative’
(savikalpaka = saprakāraka), for it a perception of an
object, the ‘qualificand’ (viśeṣya) as
having a certain feature or ‘qualifier’
(prakāra; viseṣaṇa) (cf. TS 47). It
is alleged by the Naiyāyikas that any piece of
perceptual knowledge must be of this form, and further that
most cases in which we claim just to be seeing an object
(e.g. “I see the car”) are really cases of seeing
something as a car. In a ‘qualificative’ perception, it is
the qualificand which is in sensory connection with the perceiver. How
then does the qualifier enter the picture? The Nyāya claim
that:

Principle 2: In every case of perception, the
qualifier is a previously perceived entity (substance, quality, motion
or universal) which is recalled by the perceiver and
‘superimposed’ upon the qualificand.


The intuitive idea is that the qualifying feature is a concept,
empirically acquired by the perceiver, and now used to categorise the
object perceived. To see that the passing animal is a horse, one must
first possess the concept horse, by means of previous
acquaintance with the type. (Use of the term ‘concept’ here
does not imply that the features are in any sense subjective—for the
Nyāya they are objective entities or constructions out of
objective entities). The Nyāya thus use their theory of memory
(initial experience causing dispositional trace causing memory event)
as a theory of concept-possession.


Principle 2 has a number of consequences:

If every case of seeing an object a as f is
preceded by a prior perception of f, and if that prior
perception were itself of f as qualified by some
qualifier g, we would get an infinite regress. The Nyāya
(cf. TS 47) therefore state that, in addition to qualificative
perceptions, there are also ‘non-qualificative’
(nirvikalpaka = niṣprakāraka) perceptual
experiences. In such experiences, on sees both the object and its
qualifier, but not as being qualified by the qualifier.
 To illustrate the general theory, suppose I perceive for the
first time a vase having a particular shade of blue which I have never
before seen. The theory states that, prior to seeing the vase as being
qualified by that shade, I first see the vase, together with (but not
qualified by) the shade, and then, recalling that shade, impose it
upon the vase.
Perceptual illusions, hallucinations, etc., are all explained as
cases in which a wrong feature is recalled from memory (or the concept
bank). Suppose I misperceive the coiled object in the corner as being a
snake. The account given by the Nyāya is that I recall and
superimpose the feature snakehood, on the basis presumably of its close
similarity with the true feature ropehood. Similarly, if I
hallucinate a dagger, the account entails that I am superimposing the
memory of some previously encountered dagger upon the region of space
in front of me (there must be some qualificand, by Principle
1). This is called the ‘mislocation’
(anyathākhyāti) theory of perceptual error. Note
that, if all error is a product of qualifier-mislocation, then no error
is possible with respect to the qualificand with which one is in
sensory connection. Note too that the Nyāya make no appeal to
‘images’, ‘ideas’ or any other subjective
content to explain illusion—it is an externalist account of error.
This shows that the so-called argument from illusion, from the
phenomenal indistinguishability of veridical and non-veridical
perceptual experiences to their having a shared subjective content, is
false. It is not clear, however, that one can always find a suitable
qualificand (is a region of space really perceived in a hallucination?)
or a suitable qualifier (e.g. when one sees a stick as bent, because
partially submerged in water, where does the feature ‘being bent
thus’ come from?—the Nyāya actually claim that it is an
objective feature causally produced by the act of perceiving!)
This theory allows the Nyāya to say that locutions like
“I see (visually) that the air is cold” or “I see
that the mango is sweet”, in which the qualifier, though
perceptible is not a visible property, are genuine cases of perception.
They classify them as a type of ‘extra-ordinary’
perception, called
jñāna-lakṣaṇā-pratyāsatti.
(The other types of extra-ordinary perception sometimes admitted are
‘sāmānyalakṣaṇa’, in
which all the bearers of a property are perceived by perceiving the
property, and yogic perception.)
The Nyāya state that experience amounts to a
knowledge-episode when and only when it is true, i.e. when the
qualifier actually qualifies the qualificand. The Manual of
Reason (TS 69 iii) says that the guṇa or special
causal factor for perceptual knowledge when the qualifier imposed by
the perceiver onto the sensorily connected qualificand is actually
present in the qualificand. There may, however, be scope for
Gettier-style counter-examples to this definition.

7.2 Types of Sense-Object Relation

The Manual of Reason (TS 48) reports the standard
Nyāya view, which is due to Uddyotakara, that there are exactly
six types of sense-object relation which ground perceptual
experiences:

Contact or conjunction (saṃyoga). Ordinary
perceptions, e.g. of a pot. If by ‘contact’ we understand
some sort of causal relation, then the Nyāya can be said to have
a causal theory of perception. However, they may mean that the eye is
in contact with the object in some more literal sense.
Inherence-in-the-conjoined
(saṃyukta-samavāya). We noted above that, in
‘non-qualificative’ perception, one sees the object and its
feature together. The relation between the feature and the perceiver is
an indirect one—the feature inheres in the object, with which the
perceiver is in contact.
Inherence-in-the-inherent-in-the-conjoined
(saṃyukta-samaveta-samavāya). If the feature in
(2) is a quality (guṇa), e.g. a particular shade of
blue, then inhering in it is a universal, blueness, which can itself
apparently be perceived.
Inherence (samavāya). The
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣikas have a rather strange doctrine,
that each sense-faculty is made out of the type of substance with which
it is particularly associated. The auditory faculty is thus made out of
ākāśa, and, as sounds inhere in
ākāśa, the relation between the hearer
and the sound is inherence.
Inherence-in-the-inherent (samaveta-samavāya).
By this indirect relation, the hearer is related to properties such as
sound-hood inhering in sound.
Qualifier-qualificand relation
(viśeṣaṇa-viśeṣya-bhāva).
This is an important one. The Nyāya believe that absences are
‘real’ objects, e.g. the absence of an elephant in the room
now, and that they can be perceived. Absences are said to qualify their
substrata, and are perceived indirectly, by the perceiver seeing the
substratum. The Buddhist Dharmakīrti argued that this is really
an inference from non-apprehension (anupalabdhi-hetu) running
thus: I perceive the walls of the room; ; if there were an elephant, I
would not see it, and my perceptual faculties are working normally;
therefore, there is no elephant”.

7.3 Gaṅgeśa’s Criticisms and New Definition


Gaṅgeśa criticises Principle 1 on three grounds: (a)
it entails that every awareness is perceptual since every awareness is
produced by the instrumentality of the ‘inner’ sense
faculty or manas; (b) it fails to include divine perception,
which involves no sensory connection; and (c) there is no one type of
sensory connection, nor anything obviously in common to the ad hoc list
of six types. Gaṅgeśa therefore offers a new
definition:

Principle 3: A perceptual experience is a cognition
which has no other non-mnemonic cognition as its ‘special’
instrumental cause (karaṇa).


Two objections to this definition are countered. Objection 1: Since
every qualificative cognition is produced by a prior awareness of the
qualifier, the definition under-extends. Reply: No. The awareness of
the qualifier is merely an auxiliary causal factor, the
‘special’ instrumental cause is a sense-object contact.
Objection 2: Since recognition, which is a type of perception, does
have the prior awareness of the qualifier as its ‘special’
instrumental cause, the definition under-extends. Reply: No. The
‘special’ causal factor is the memory of the qualifier
triggered by the dispositional trace produced by the prior awareness,
not the prior awareness itself.


Gaṅgeśa’s definition has the virtue of
capturing the sense in which perceptual experience is more
‘immediate’ than other types of experience, and is also
applicable both to human and to divine perception. Restricted to human
perception, it turns into the previous definition
(Gaṅgeśa says that the ‘inner’ sense should
not be regarded as perceptual after all).
8. Logical Theory and Gaṅgeśa’s Analysis of Inferential Warrant (vyāpti)
8.1 Overview of Logical Theory


Gaṅgeśa’s
Tattvacintāmaṇi is divided into four parts, one
for each of the four knowledge-sources or
pramāṇas recognised by the Nyāya school.
The post-Gaṅgeśa scholars focused more and more
exclusively on the second part, concerning inference, and wrote
increasingly detailed commentaries on a comparatively small portion of
the book, namely the part where Gaṅgeśa examines the
relation between inferential sign and property-to-be-inferred, which is
called the vyāpti, ‘pervasion’ or
‘inference-warranting’ relation (Ingalls 1951, Goekoop
1977, Wada 2007). Even today, in a traditional Indian education, study
of these sub-commentaries on various subsections of the
vyāpti section of Gaṅgeśa forms an
essential part of the curriculum.


The general structure of a properly formulated Nyāya inference
has three components: thesis, reason (hetu) and example
(dṛṣṭānta). The thesis, again, has two
components: the ‘locus’ (pakṣa) or place of
the inference, and a property (sādhya) whose presence in
the locus is to be inferred.  Thus every Nyāya argument exhibits
the same pattern: p has S, because it
has H; e.g. d. For example, “The mountain (
= p) has fire (= S), because it has smoke (
= H); e.g. the kitchen ( = d). A sound argument must
fulfil at least three criteria: (i) the reason property must be
uncontroversially present in the locus; (ii) the reason property and
the inferred property must be appropriately related, roughly such that
wherever the reason is present, so is the inferred property; (iii) the
example must be an uncontroversial place where both the reason
property and the inferred property are present.



Certain topics concerning this account are addressed in The
Manual of Reason and other Navya-Nyāya texts. Among them
are: the conditions under which inference can take place, and the
conditions under which the result is a knowledge-episode (TS 49, 54);
the correct account of the inference-warranting relation, between the
inferential sign and the property-to-be-inferred, called the
‘pervasion’ or ‘vyāpti’
relation (TS 50); the distinction between inference and demonstration
(svārtha- and parārtha- inference) (TS
52, 53); the three-fold classification of inference types, those which
are ‘universally positive’ (kevalānvayin),
those which are ‘universally negative’
(kevala-vyatirekin), and those which are combined positive and
negative (anvaya-vyatirekin) (TS 55); the types of inferential
fallacy (hetvābhāsa) (TS 57-64).


I will discuss mainly the definition of the ‘pervasion’
relation. First, however, a brief note on how the causal model of
knowledge is applied to inference. The ‘special’
instrumental cause (karaṇa) of an inferential cognition
is said to be the inferrer’s knowledge of the relevant pervasion
relation. The ‘operative condition’
(vyāpāra) is said to be an awareness that the locus
of inference (p) possesses such an inferential sign
(h) as is pervaded by the property inferred
(s). This is, in effect, an awareness which combines the two
premises of the argument together immediately prior to the conclusion
being derived, and is called the
‘parāmarśa’ or
‘consideration’. The ‘guṇa’ or
‘causal factor responsible for the truth’ of the
inferential cognition is the condition that this
‘consideration’ be true, i.e. that the locus does in fact
possess such a sign as is pervaded by the inferred property. Another
auxiliary causal factor is that the inferrer must either not yet
already know the conclusion or else must have a particular desire to
infer (i.e. given, knowledge of the premises, the inference would
normally take place mechanically, but if the conclusion is already
known e.g. perceptually, then the inferrer has to have a special wish
to re-establish it inferentially). This condition is known as
‘pakṣaṭā’, and should not to be
confused with ‘pakṣadharmatā’, which
is the name of condition (i) above.
8.2 Definitions of the Pervasion (vyāpti) Relation

Vyāpti or pervasion, is that relation between the
inferential sign (hetu) and the inferred property
(sādhya), which legitimises the inference. It would
typically be expressed by a sentence such as “wherever there is
smoke there is fire”, or “whatever exists is
transitory”. Knowledge of this relation, according to the
Nyāya, is the instrumental cause in the inferential process—it
is that relation knowledge of which, when combined with observation of
the inferential sign, will permit us to make a sound or
knowledge-yielding inference. Gaṅgeśa therefore attaches
great importance to the precise definition of this relation. He notes
as many as twenty-one definitions all of which he rejects for some
reason or other, and then he goes on to give seven further
formulations, each of which he considers acceptable. Of the definitions
he rejects, the first five came to be known as the
‘vyāpti-pañcaka’, and inspired a
huge literature both among the Sanskrit commentators and their modern
interpreters. These definitions are traceable to the earlier Buddhist
and Nyāya literature. Two more rejected definitions, known as
the ‘Lion and Tiger’ definitions, are apparently due to
Gaṅgeśa’s Navya-Nyāya predecessors (Wada
2007, ch. 5). The definition Gaṅgeśa finally accepts is
called his
‘siddhānta-lakṣaṇa’.
8.3 The ‘No Counter-Example’ Definition


The five definitions which make up Gaṅgeśa’s
‘vyāpti-pañcaka’ are all varieties of
what we might dub the ‘no counter-example’ definition of
the pervasion relation. This states that the inferred
property S pervades the reason property H just in
case there is no place/entity where H is located
but S is absent. Formally:


V1
Pervades (S, H) iff ¬(∃x)(Hx & S′x).




where S′ is used to denote the complement
of S. This definition is traceable both to the early
Nyāya notion of a ‘deviating’ pseudo-reason (i.e. one
which occurs somewhere where the inferable property S is
absent), and to Diṅnāga’s
‘triple-condition’ theory of the inferential sign, his
third condition being that H must not be located in any
“disagreeing case” (cf.
‘vipakṣa’), i.e. a place where S
is absent. In either case, the intuition is that a relation expressed
by “where there is smoke there is fire” obtains just in
case there is no place where fire is absent but smoke is present, i.e.
no counter-example. The first definition which Gaṅgeśa
considers is of just this form. It is that S
pervades H iff H has “non-occurrence in the
loci of absence of S”
(sādhyābhāvavad-avṛttitvam), i.e.
V1.


Why is this plausible-seeming interpretation of the notion of
pervasion rejected in Navya-Nyāya? There are two reasons:

The Problem of Partially Locatable Properties. The first
problem with the ‘no counter-example’ definition depends
on the Navya-nyāya notion of partial location
(avyāpya-vṛtti). A property is said to occur
wholly or completely in an object if it occurs in every part of that
object. For example, the property of being golden occurs completely in
a piece of (pure) gold; the object is ‘saturated’
(abhivyāpya) by the property, just as sesame oil
saturates a sesame seed. Some properties, however, occur in some parts
of the object but not others—these are called “partially
locatable”. For example, the property of being molten occurs at
the centre of the Earth but not at the periphery. Note that the same
property can be wholly located in some loci and partially located in
others—e.g. redness occurs wholly in a ruby but partially in a
red snooker ball. The distinction concerns two modes of
property-possession, not two types of property. An important point is
that, if a property is partially located in an object, then so is its
negation. The Naiyāyikas’ standard example of a partially
locatable property, viz. “…is in contact with a
monkey” (kapi-samyoga), illustrates the point. If the
monkey is sitting on a branch of a tree, then the following statements
may be true:

The tree is in-contact-with-the-monkey at time t, and
The tree is not-in-contact-with-the-monkey at time t,



(2) being true because there are parts of the tree with which the
monkey is not in contact. Nyāya avoids the threatened violation
of the law of non-contradiction by relativising the notion of
occurrence. (1) is thus analysed as “the occurrence, of the
property being-in-contact-with-the-monkey in the tree, is delimited
by (avacchinna) the branch”. Since a different delimitor
appears in (2), there is no inconsistency between the two statements.



The main effect of admitting partially located properties into the
system is that it is no longer the case that a property, P,
and its complement, P′, are disjoint: they may now
intersect. If the inferred property is partially located, then the
class of “agreeing cases” (sapakṣas -
places where the inferred property is present) and the class of
“disagreeing cases” (vipakṣas—places
where the inferred property is absent) overlap rather than being
distinct classes. To put it another way, a property P should
be thought of as having both a “presence range”
(P+) and an “absence range” (P−),
and the two may overlap. Consider now the standard inference
“The mountain has fire, because it has smoke”. Suppose we
find a place where smoke is present, and fire is both absent and also
present, e.g. the kitchen. Does this show the inference to be faulty?
According to definition V1, it does, because the kitchen
will be a counter-example, a place where smoke is present and fire
absent. But this is wrong: since fire is also present there, it is not
a real counter-example to the rule “where there is smoke there
is fire”. The upshot is that we must examine the “presence
ranges” of the reason property and inferred properties, not
their “absence ranges”. A real counter-example to rule is
a case which is in the presence-range of the reason property but not
in the presence range of the inferred property.



Gaṅgeśa’s second definition is designed to solve this
problem: H’s “non-occurrence in the loci of absence
of S which are different from locus of S”. In
other words, a locus of absence of S which is also not a
locus of S should not be a locus of H:


V2
Pervades (S, H) iff
¬(∃x)(Hx & S′x & ¬Sx).




The effect of the new clause is precisely to rule out the problem of
partially locatable properties, by specifying more restrictively what
constitutes a counter-example.

The Problem of Universally Positive Inference. There are,
claim the Nyāya, patterns of legitimate inference in which the
property inferred has as its extension the entire domain. Such
inference are called ‘kevalānvayin’ or
‘universally positive’ (cf. TS 55). The stock Nyāya
example is the inference “This is nameable, because it is
knowable”, nameability being regarded as a property of
everything. Another example would be “This exists because it is
produced”. If such an inference is sound, then its reason
property and inferred property must exemplify the pervasion
relation. According to the above definition, to say that nameability
pervades knowability is to say that any locus of the property
absence-of-nameability is not a locus of knowability. The problem is
that, since nameability is a universal property,
absence-of-nameability is an uninstantiated (aprasiddha)
property, and the Nyāya claim that such properties are
ontologically suspect. To put it another way, the statement “any
locus of the property absence-of-nameability is not a locus of
knowability” includes a non-referring expression,
“locus-of-absence-of-nameability” or “unnameable
thing”, and hence is not truth-evaluable. The problem does not
arise for all uninstantiated properties, for some, e.g. being a
sky-lotus, or being a square circle, can be shown to be constructs
made out of simpler instantiated properties. Thus, the statement
“The square circle is circular” can be taken not as
containing a non-referring expression, but as meaning “The
circle is square and circular”. However, ‘unnameable
(thing)’ is not decomposable into two distinct properties this
way.


None of the interpretations of the ‘no counter-example’
definition considered by Gaṅgeśa can solve the problem
of universally positive inferences, and Gaṅgeśa
accordingly rejects them all. His own definition uses a trick to get
round the problem.
8.4 Gaṅgeśa’s Definition: the ‘siddhānta-lakṣaṇa’

The Manual of Reason reproduces with slight simplification
Gaṅgeśa’s new definition. It says that S and
H are related by the pervasion relation just in case there is
collocation of H with S and S is not a
property the absence of which is collocated with H
(hetusamānādhikaraṇātyantābhāvāpratiyogi-sādhyasāmānādhikaraṇyam
vyāptiḥ; TS 50). Almost the same formulation is found
in other Navya-Nyāya texts, such as the
Siddhānta-muktāvali. This definition is supposed to
be applicable even if the inferred property S is
‘universally positive’. The idea, roughly, is that if
S pervades H then no property whose absence is
collocated with H can be identical to S. If we can
find an instance of a locus of smoke which is also a locus of the
absence of some property, coldness say, then coldness cannot be
identical with fieriness. That is:


Pervades (S, H) only if
(∃x)(Hx
& P′x) → (P
≠ S).


(There is an implicit quantification over P here). What this
says is that there is no place where H is collocated with the
absence of S, but it does so without actually using the
potentially non-referring phrase “absence of S”, and it
thereby avoids the problem of universally positive
properties. However, although this condition is necessary for
pervasion, it is not sufficient, for it is consistent with H
(or S) being uninstantiated. So Gaṅgeśa insists
too that H and S must be collocated:


Pervades (S, H) iff  


i.
 ∃x (Hx
& P′x) → (P
≠ S), and

ii.
 ∃x (Hx & Sx).





Gaṅgeśa’s trick implicitly trades on the theorem
“A → B ≡ ¬ (A &
¬ B)”. Thus clause (i) is virtually equivalent to
V1. This shows too that we do not yet have a definition
which can deal with the partially locatable properties, for which we
need something more like V2. Hence
Gaṅgeśa’s final definition is:


V3

Pervades (S, H) iff

i.
 ∃x (Hx &
P′x & ¬Px) →
(P ≠ S), and

ii.
 ∃x (Hx & Sx).







This definition of pervasion is able to handle both universally
positive properties and partially located properties appearing as
inferred property.


One may wonder why it is that, since a pervasion relation is of the
form “all Hs are S”, the Naiyāyikas
did not simply use the notion of universal quantification in their
definitions. The answer, perhaps, is that they were in fact trying to
define this notion, and to do so only in terms of certain other
notions which they took to be primitive, especially the notion of
co-location and absence.  If this is correct, however, then we must
show how to reconstruct the definition without its implicit
quantification over a property P (cf.  Goekoop 1967).
9. Meaning, Understanding and Testimony
9.1 The Language Processing Mechanism


Just as perception and inference are described, in the
pramāṇa system, as knowledge-yielding
faculties, so too is language. This leads the Nyāya to formulate
a description of the mechanism by which a competent language-user is
able to decode noise-utterances and derive language-based knowledge.
The description The Manual of Reason gives of this
‘language processing mechanism’ is as follows (TS 67, 68).
The input to the process is the hearer’s auditory perception of a
spoken utterance qua uninterpreted noise, and this is identified as the
‘special’ instrument cause (karaṇa). For
example, hearing the noise-string


[*]
“The” “cat” “is” “on”
“the” “mat”.




The ‘operative condition’
(vyāpāra) is the hearer’s (tacit)
knowledge of the meaning (śakti-jñāna)
of each of the words in the utterance. This is what marks off a person
who understands the language in question from one who does not (but who
may, nevertheless hear the words spoken, without having the capacity to
interpret them). For example, knowledge that


[M1]
“the cat” means the cat,




[M2]
“the mat” means the mat, and




[M3]
“is on” means the substratum-superstratum relation.




The output of the process, i.e. the effect of the combined causal
factors, is the hearer’s forming a belief, for example belief
that


[P]
The cat is on the mat.




Just as, in the case of perception, a number of auxiliary causal
factors, such as there being adequate lighting, the perceiver’s
sense-faculty being in good condition, the perceiver paying attention,
etc., so here too. Nyāya isolates four such factors for special
attention, namely: spatio-temporal ‘contiguity’
(sannidhi) of the uttered words; the speaker’s intention
(tātparya); ‘syntactic expectancy’
(ākāṅkṣā); and
‘semantic fitness’ (yogyatā) (cf.
TS 67). The first is self-explanatory: if the words in the utterance
are uttered one at a time over a long period of time, or mixed in with
the words of a distinct utterance, it will be impossible form a proper
auditory perception of the utterance. The second,
‘speaker’s intention’ is appealed to when the
sentence contains an ambiguous word—disambiguation proceeds via
consideration of the speaker’s intended meaning. The Manual
of Reason defines ‘syntactic expectancy’ as ‘the
inability of one word to produce, without another word, an awareness of
the relation between them’, and it cites, as an example of an
utterance which fails to possess such expectancy, the sentence
“horse man elephant”. Clearly the idea is at least that the
utterance must be grammatically correct. More than that, there is a
suggestion that it is in virtue of the syntactical rules that the
unarticulated semantic relations between the words are expressed. What
makes it the case that someone who understands the utterance “the
cat is on the mat” grasps a united proposition, and not just a
list of items [the cat, the on-relation, the mat]? The idea here,
perhaps, is that (knowledge of) the syntactical rules generates an
awareness of the connecting relations between each of these items.


‘Semantic fitness’ (yogyatā) is an
intriguing concept. The Manual of Reason defines it as
‘the absence of incompatibility among what is signified by the
words’, and illustrates its definition by contrasting the
sentence “He sprinkles the field with water” with “He
sprinkles the field with fire”. The idea is that the activity of
sprinkling is ‘compatible with’ (i.e. can only be done
with) a liquid like water, and not with a substance like fire. It would
be like saying “Cathood is on the mat” or perhaps
Chomsky’s “Colourless green ideas sleep furiously”.
Such sentences, though grammatically correct, do not make sense. This
causal factor, then, is that an utterance is intelligible only if the
proposition expressed is ontologically possible, by the light of a
preconceived ontological system, such as the Vaiśeṣika
system of categories. Some Naiyāyikas, however, impose a more
demanding requirement, that to be ‘semantically fit’ the
utterance must be true, i.e. that ‘fit’ =
‘true’, not merely ‘possible’, and consequently
that an utterance is intelligible only if it is true! In effect, they
identify ‘semantic fitness’ with the
‘guṇa’ or ‘causal factor leading to
truth’, in the language-processing mechanism. We will return to
this dispute a little later.
9.2 Semantic Power and the Reduction of Semantic Properties

The Manual of Reason’s definition of a word is
celebrated and often quoted. It says (TS 66) that a word is that which
has semantic power (śaktaṃ padam). A sentence
(vākya) is defined as a collection of words. So The
Manual of Reason’s definition fits with the modern one,
according to which a word is a semantically significant sentential
constituent. Semantic power is that knowledge of which enables the
competent hearer to interpret the word, and this, for the
Naiyāyikas, consists in the word’s standing for an object.
Thus, someone who understands the word “cat’ knows
something of the form <“cat” means cat>, where
“means” is a relation between words and objects of some
type. The Manual of Reason raises three questions about this
relation: (i) Is it a new and irreducible type or relation, not
reducible, that is, to any of the relations already admitted (TSD 66a)?
(ii) What is the relatum, i.e. with what type of entity are words
semantically related (TSD 66b, k)? (iii) How do we learn the meaning of
a word (TSD 66c, d).


(i) The Mīmāṃsakas and Grammarians were
‘essentialists’ about meaning, arguing that the Sanskrit
language is a natural entity, independent of human convention or usage,
whose words possess intrinsic semantic powers to signify objects, just
as fire has the intrinsic capacity to burn. The Naiyāyikas
traditionally opposed this view, arguing instead that language is a
product of convention, and that it is possible to account for a
word’s semantic power in terms of stipulations governing its use.
The claim is that we can define (and hence analyse) the
meaning-relation thus:

x means y iff there is a decree/stipulation
(saṅketa) of the form “Let utterances
of x generate cognitions of y”.


Now a stipulation or decree is claimed to consist in the
decree-maker’s having a certain mental state, viz. a
‘desire’ or ‘will’ (icchā) of
the form specified. Thus, the meaning relation is analysed in terms of
mental states and their contents, and not as a new type of relation.
Who is the decree-maker? The Manual of Reason states that it
is God, but most later Naiyāyikas drew a distinction between
words which have belonged ‘endlessly’ in the language
(introduced by God) and words introduced by an explicit human
stipulation (e.g. the technical terms in Pāṇini’s
grammar).


(ii) What is the meaning-relatum of a word like “cow”, a
generic nominal expression? Here again The Manual of Reason
contrasts the Nyāya view with that of the
Mīmāṃsakas. One sub-school of
Mīmāṃsakas (the Bhātta) claim that the
meaning of “cow” is the universal cowhood, since sentences
like “(The) cow is an animal”, or injunctive laws like
“Never kick a cow”, say something about the entire class of
cows, not about any one individual. Thus:


(Bh)
“cow” means cowhood.




In reply to the obvious objection, that in many other sentences,
such as “The cow is in the garden”, a particular cow is
referred to, these Mīmāṃsakas appeal to the idea
that a sentence can carry an ‘implication’
(ākṣepa) other than its literal meaning. Thus
the sentence “The cow is in the garden” may mean literally
that cowhood is collocated with occurrence-in-the-garden (i.e. that
there exists a cow in the garden), but carries the implication that a
certain particular cow is in the garden. The principle here is that a
prior awareness of the qualifier
(viśeṣaṇa) leads to an implicated
awareness of the thing qualified (viśeṣya) (TSD
66b). The Nyāya reply to this argument proceeds by way of
rejecting the principle cited, for, they say, awareness of a qualifier
or universal is possible only via an awareness of the thing qualified.


The Manual of Reason states the modern Nyāya view:
the meaning of an utterance of the word “cow” is a
particular individual as qualified by cowhood
(jāti-viśiṣṭa-vyakti):


(Ny)
“cow” means a-cow-as-qualified-by-cowhood.




The idea is this. Anyone who understands an utterance of the
sentence “(The) cow is in the garden” does so by (a)
identifying a certain object as the referent of the word
“cow”, and (b) grasps that that individual is qualified by
the property occurrence-in-the-garden. However, one can only identify
an object by distinguishing it from others, and this involves the use
of a distinguishing feature. So the individual is grasped in awareness
as distinguished/qualified by the feature cowhood. Since the meaning of
a word is, by definition, its contribution to the final belief
generated by hearing the utterance containing the word, the meaning of
“cow” is an individual as qualified by cowhood. Note that,
on such a theory, token utterances of “cow” vary with
respect to the individual to which they refer, but every token
utterance nevertheless shares a common semantic property, viz. “
…—qualified-by-cowhood”. The Naiyāyikas in this
way draw a distinction between type- and token- meaning (or, as some
say, between meaning and reference).


The other Mīmāṃaka sub-school
(Prābhākara) claim that, in order to explain the fact
that, on hearing a sentence, we grasp a unified proposition and not
just a list of entities, the meaning-relatum of a word like
“cow” is ‘an object connected with another’
(itarānvita). The meaning-relatum is a cow along with a
‘hook’ to link it with other meaning-relata. More
precisely, the meaning of the word would be something like


(Pr)
“cow” means a cow-individual, which is ……




So the sentence “The cow is in the garden” does not just
mean the list <cow, being in the garden>, as it would if each
word simply designated an object, but rather the connected proposition
<cow-which-is in-the-garden>. The idea, in effect, is that all
meaning-relata, are, in Frege’s terminology,
‘unsaturated’. To this ingenious suggestion, The Manual
of Reason replies (TSD 66k) that it is superfluous, for
“since it is possible for the relation [between meaning-relata]
to be apprehended as what is signified by the sentence [as a whole], it
is not necessary to postulate a semantic power with reference to the
relation”. In other words, The Manual of Reason claims
that general (presumably syntactic) features of the sentence are enough
to connect the meaning-relata, without needing to claim that those
meaning-relata themselves do the connecting.


(iii) The Naiyāyikas offer the following account (TSD 66c) of
language acquisition. The child makes a series of observations
concerning the linguistic behaviour of adults. She hears adult A utter
a certain noise “Bring the cow” say, and sees adult B
perform a certain action, bringing of the cow. Again, she hears A utter
the noise “Bring the horse”, and sees B bring the horse,
and hears “Feed the cow” and sees the cow being fed. Then,
by a twin inductive process, of (a) “agreement in presence”
(anvaya) and “agreement in absence”
(vyatireka)—i.e. noticing the correlation between A making
or not making an utterance and B performing or not performing an
action, and (b) ‘collection’ (āvāpa)
and ‘rejection (udvāpa)—i.e. noticing the
regularities between utterances of “cow” and events
concerning the cow, utterances of “bring” and bringing
events, etc., the child understands that the word “cow” is
linked with objects belonging the class of cows, etc.


This is an empiricist account of language learning reminiscent of
the account attributed by Wittgenstein to Augustine, and severely
criticised by him. Apart from the superhuman inferential powers
attributed to the child, the problem highlighted by Wittgenstein is
that no amount of observation can show, for example, that the relevant
correlation is between “cow” and cow-individuals, and not
between “cow” and B’s cow-directed-actions, the
universal cowhood, heifers rather than cows, etc. (cf. TSD 66d).
9.3 Testimony

The Manual of Reason says that statements are either Vedic
or secular. It adds that (hearing a) Vedic statement is a
pramāṇa, a means of knowing that which is
stated, because Vedic statements are originally uttered by God. (The
Mīmāṃsakas dispute this. Not believing in God,
they say instead that a Vedic statement is a means of knowing precisely
because it has no personal origin, and error in testimony is always a
result of human error in the source!) Hearing a secular statement is a
means of knowing only if the speaker is an ‘authoritative
person’ (āpta). An authoritative person is
defined as one who speaks the truth
(yathārthavaktā). There is an ambiguity here: is
an authoritative person one who is speaking the truth with respect to
the particular utterance in question, or one who is generally truthful?
Another question here is: must the testifiee know that the testifier is
an authority in this sense or not?


To confuse matters further, The Manual of Reason says that
the ‘guṇa’, causal factor responsible for
the truth of the testifiee’s belief, is
‘yathārtha-yogyatā-jñāna’,
which can mean either (i) veridical cognition of semantic fitness, or
(ii) cognition of veridical semantic fitness. In either case, the
‘guṇa’ has nothing to do with the
speaker’s credentials, it seems. Option (ii), however, must be
wrong, for it cannot be a condition upon testimony that the
hearer already knows that what was said is true. Option (i), however,
would not guarantee that the final hearer’s belief is true,
unless by ‘fitness’ The Manual of Reason now
intends a rather stronger notion, according to which the meaning-relata
‘fit’ together iff they are in fact connected, i.e. if the
utterance expresses a truth. This is, indeed, how some other
Naiyāyikas understand the notion of yogyatā, but
does not accord with The Manual of Reason’s own
definition.


I propose the following resolution. The language processing
mechanism was described above as one which issues in the testifiee
believing that which the testifier says. The truth of the
testifiee’s belief will therefore depend upon whether or not the
testifier is speaking truly, and so this should be called the
‘guṇa’ here. However, we do not always
believe what we hear, especially if we have reasons to suppose that the
speaker is not likely to be speaking the truth. It is possible, then,
that the output of the language processing mechanism is not simply
belief in what was said, but rather belief simply
that it has been said. There are, roughly, two sorts of case
when this can happen: (1) if the testifiee judges that the testifier is
deceitful or unreliable or simply uninformed about the topic, and (2)
if the testifiee knows on independent grounds that what the testifier
is saying is false (which is consistent with the testifier believing it
and testifying sincerely), perhaps on a priori grounds
concerning the plausibility of the assertion. With a little
interpretative licence, we might think that these two conditions
correspond to the two conditions imposed by The Manual of
Reason on testimony: that the testifier must be an
‘authority’ (āpta), and that the sentence
must be ‘semantically fit’ (yogya).
10. The Vaiśeṣika Concepts of Universal, Inherence, and Basic Differentium
10.1 Universals

The Manual of Reason reports the standard
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika definition of a universal
(sāmānya, jāti):


A universal is something which is (i) eternal, (ii) unitary, and
(iii) located in a plurality of things (substances, qualities or
motions). (TS 82)


Universals are thus conceived of as unstructured, objective
properties which necessarily reside in individuals. The postulation of
such entities in the Vaiśeṣika schema has explanatory
force, accounting for the distinction between ‘natural’ and
‘conventional’ classifications. Intuitively, this is the
distinction between groupings such as the class of cows or horses,
which reflect natural divisions (“cut nature at the
joints”), and those such as the class of Cabinet Ministers or the
class of endangered species, which reflect anthropocentric concerns.
The Naiyāyikas mark this distinction by calling natural
properties “universals” (jāti) and
anthropocentric properties “imposed” or
“nominal” properties (upādhi).
Correlatively, a semantic distinction is drawn between “natural
kind terms” (naimittikī), i.e. terms the basis
for whose application is a universal, and “imposed kind
terms”, terms whose basis for application is an anthropocentric
property. Udayana tried to make this distinction more precise by giving
a list of criteria for a property to count as natural. Examination of
his list (which are called the
“jāti-bādhakas”—impediments
distinguishing natural properties) will reveal something further about
the nature of the natural properties according to Nyāya.


The six impediments are (1) ‘non-plurality’—a genuine
universal must be plurally instantiated; (2) ‘equipollence’
(tulyatva)—two co-extensive properties cannot both be
genuine universals; (3) ‘cross-connection’
(saṃkara)—two genuine universals must not partially
overlap; (4) ‘regress’—a property like universality
cannot itself be a universal, on pain of infinite regress
(universality-hood, etc. etc.); (5) a property like differentia-hood
cannot be a genuine universal, for by definition the basic differentia
share no common universal property; (6) a property like inherence-hood
cannot be a universal, since it does not inhere in its loci. Of these
six, the last three are there basically to maintain the internal
consistency of the Vaiśeṣika system, and the first is a
straightforward consequence of the definition of a universal. It debars
a singly-instanced properties such as space-hood from the status of
genuine natural kind, perhaps motivated by the thought that the very
nature of a universal consists in its grounding judgements of the form
“x is of the same kind as y”, which
presuppose that there are at least two entities.


The second and third criteria are the most important, and can be
stated more formally as follows. If P and Q are
distinct properties, then (equipollence, tulyatva):


[P] = [Q] → either P or Q (or
both) is not a universal,


where ‘[P]’ denotes the extension
of P. The contraposed form is:
P and Q are universals →
[P] ≠ [Q].


Note that this does not entail that universal properties are
extensionally individuated or equivalent to classes, as some have
maintained. It shows only that corresponding to each class, there is at
most one universal. Although, within the domain of universals, a
universal is uniquely determined by its extension, the distinction
between a universal and a co-extensive imposed property (e.g. pothood
and conch-shell-like-neck-hood) is an intensional distinction.


As for the third impediment (sāṃkarya),
if P and Q are distinct properties, then


[P] partially overlaps [Q] → either P
or Q (or both) is not a universal.


The contraposed form is:

P and Q are universals → [P] ⊂
[Q] or [P] ⊃ [Q] or [P] ∩
[Q] = ∅.


(The inclusion is strict because of the ‘equipollence’
constraint.) In other words, genuine universals are arranged in a
hierarchy: given two universals, either they are related as genus and
species, all instances of one being instances of the other, or else
they are completely disjoint, having no instance in common (e.g.
cowhood-animalhood, cowhood-treehood). The Nyāya say that, if
one universal is thus subsumed by another, the former is
‘lower’ (apara) and the latter is
‘higher’ (para) (cf. TS 6). The
‘highest’ universal of all is ‘existentness’
(sattā), into whose extension falls every substance,
quality and motion. The demand that universals be organised
hierarchically shows that the Nyāya took as their paradigm the
biological species, which tend to exhibit this structure. Bearing in
mind that the term for “universal”, i.e.
“jāti” is also the word for caste, Matilal
(1971: 76) speculates that


[O]ne might discover in the Nyāya doctrine of generic
property a remote influence of the socio-religious ideas of the
Brahmins. Translated into biological terms, the … principle of
‘non-overlapping’ becomes a principle which opposes
cross-breeding. There is thus some evidence that the Nyāya bias
for real generic properties was partly influenced by the Brahmanical
concept of an ideal social order where intermixture of classes is not
to be permitted.


Some Naiyāyikas, especially Bhāsarvajña and
Raghunātha, reject the ‘cross-connection’
impediment, pointing out the problems encountered trying to apply
it to non-biological natural kinds (e.g. redness and greenness overlap,
as do pothood and goldhood). Raghunātha suggests that consistent
application of this principle would eliminate virtually all universals
from the ontology. Udayana’s criterion of a property to be
‘natural’ is thus not a necessary one, and neither is it
sufficient: none of his impediments shows why the pair
‘blue-green’ is more natural than Goodman’s pair
‘grue-bleen’ (where x is grue iff x is green and examined
before time t, and is blue otherwise, and vice versa for bleen.)


The idea that universals are, in some sense, ‘located’
in particulars generated two distinctive objections to the theory.
Diṅnāga trades on the spatial metaphor to argue that the
Nyāya conception of universals is incoherent. For, if a
universal is ‘unitary’, it can be located in at most one
place, and thus not ‘plurally instanced’. If, conversely,
if is located simultaneously at many places, that can only be because
it has parts, each located at a different place, and hence is not
‘unitary’. This argument plays on the ambiguity of the
notion of ‘being located’, and pretends that a universal
like cowhood is located in individual cows in just the same sense that
a cow is located in a field. Nevertheless, it forces the Nyāya
to be more careful in its account of the universal-particular relation.
As The Manual of Reason notes (TS 84), a universal is said to
reside in its instances by the relation of ‘inherence’
(samavāya), defined as an “inseparability”
(ayutasiddhi) relation. Of two entities, x and
y,

x is inseparable from y iff x cannot
exist unless y exists.


The idea is that a cow cannot exist unless the universal cowhood
exists, and that it is in this sense that cowhood is located in the
cow. (The same relation is claimed to occur between non-repeatable
‘qualities’ (guṇa) and substances, a whole
and its parts, and the basic differentia and the atoms.) Spatial
location, on the other hand, involves a quite different relation,
namely contact (saṃyoga). In this way, the term
‘location’ is disambiguated.


The other problem is the classic one: what happens to a universal if
all its instances are destroyed? Can universals exist without being
instantiated? The definition of the inherence relation permits this,
for the requirement is that cows cannot exist without cowhood, not vice
versa. We might say that the cow’s existence supervenes on that
of the universal cowhood. However, it is not so clear that we can say
in the same way that the parts (of a car, say) cannot exist unless the
whole (car) exists.
10.2 The Basic Differentia (viśeṣa)


The Vaiśeṣika traditionally and uniquely accept into their
ontology a category of item called ‘basic differentia’
(viśeṣa), from which, some claim, they derive
their name. The Manual of Reason defines these items as
follows (TS 83): “those entities which reside in the eternal
substances [i.e. the atoms] and function as their differentiators are
called viśeṣa”. The idea is that, just as a
cow and a horse are distinct entities, as they have distinct
properties, so too even two atoms of the same substance, e.g. earth,
must differ with respect to at least one property. Each atom,
therefore, possesses a ‘differentium’ unique to itself,
which serves to distinguish it from any other atom of the same
type. The assumption, then, is that any two non-identical items are
distinguished by virtue of possessing distinct properties. This is the
contraposed version of Leibniz’ Law that Indiscernibles are
Identical, that (∀P)(Px
≡ Py) → (x = y), where
“P” ranges over properties. The principle faces
triviality unless certain constraints are placed on the range of
properties quantified over. For example, if the property
“… = y” is permitted, the principle states
vacuously that identicals are identical. The Vaiśeṣikas
implicitly restrict the principle to intrinsic, non-relational
properties of the objects concerned, ruling out, for example,
‘being at a certain spatial or temporal location’ as being
a property capable of discriminating two otherwise identical
objects. Thus, the claim seems to be that no two objects, including
atoms, can be intrinsically identical. This is how Leibniz himself
appears to have understood his Law, saying that “It is always
necessary that beside the difference of time and place there be
internal principles of distinction….thus although time and
place serve in distinguishing things, we do not easily distinguish
them by themselves,” and that “There is no such thing as
two individuals indiscernible from each other. Two drops of water, or
milk, viewed with a microscope, will appear distinguishable from each
other”.


The principle is, admittedly, as strong one. Wittgenstein
(Tractatus 5.5302) points out that it entails the logical
impossibility of a universe containing two identical spheres; Wiggins
notes that it implies the logical impossibility of even a single sphere
(or any other symmetrical object), since it entails the identity of the
two hemispheres (and so on until one reaches a geometrical point). More
to the point, as the Vaiśeṣikas implicitly realised, it
implies the logical impossibility of more than one atom of a given
substance (having a certain velocity, spin, etc.). Rather than reject
the principle, however, they instead introduced new intrinsic
properties, the basic differentia, thereby avoiding the unpalatable
consequence.
11. The Ontology of Nonexistence (abhāva) and the Semantics of Negative Statements
11.1 Motivations


The later Naiyāyikas develop a remarkable theory of
nonexistence. According to them, the absence of an object or
feature at a particular spatial or temporal location is a state of
affairs just as objective as the presence of the object or
feature there. To Kanāḍa’s original list of six
categories (padārtha) or types of existent, they
therefore add a seventh, ‘absence’
(abhāva). This ontological doctrine is underpinned by
(i) phenomenological and (ii) semantic considerations.


(i) The phenomenological point was that a negative awareness, say
that a certain person is not in the room, is a kind of awareness
phenomenally distinct from any awareness about what is in the room.
Cognition of what is not has an autonomous phenomenology (this idea is
notably articulated by Sartre). The principle appealed to is thus:


P1
Experiences of nonexistence are phenomenally distinct from, and irreducible to, experiences of existents.




The idea emerges in the Nyāya epistemology with their claim
that absence is perceived, and that this perception is a sui
generis type of perceptual experience, not reducible to a
combination of ordinary perception and inference (cf. the sixth type of
sensory connection in Uddyotakara’s list).


(ii) The semantic point is that the Nyāya espouse a version
of the correspondence theory of truth, according to which true
sentences correspond to facts. It is alleged that true negative
sentences (e.g. “The pot is not on the ground”) correspond
to ‘negative facts’. Facts, however, are all, for the
Nyāya, of the same basic relational form, ‘bRa’
(they are said to have a qualificand-relation-qualifier structure; i.e.
they are complexes of existing entities). This restriction on what
constitutes a fact is expressible via the following semantical
principle:


P2

Sentences correspond to facts constructed out of simple or complex
entities (i.e. entities like ‘a’, ‘absence of
a’, ‘a-&-b’, ‘a-or-b’).





The principle entails that one cannot use the truth-functional
connectives to construct facts, except where they are equivalent to
term-logical connectives. (For example, the sentence “Rama and
Sita are righteous” is equivalent to “Rama is righteous and
Sita is righteous”, but the term-connective in “Rama and
Sita are married” is not similarly eliminable in favour of the
truth-functional conjunction “Rama is married and Sita is
married”.) The point is that a sentence like “The pot is
not on the ground” cannot correspond to a fact of the form
‘¬bRa’ (as there are no such facts according to
P2), but must rather correspond to a fact of the form
‘bRā’. Hence the introduction into one’s
ontology of negative entities.
11.2 Temporally and Spatially Located Absence

The Manual of Reason (TS 85–88) reports the usual
Nyāya view that there are four types of absence: prior
nonexistence (prāgabhāva); posterior nonexistence
or ‘destruction’ (dhvaṃsa);
‘constant’ or ‘absolute’ absence
(atyantābhāva); and difference
(anyonyābhāva). Of these, the first two refer to
possible temporal states of a transient object. Suppose we represent
the temporal duration of a person A by the following line
(assuming that he lived between 1650 and 1750):


t1
1650
t2
1750
t3



 
 
 
 
 
 




At any time t1 prior to 1650, A does not
yet exist, and at any time t3 later than
1750, A no longer exists. In accordance with the above
principles, Nyāya reformulates these negative existential claims
as positive existential statements about negative entities, namely,
the ‘prior absence of A’,
‘<A’ say, and the ‘posterior absence
of A’, ‘A>’ say. Thus, the
first reads:

<A exists at t1,


or, since, in the Nyāya idiom, objects are said to be located
in time as well as in space,

<A is located at t1.



Similarly,

A> is located at t3.



What happens at times such as t2? These are times at
which A exists or is present (is located). Note, furthermore, that, at
t2, there is a posterior absence of <A
(for the prior absence of A is destroyed when A
comes into existence), which we designate by
‘(<A)>’. There is also a prior absence
of A> (for the posterior absence of A does not
yet exist), i.e.  ‘<(A>)’. The Manual
of Reason (TSD 89E) records the older Naiyāyikas’
claim that these double absences must be identical with the original
entity, on pain of an infinite regress. Thus:


(<A)> = <(A>) = A.


Later Naiyāyikas apparently disputed this natural identity
(which corresponds to the Law of Double Negation in classical logic),
on the ground that double negative constructions contain the concept of
negation, and hence are logically more complex.


A third type of absence, called ‘constant’ or
‘absolute’ absence (atyantābhāva) is
illustrated by constructions of the form “The pot is not on the
ground”. The Manual of Reason states (TS 87)
that what distinguishes this type of absence is that it is located in
the three times—past, present and future. This seems odd, as it might
be that the pot is on the ground at some times but not others. Perhaps
the point is that the locus of the absence here is a spatial entity
rather than a temporal one. For example, the construction “Heat
is not in ice” illustrates this kind of absence. Perhaps,
furthermore, the force of this negation is that the pot is
never located on the ground—hence we cannot speak of the
prior or posterior absence of the pot (for these concepts are defined
in terms of times when the pot is present). (E.g. Udayana’s
definition of a substance as that which does not have a constant
absence of qualities.)


The fourth type of absence, ‘difference’
(anyonyābhāva), is illustrated by the sentence
“The pot is not (the) cloth”. This is to be read as a
non-identity statement.


The Naiyāyikas thus say that every negative sentence is the
negation of a sentence of the form
“aRb”, and they distinguish
between cases where the relation R is the identity relation and cases
where it is a relation other than identity. The object
a is called the locus of the absence, and the object
b is called the ‘counterpositive’ or
‘negatum’ (pratiyogin) of the absence, i.e. it is
the object whose presence in the locus is being denied. This
highlights the fact that absences are thought of as a kind of property
or ‘locatable’, rather than as a kind of
‘location’ (at least when the relation is not identity).
For example, the absence of A is located in many places at
once. It is not said that there is a distinct absence-of-A at
each and every place where A is absent. We can now see how
the Nyāya parse negative sentences without using a sentential
negation. Take the sentence “The pot is not blue”. The
first-order paraphrase of this would be: It is not the case that the
pot is blue (¬Fa). The Nyāya strategy is
first to say that every property, such as blueness, has both an
extension F (places where it is located) and a
counter-extension F′ (places where its absence is
located), and then to paraphrase the sentence as: The pot has
absence-of-blue. Note that a partially locatable property is one for
which the extension and counter-extension overlap—it is possible
for a feature to be collocated with its absence.
11.3 The Logic of Negation

The Manual of Reason (TS 89) makes some very interesting
observations about the logical properties of absence or negation.

Reference versus description. It is claimed that
there is a distinction between a qualified absence
(viśiṣṭābhāva) and a mere absence
(kevalābhāva). Consider the following pair of
sentences:

Annambhaṭṭa is not in the room, and
The author of The Manual of Reason is not in the room.



The idea is that in (3) the ‘mere’ absence of
Annambhaṭṭa is located in the room, whereas in (4) a
qualified absence (of Annambhaṭṭa as qualified by
authorhood) is located in the room. Do (3) and (4) really have distinct
logical forms? Perhaps we find here a realisation that nominal
expressions such as “The author of The Manual of
Reason” have two distinct logical functions, namely those of
referring to an individual and describing an
individual via his properties. (4) can thus be read either as
asserting the same as (3), that Annambhaṭṭa is not in
the room, or as saying that the author of The Manual of
Reason, whoever it or she is, is not in the room, i.e. that the
properties ‘being the author of The Manual of
Reason” and “being in the room” are not
collocated. If that is the sense in which (4) involves a qualified
absence, then (3) and (4) do have different logical forms.

Universal Quantification. The Manual of
Reason draws another very important distinction, between a
specific absence (viśeṣābhāva) and a
generic absence (sāmānyābhāva). These are
illustrated by the following sentences:

(This) pot is not in the room, and
(Any) pot is not in the room



(N.B. they would be expressed by the same sentence in Sanskrit;
hence the brackets). To say that there is a specific absence of pot in
the room is to say that some particular pot is not in the room, but to
say that generic absence of pot in the room is to say that any pot is
not in the room (i.e. no pot is in the room). The distinction is thus
linked to the formulation of universally quantified constructions.
Indeed, in Nyāya logical theory, generic absences are used to
formulate the pervasion (vyāpti) relation: “where
there is smoke there is fire” is contraposed to give “where
there is no fire there is no smoke”, and this is expressed by
saying that there is a generic absence of smoke in places where there
is a generic absence of fire (cf. Ingalls 1951: 54–5). It is
clear that (5) and (6) do have distinct logical forms. In the
Nyāya technical language, the distinction is made out by saying
that the property which delimits the counterpositiveness of the absence
(i.e. the pratiyogitāvacchedaka) is this-pot-hood in
(5), but pothood in (6).

Logical Connectives and De Morgan’s
Laws. The Manual of Reason touches on the meaning of
conjunctive and disjunctive absence, i.e. absence of (both A
and B) (ubhayābhāva) and absence of
(either A or B)
(anyatarābhāva). It observes that an awareness that
two pots are absent is consistent with an awareness that one pot is
present (and the other absent). In fact, as Ingalls shows (1951:
63–67) the Nyāya recognised the validity of two general
equations:



absence of (both A and B) = (absence of A)
or (absence of B), and


absence of (either A or B) = (absence of A)
and (absence of B).



These are recognisably versions of De Morgan’s Laws, that
¬(A & B) ≡ ¬A ∨
¬B, and that ¬ (A∨B) ≡
¬A & ¬B. As an example of the second of
these laws, consider Mathuranātha’s remark (1951: 66) that
a ‘heap’ of (specific) absences
(abhāva-kūṭa) is equivalent to a generic
absence. A place which is the locus of generic absence of fire is a
place at which every particular fire is absent, and conversely, if
every specific fire is absent, then fire is generically absent. Thus
the ‘heap’ (conjunction) of specific absences of fire, is
equivalent to the absence of any fire at all (the disjunction of
specific fires).