Anthony Collins (1676–1729) was a wealthy English free-thinker,
deist and materialist who in his later years became a country squire
and local government official in Essex. Along with John Toland, Collins
was the most significant member of a close knit circle of radical free
thinkers that arose in England in the first three decades of the
eighteenth century. This group included such men as Samuel Bold,
Matthew Tindal, Thomas Woolston and William
 Wollaston.[1]
 He was a
friend of John Locke in Locke's old age and Locke was one important
formative influence on his philosophical views. In respect to his
materialism and determinism Collins was clearly influenced more by
Hobbes, Bayle and possibly Spinoza than he was by Locke. The
Latitudinarians may well have influenced his views about free-thinking
as well as Locke.  Collins' works had some influence in England and
much more on the continent during the 18th century.


Collins' central passion is the autonomy of reason particularly with
respect to religion. Collins was strongly motivated by an aversion to
religious persecution. Issues revolving around religious freedom are
the threads that run through all of his writing. It is possible to
divide Collins' works into those that are mainly philosophical and
those that are more narrowly religious, but they are clearly
connected.  His 1707–8 pamphlet controversy with Samuel Clarke over
whether “matter can think” and other topics, and his book
about free will and determinism are chiefly engaged with philosophical
topics. Even these topics, however, involve such religious issues as
the immortality of the soul and punishment and reward in the next
life. His writing about reason and free-thinking may be regarded as on
the borderline between philosophy and religion. Although it deals with
epistemological and sometimes metaphysical issues, it focuses almost
entirely on religious issues. His religious works are even more
narrowly focused. The Thirty nine Articles are the only official
confessional statement of Anglicanism. Two of Collins' books deal with
the authenticity of Article 20 of the Thirty nine Articles and whether
the church has the power to make doctrine. In large measure these
represent the doctrines of free-thinking applied to the particular
case of the Anglican Church.  Collins also wrote a book examining the
question of whether the prophecies of Christ's messiahship could be
accepted. This seems to be a rejection of Christianity as a revealed
religion. How far Collins went in the direction of atheism is still a
matter of scholarly debate.


Collins was clearly a controversial figure in his time; nor has
scholarly treatment down the years done much better at being objective.
As Ernest Campbell Mossner remarks: “The Deists were long subjected to
the odium theologicum and the historians of the movement have
almost without exception downgraded or slandered them both socially as
well as intellectually since the time of John Leland in the eighteenth
century.” (Mossner, 1967b, p. 335)
 
1. Life and Works
1.1 Life


Anthony Collins was born in Heston, Middlesex on June 21, 1676 into a
family of lawyers. He went to Eton and then King's College, Cambridge
in 1693. Though he had not graduated from Cambridge, Collins went to
the Middle Temple in 1694 to study law. He didn't like the law and was
never called to the Bar. In 1698 he married the daughter of a rich
London merchant, Sir Francis Child. She died in childbirth in 1703. At
the time of his marriage he received some property in Essex from his
father. Together with his wife's dowry, this made him a very rich man
indeed. Collins met John Locke on a visit to Oates in Essex in 1703,
visited Locke five times over the next 18 months and carried on a
correspondence with him about various philosophical topics. In one of
his letters to Collins Locke remarked: “Believe it, my good
friend, to love truth for truth's sake is the principal part of human
perfection in this world, and the seed bed of all other virtues; and
if I mistake not, you have as much of it as I have ever met with in
anybody.” Collins was a lifelong bibliophile with a large
private research library. In the article on Collins in Birch's
Dictionary, Birch notes that his “large and curious [library]
was open to all men of letters, to whom he readily communicated all
the lights and assistance in his power, and even furnished his
antagonists with books to confute himself, and directed them how to
give their arguments all the force of which they were capable”
(Birch, quoted in Berman, 1975).  During this period Collins also met
Samuel Bold and John Toland. From 1703 until 1706, after his wife's
death, Collins spent the winters in London and the summers at his fine
summer mansion in Buckinghamshire—where Queen Anne and her court
visited him. In 1707 Collins began a pamphlet controversy with Samuel
Clarke, a prominent British philosopher and member of Newton's inner
circle, over the question of whether matter can think. The controversy
continued until 1708. In 1707 Collins also published anonymously
the Essay Concerning the Use of Reason in Propositions, the
evidence whereof depends on human testimony.  During this period
Collins frequented the London coffee shops where the deists and
free-thinkers met. Berkeley apparently met him at such a gathering in
1713. In 1710 Collins made his first trip to the Continent, spending
his time buying books in Holland and meeting John Churchill, first
Duke of Marlborough, and Prince Eugene. Back in England, Collins met
several times with Samuel Clarke and William Whiston at the house of
Lady Calverly and Sir John Hubern for “frequent but friendly
debates about the truth of the Bible and the Christian Religion”
(Whiston, quoted in O'Higgins, 1970. p. 77). In 1713 he
published A Discourse Concerning Free-Thinking. The
Discourse was his most controversial work. He made a second
trip to the continent about the time that the Discourse was
published. Again he went to Holland and France and planned to go on to
Italy. The trip was cut short by the death of a close kinsman. In 1715
Collins, in effect, took root in Essex, moving into Mowdon Hall.
Collins probably owned a good 2000 acres in Essex, much of it prime
agricultural land. In 1717 he published A Philosophical Enquiry
Concerning Human Liberty in which he argues for a compatibilist
form of determinism and rejects freedom of the will. Samuel Clarke
reviewed the book, continuing the argument that had begun during the
Collins-Clarke correspondence of 1707-08.


From 1717 on Collins spent most of his time in the country, but
still had a keen interest in national politics at a distance, and local
politics in person. Collins was a Whig and became a spokesman for the
Whigs in the country. Collins took a serious role in the government of
Essex—serving as a justice, a commissioner for taxes, and then
Treasurer of the County. He examined roads and bridges. He was involved
in finding a place for housing county records. As Treasurer he was a
model of integrity. In considering the relation between Collins, the
County official and Collins the writer, O'Higgins notes that Collins
was probably less tolerant towards Catholics than other justices
(ibid. pp. 128–9). And Collins the writer is consistently
anti-Catholic. So, while one might hope that the use of reason would
produce a higher degree of toleration towards all religious groups than
one would expect to find among true believers, there seems to be little
conflict here between the writer and the jurist.


In December 1723 Collins' only son suddenly became ill and died. His
father was grief-stricken. Collins remarried in 1724 and he published
what is perhaps his most successful book, A Discourse on the
Grounds and Reasons of the Christian Religion as well as An
Historical and Critical Essay on the Thirty Nine Articles of the
Church of England. From 1725 until 1729 Collins' health began to
deteriorate. Still, in 1726 he published The Scheme of Literal
Prophecy Considered. In 1729 Collins published A Discourse
Concerning Ridicule and Irony in Writing.  He was suffering from
gall stones and finally died of his disease on December 13, 1729. His
second wife Elisabeth and his two daughters survived him.  He willed
his unpublished manuscripts to Pierre Desmaizeaux but Desmaizeaux took
an offer from Collins' widow to buy them. It appears that she then
destroyed them.  Desmaizeaux quickly regretted his decision, but it
was too late. 
1.2 Chief Works

An Essay Concerning the Use of Reason, 1707
Collins contributions to the Collins Clarke controversy: 


A Letter to Mr. Dodwell, 1706
A Reply to Mr. Clarke's Defence of His Letter to Mr. Dodwell
Reflections on Mr. Clarke's Second Defence of His Letter to Mr.
Dodwell
An Answer to Mr. Clarke's Third Defence of His Letter to Mr.
Dodwell, 1708


Priestcraft In Perfection 1710
A Vindication of the Divine Attributes, in some Remarks on His
Grace the Archbishop of Dublin's sermon intitled “Divine Predestination
Consistent with the Freedom of Man's Will”, 1710
A Discourse of Free-Thinking, 1713
Philosophical Inquiry Concerning Human Liberty, 1717
A Discourse on the Grounds and Reasons of the Christian
Religion, 1724
An Historical and Critical Essay on the Thirty Nine Articles of
the Church of England, 1724
The Scheme of Literal Prophecy Considered, 1726
A Discourse concerning Ridicule and Irony in Writing, 1729

2. The Collins Clarke Correspondence (1707–08)
2.1 Background: Consciousness and Material Systems


The chief topic of the Clarke Collins controversy of 1707–08 is
whether consciousness can inhere in a material system, a highly
controversial issue inspired by Locke's notorious speculation about
thinking matter. In Book IV of An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding, in stressing the limits of human knowledge of
substances, Locke writes: “We have the Ideas of Matter and
Thinking, but possibly shall never be able to know, whether any mere
material Being thinks, or no; it being impossible for us, by the
contemplation of our own Ideas, without revelation, to discover
whether Omnipotency has not given to some System of Matter fitly
disposed, a power to perceive and think, or else joined and fixed to
Matter so disposed, a thinking immaterial Substance...”
(ibid., IV, iii, 6, pp.  540–1). Locke then went on to
conjecture that it might be just as easy for God to add the power of
thought to a system of matter organized in the right way as for God to
connect an immaterial thinking thing to a body
(ibid.). Clearly, the difficulties in explaining how an
immaterial mind could relate to a material body play a significant
role in leading Locke to this position. This “thinking
matter” passage “raised a storm of protest and discussion
that lasted right through to the last years of the eighteenth
century” (Yolton, 1983 p. 17). Locke and Collins discussed some
of the responses to this passage that were published before Locke's
death in 1704. Locke's conjecture about thinking matter is, in effect,
the centerpiece of the debate between Samuel Clarke and Anthony
Collins between 1707 and 1708, although the issue was also discussed
on the continent. 
2.2 The Correspondence


The correspondence between Clarke and Collins took its inspiration
from a book published in 1706 by Henry Dodwell, putting forward the
view on the basis of various passages from the Bible that without
divine intervention the soul would perish at death. Clarke wrote a
public refutation of Dodwell's book. Besides rejecting Dodwell's
interpretation of scripture, Clarke gave an argument to show that
consciousness could not be a property of a material system since the
most plausible reason, apart from appeals to scripture, for the soul
being naturally mortal is that it is material. Thus, without
mentioning it, Clarke gave a refutation of Locke's thinking matter
hypothesis.  Collins, writing to Dodwell concerning matters about
which they disagreed, noted that he would be happy to see Dodwell have
the liberty “to publish whatever he thinks fit”
(Dybikowski p. 188).  Collins then wrote a public “Letter to Mr.
Dodwell” in which he claimed to show that Clarke's philosophical
argument against the mortality of the soul was inconclusive. Clarke
responded with “A Defence of a Letter to Mr. Dodwell.”
Over the next two years Clarke wrote three more defenses of his
original letter to Henry Dodwell and Collins wrote three replies. Each
of these was longer than its predecessor. Clarke, who became
increasingly irritated as the debate continued, got the final word in
“The Fourth Defence of A Letter.”


While the central issue of the correspondence is whether it is possible 
for consciousness to inhere in a material system and thus for matter to 
think, the discussion toward the end turned to other issues such as free will 
and determinism and the adequacy of Collins' account of personal identity.
Rather than explain the Correspondence in detail, what follows is a
discussion of Collins' position in respect to two central issues, that
of emergent properties and personal
 identity.[2]
2.2.1 Clarke's categories


To give a materialist account of life and consciousness, Collins needs
to show that from lifeless and unthinking matter one can get life and
thought. In his “Letter to Dodwell” Collins claims that
there are material systems all about us whose parts do not have the
properties found in the whole. He gives the example of a rose that has
the power to produce its sweet scent in us, while the particles that
compose it individually do not have this power (Clarke, p. 751; Clarke
and Collins pp. 48–9). These material systems provide models and
analogies to understand how life and consciousness can arise from
lifeless and thoughtless particles. Thus, from the beginning, Collins
is arguing that consciousness is an emergent property, i.e. a property
had by the whole, but not by the parts that compose that whole.


In his First Defence, Clarke responds by giving an argument to show
that there are no real emergent properties. He does this by giving an
enumeration of all of the kinds of properties. It turns out that there
are only three categories. These categories correspond roughly to the
primary, secondary and tertiary qualities of the mechanical philosophy
(Attfield, p. 46). The correspondence is not precise because Clarke
includes consciousness in the first category, though on a different
basis than first category properties of matter such as magnitude or
motion. Clarke claims that only properties of the first kind are real.
Properties of the second kind are “not really Qualities
of the System, and evidently do not in any proper Sense
belong to it, but are only Effects occasionally produced by
it in some other Substance, and truly are Qualities or Modes of that
other Substance in which they are produced...” (Clarke, p. 759;
Uzgalis 2011 p.56). Heat, light, taste and sound are examples of this
class of properties. Clarke claims that these properties are largely
irrelevant to the question about consciousness because they are modes
of the other substance in which they are produced. The properties of
the third kind are fictional. They “are not real
Qualities at all, residing in any subject, but merely
abstract Names to express the Effects of some determinate Motions
of certain streams of Matter...” (ibid., p. 760; Clarke
and Collins, p. 57). The examples that Clarke gives of third category
properties are magnetism, electrical attractions and gravity.


What conditions are required for belonging to Clarke's first class?
In respect to material wholes, Clarke is a reductionist who holds that
whatever real property one finds in the whole must be found
proportionally in the parts. The height of the bricks and the mortar in
a wall sum to the height of the wall as a whole. Thus, all the
properties in a material whole are compositions of the properties of
the parts. Call this Clarke's Composition Principle. Any property of a
material system that fails to conform to this pattern is not a real
property. It follows that emergent properties, properties possessed by
the whole but not by the parts, cannot be real. They would involve
contradictions such as the whole being larger than the parts, or that
something (some property of the whole) comes from nothing, or that
there is something in the effect that is not to be found in its
cause.[3]  
As a result of his examination of the kinds of categories, Clarke
claims that all emergent properties belong in his third class, the
class of fictional properties. It follows that since consciousness is
a real property it cannot be an emergent property.


Since consciousness is a real property it must belong in Clarke's
first class of properties. This being so, it cannot violate the
Composition Principle. But consciousness is so strongly unified that
it cannot be either compounded or divided. This is why it cannot
belong to any material system. So, there must be a second sufficient
condition for belonging to Clarke's first category. Clarke second
sufficient condition is that “an Individual Power,
properly and strictly speaking...can only proceed from or reside
in, an Individual Being” (Clarke, p. 750; Clarke and
Collins, p. 58). To be an individual power, Clarke tells us, a power
must be truly unitary, and thus not composed of parts. Call this the
Individual Power Principle. So, consciousness is an individual power,
which belongs to an individual being, the soul. The soul, too, is so
unified that it does not have parts. Magnitude, in contrast, satisfies
the Composition Principle, but is not an individual power.  This is
because the matter to which it belongs can always be divided.


Collins challenges the enumeration of categories of properties with
which Clarke seeks to prove that consciousness cannot belong to a
material system (Clarke, 1738, Vol. 3, pp. 751; 767–70; Clarke and
Collins. pp. 69–72). He continues to maintain that consciousness is a
real emergent property. He also challenges the Individual Power
Principle.
2.2.2 Real emergent properties


In responding to Clarke's First Defense, Collins claims that Clarke
has not properly enumerated the kinds of properties. He claims that
Clarke needs to show that his enumeration is complete but has not done
so. There may be powers unknown to Clarke that need to be included in
order to give a complete enumeration of the properties and powers of
matter. In order to effectively defend his materialist account of
consciousness, however, Collins pointed out a new class of properties
that are arguably real and that are emergent and do not fit Clarke's
composition model for real properties of matter.


Collins' chief strategy for showing that there are real emergent
properties is likely derived from Locke's claim in the Chapter
“Of Identity and Diversity” in the Essay that
living things are individuated not by the matter that composes them at
a time but by their functional organization (Locke, 1972, ii. xxvii
3–4, pp. 330–331; see also Attfield, 1977, p.
 52)[4]. 
Collins begins by considering the different roles that matter and
organization may play in producing all the different kinds of things
in the universe. He starts with the hypothesis that different parts of
matter are different from one another. If this is so the particles of
matter may work in the way different parts of a clock work—the
parts of the clock are different from one another and consequently
have different powers. The whole to which they contribute will have
powers that none of the parts have (Clarke, p. 768; Clarke and Collins
p. 72). The second hypothesis Collins puts forth is that all matter is
the same and therefore completely interchangeable. Collins prefers
this hypothesis because it makes it easy to argue that all of the
differences between the various kinds of things are a result of their
organization. The distinction between matter and its organization is
useful for Collins' purposes because the properties that result from
the organization of matter are different from the properties of the
particles. As Collins notes:
...if the powers of a System of Matter may intirely cease
upon the least Alteration of a Part of that System, it is evident that
the Powers of the System inhere not in the Parts in the same Sense with
Magnitude and Motion: for divide and vary the Parts of Matter as much
as you will, there will be Magnitude and may be Motion; but divide or
vary the least Part of the Eye, and the Power of contributing to the
Act of Vision is intirely at an end (ibid.).


The organization of the eye is essential to its proper functioning and
indeed to it being an eye at all (ibid., p. 769; Clarke and Collins, p. 72) 
It is an emergent property. Collins does not explicitly make the point that
since the organization of the eye is an essential property it must
also be a real property. Perhaps he thought this obvious. Clarke's
response was to claim that the power of the eye to see is a fictional
and not a real property.
2.2.3 Personal Identity


The topic of personal identity comes up as early as Clarke's Second
Defence of an Argument because Clarke objects to consciousness being
an emergent property of the brain and also objects to the brain being
the bearer or seat of personal identity (Clarke, p. 787; Clarke and
Collins, Pg. 96). Correspondingly, there are important connections
between Collins' account of emergent properties and his account of
personal identity. Consciousness, for Collins, is both an emergent
property and constitutive of personal identity. In addition, Collins
claims that because of the mind body problem, dualist views do not
serve the ends and purposes of religion.  Clarke replies that it is
Collins' materialist views that have dangerous consequences for the
ends and purposes of religion. Many of these consequences have to do
with personal identity.


What are the connections between Collins' account of emergent
properties and his account of personal identity? The most important
connection is the Lockean distinction between the matter that composes
a material thing at any given time and the organization of matter. The
distinction comes from Locke's account of the individuation of masses
of matter and living things in his chapter “Of Identity and
Diversity” in Book II of the Essay. A mass of matter is
individuated by the particles that compose it, however organized. If
the mass gains or loses a single particle it becomes a different
substance. Living things, by contrast, are individuated by their
functional organization (Locke, 1972 II. xxvii 3. p. 330). Collins'
summary of his views on identity and personal identity make it clear
that he agrees completely with Locke's account of identity and the
individuation of masses, living things and persons (Clarke p. 875;
Clarke and Collins, p. 231–2). But Clarke insists that in order for
something to remain the same, it must remain the same substance. In
the case of material things like oaks, this means that the matter that
composes it must remain the same or it is not the same oak. Only atoms
and persons fulfill this same substance condition for Clarke. So, oaks
are only identical in a fictional sense. In addition, it is not
possible for any entity to have the same properties it had previously
if its substance has changed, because it is not possible to transfer
properties from one substance to another (Clarke, p. 798; Clarke and
Collins, p. 113). So, just as Clarke holds that emergent properties
are fictional, so he holds that any identity not based on identity of
substance is fictional.


Collins accepts Locke's revolutionary view that consciousness and not
the substantial soul is the bearer of personal identity. Again
agreeing with Locke, he regards both memory as crucial to personal
identity and feelings of pleasure and pain as important concomitants
of consciousness. Still, Collins' account of personal identity is not
exactly the same as Locke's. Locke's account is officially neutral in
regard to whether “the substance that thinks in us” is
material or immaterial, simple or compounded. Collins, by contrast, is
giving an account that makes “the substance that thinks in
us” material and compounded. But the neutrality of Locke's
account of personal identity ought to allow Collins to adopt it
without significant change, and this is what he does. Collins also
defends the view against attacks addressed to the concept of memory
involved. Clarke holds that Collins' account of memory violates a
basic principle of Clarke's substantialist account of
identity—that properties cannot be transferred from one
substance to another.


Collins' response to this is to claim that annexing consciousness to
the brain explains the phenomena of consciousness far better than
positing an unchanging immaterial substance. It is also a perfectly
reasonable sense for properties to be transferred from one substance to
another. In his Reflections on Mr. Clarke's Second Defence he
writes:
For if we utterly forget, or cease to be conscious of
having done many things in former Parts of our Lives which we certainly
did, as much as any of those which we are conscious that we have done;
and if in fact we do by degrees forget everything which we do not
revive by frequent Recollection, and by again and again imprinting our
decaying Ideas; and if there be in a determinate Time a partial or
total flux of Particles in our Brains: What can better account for out
total Forgetfulness of some things, our partial Forgetfulness of
others, than to suppose that the Substance of the Brain in constant
Flux? (Clarke, p. 809; Clarke and Collins, p. 130)


As for the problem of transferring consciousness from one substance
to another he writes:
I will suppose myself conscious at Forty of having been
carried to a Market or Fair at Five Years old, without any Particle of
Matter about me, the same which I had at that Age: now in order to
retain the Consciousness of that Action, it is necessary to revive the
Idea of it before any considerable Flux of Particles, (otherwise I must
totally lose the Memory of it (as I do of several things done in my
Childhood) and by reviving the Idea of that Action, I imprint afresh
the Consciousness of having done that Action, by which the Brain has a
lively and Impression of Consciousness (though it be not entirely
composed of the same Particles) as it had the day after it did the
Action... (ibid).


This account of how memory works nicely fits the model of the
preservation of organization through change of matter that Locke uses
to explain the identity of living things. However Clarke does not
accept this explanation because he holds that only a theory of the
substantial soul can provide the underpinnings for an account of
veridical memory.
2.3 Evaluating the Collins Clarke Correspondence


In evaluating the controversy, one would have to say that of all the
encounters between the Newtonians and the free thinkers, the one
between Collins and Clarke was the most philosophically significant
and influential. O'Higgins holds that Collins is important to us
mainly because he defends an early version of materialism. While there
is surely some truth to this, O'Higgins is clearly damning Collins
with faint praise.  What we should recognize is that Collins was
indeed a pioneer in trying to show that consciousness is a real
emergent property of the brain and in this regard certainly showed
more originality than O'Higgins gives him credit for.(See note 2)
O'Higgins also claims that Collins' arguments are not very good. This
also does not give Collins enough credit. It is true that Collins does
give some arguments that are not very good. On the other hand, Collins
forced Clarke to clarify his position in a number of respects. He also
uncovered a number of weak points in Clarke's position. Clarke's poor
treatment of Collins example of the power of a rose to produce a sweet
smell in us is one example.  He answered as if Collins was talking
about the smell of the rose and claims that this secondary quality
properly belongs in his second class of properties.  But Collins
properly objects that he was talking about the organization of the
particles of the rose—the cause of this effect, and not the
effect on us. Clarke's response is weak. One of Collins' strongest
points was his critique of Clarke's doctrine that though the soul is
immaterial it is extended (Vailatti, 1993). One can also see how much
pressure Collins is applying to Clarke's system as the number of
properties in Clarke's third class—fictional
properties—continues to mount in the course of the
correspondence. In respect to the central issues of the debate,
Collins is struggling to articulate a materialist and empiricist
metaphysics that can compete with the well developed dualist
metaphysics that Clarke deploys. As Barresi and Martin comment:
“His faltering, but often successful attempts to reformulate
traditional metaphysical issues empirically, embodies the birth pangs
of a new approach” (Martin and Barresi, p. 51).  But perhaps
most strikingly, Collins is attempting to defend a doctrine of
emergent properties that does not become prominent in English
philosophy until Mill's System of Logic (1843)
3. Determinism and Free Will
3.1 Background


Collins deals in passing with determinism and freedom of the will in
the 1707–08 correspondence with Samuel Clarke and in his 1707 book
An Essay concerning the Use of Reason. His A Philosophical
Inquiry Concerning Liberty of 1717 is entirely devoted to the
issue. From the beginning, Collins is a determinist with a
compatibilist account of free action. Clarke attacked Collins'
determinism in the 1707–08 correspondence. He also reviewed the 1717
book and defended a doctrine of libertarian free will as he had in the
earlier correspondence.


Since the nature of human choices and action are central to debates
about free will and determinism there is a close connection between
positions about these issues and positions about consciousness and
personal identity. The kind of determinism that Collins advocates is a
natural extension of his materialist, empirical and naturalistic
account of consciousness. In his account of consciousness, Collins
makes the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain the most basic
motives of action. This makes happiness and misery necessary
concomitants of consciousness, and thus conscious beings are endowed
with a desire for happiness. This is true as much of animals as it is
of human beings and accounts for a large number of similarities in the
behavior of humans and animals. Collins holds that if the behavior of
animals is determined, then that of humans must be as well.
3.2. Determinism in Collins early works


In the Clarke Collins correspondence of 1707–08 Collins claims that
Clarke's argument for dualism is useless to religion and morality
because of the problem of explaining how the immaterial mind and the
material body interact. One of Clarke's counter-charges is that
Collins' materialism is dangerous to religion and morality because it
implies a determinism that is destructive of religion and
morality.


Collins claims that human action is caused in much the same way as the
actions of clocks. Both are necessary agents, though the causes that
produce the action in either case are very different. “Both are
necessarily determined in their Actions: the one by the Appearances of
Good and Evil, the other by a Weight or Spring” (Clarke.,
p. 872; Uzgalis 2011 p. 226). Collins also attacks the free will
position. He holds that the same causes will always produce the same
effects and claims that the free will explanation of being able to do
otherwise violates this basic principle of causal explanations
(ibid., pp. 873 and 874; Clarke and Collins, p. 227 and
230).


Collins also expressed determinist views in his first
book—An Essay Concerning the Use of Reason, 1707. He
does this in the context of the problem of reconciling God's
foreknowledge with human free-will. As O'Higgins puts it: “He
solved the problem to his own satisfaction by saying that all things,
including human choices, are determined in their causes and as such
can be foreseen by an all-knowing God” (O'Higgins, 1976,
p. 6). This view also plays a role in Collins' 1710 critique of
Archbishop King's views about the problem of evil and the
epistemological status of the attributes of God. King claimed that
God's attributes, including his foreknowledge of events, was
analogical. In the case of God's foreknowledge, he did this to avoid
contradictions between God's knowing what was to come and the
contingency of events and human free will. Collins is content to
reject human free will and to suppose that ‘foreknowledge’
has a univocal meaning when used with reference to God or humans.
3.3 A Philosophical Inquiry Concerning Human Liberty, 1717


In A Philosophical Inquiry Concerning Human Liberty Collins
briefly states his position. He rejects the view that there is any
freedom from necessity and claims that insofar as there is human
freedom it is “liberty or freedom from outward impediment to action.”
Such freedom is compatible with necessity. Collins holds that every
action has been caused and must necessarily have occurred. The future
is as much determined as the past. He then gives six arguments for this
form of determinism.


The first of Collins' arguments has to do with experience. Defenders
of free will hold that the experience of even ordinary people shows
that they choose freely. Collins' response is much the same as that of
Hobbes and Spinoza. He claims that that those who say such things are
either not attending to, or not seeing, the causes of their actions.
Collins goes on to claim that some defenders of free will admit that
the issues is tangled and not to be resolved by appeals to vulgar
experience.


William Rowe notes that Collins and Clarke share a volitional theory
of action. Rowe describes the theory in this way: “According to this
theory, actions are of two sorts: thoughts and motions of the body.
What makes a thought or bodily motion an action is its being preceded
by a certain act of will (volitions) which bring about the thought or
motion. Volitions, then, are ‘action starters’” (Rowe,
p. 54). Rowe also notes that Collins and Clarke share the assumption
that if a volition is causally determined then the person doing the
act does not have free will (ibid., p. 53). Rowe says that as
the two antagonists agree on these points, they play little or no part
in the debate. But they do explain the strategy that Collins uses to
argue that experience actually shows that we are determined. He
examines experience under four topics relating to choice and action:
1. Perception of Ideas; 2.  Judging of Propositions; 3. Willing; and
4. Doing as we will. Collins argues that each of these is causally
determined.


In respect to perception he holds that perception, both of ideas of
sensation and reflection, is not even voluntary. So, perception can
hardly be free. In respect to judging, he claims that we judge in terms
of how things appear to us, and that we can't change these appearances.
In respect to the will, he claims that there are two questions to be
considered. One is whether we are at liberty to will or not. The second
is whether we are at liberty to will “one or the other of two or more
objects.” In respect to the first question he claims that Locke made a
mistake in holding that people are at liberty to will because they can
suspend willing. So, Collins holds that Locke's answer to the first
question would be affirmative. Collins claims that suspense of willing
is as much an act of will as any other. So, his answer is negative. In
respect to the second question Collins argues for a value determinism
that makes the answer to the second question negative as well. In
defining willing, he remarks: “Willing or preferring is the same with
respect to good and evil, that judging is with respect to truth or
falsehood.” So, if something seems better than the alternatives we will
choose it. Collins is thus a moral determinist who holds that we must
do what seems best to us. In giving his negative answer to his second
question, Collins is also rejecting the claim that we could have done
otherwise. Collins then proceeds to consider cases where we can see no
difference between the objects we are to choose among, e.g., which of
two eggs we will take. Collins' response is that:
It is not enough to render things equal to the will, that
they are equal or alike in themselves. All the various modifications of
the man, his opinions, prejudices, temper, habit and circumstances, are
to be taken in and considered as causes of election no less than the
objects without us among which we chuse; and these will ever incline or
determine our wills, and make the choice we do make, preferable to us,
though the external objects of our choice are ever so much alike to
each other. (O'Higgins, 1976, p. 47)


If one were truly indifferent one simply would not choose. But once
there is a will to choose, the cascade of causes that leads to action
will determine the choice one way or the other. What Collins means by
“doing as we will” is what we do consequent to willing. Here again he
finds no freedom from necessity. We do what we have willed unless some
external impediment or intervening cause hinders us from doing so.
Finally, he compares the actions of animals to those of men. He claims
that while animals are supposed to be necessary agents and humans free
agents, there is no perceivable difference between their actions that
would allow us to make this distinction.


Collins' second argument is that man is a necessary agent because
all his actions have a beginning. He holds that whatever has a
beginning has a cause and all causes are necessary. Collins (as he had
in the Collins Clarke controversy) also rejects the proposition that
the same causes could produce different effects. Thus Collins rejects
the doctrine of free will because it violates the basic principle of
causal explanations. The third argument claimed that liberty is an
imperfection. Going back to judging propositions, Collins points out
that if we were free, we would be able to judge probable what is
improbable, and so on. This is the analog of moral determinism to the
epistemic realm. Just as we are not free to knowingly choose the worse
over the better, we cannot affirm that what seems improbable to us is
the probable. If we could we would be worse off than we are. The fourth
argument is that liberty is inconsistent with God's foreknowledge. This
is again similar to the view that Hobbes held and repeats the
assertions of Collins' first book An Essay concerning the Use of
Reason. The fifth is that if man was not a necessary agent, and
determined by pleasure and pain, there would be no foundation for
rewards and punishments. The sixth is that if a man were not a
necessary agent he would be ignorant of morality and have no motive to
practice it. These last two arguments make the point that causality is
necessary for the operation of morality in the world, and to introduce
a causeless free will is to make the teaching of morality or its
motivation by punishment or reward pointless.


Jacopo Agnesina has recently argued that the An Inquiry Concerning
Human Liberty was in fact a response to Dr. Clarke and rational
theology.  Agnesina claims that Collins was attempting to demonstrate
that determinism follows from Clarke's first principles. (Agnesina,
2011) Interestingly, there was only one response to Collins' book in
England. Samuel Clarke reviewed it and argued that the notion of a
“necessary agent” was incoherent, for to be an agent one
must be active and Collins' position was that the humans are
completely passive and thus (in Clarke's sense) not agents at
all. Clarke charges that in discussing being able to do otherwise,
Collins fails to distinguish between physical and moral
necessity. (See Harris, p. 59) Clarke also complained that Collins
treated perception as actions when perception is passive. (Clarke, p.
722) Clarke develops his own account of free will arguing that
motives, pleasures and pains, reasons and arguments, are simply
occasions for the self-moving power that is active to freely determine
action. What we have again is a competing set of explanations for the
same phenomena. Clarke failed to take a number of Collins' arguments
seriously, because the free will arguments being refuted were not his
arguments.


In a series of letters Collins discussed Clarke's review of his book
with his long time friend and collaborator Pierre Desmaizeaux. He had
written up a reply.  Eventually, however, Collins concluded that
Clarke had been threatening him with civil action, and that to reply
would provide Clarke with the opportunity to do so. (Dybikowski,
pp. 260–1, 269 and 281) Consequently Collins made no reply to Clarke's
review. In 1729 a short book, A Dissertation of Liberty and
Necessity, with the initials A.C. on the title page, was
published. For a number of reasons O'Higgins holds that Collins is not
the author of this work. His first reason is that the book treats the
substance of the soul as unknown—a Lockean doctrine that Collins
had rejected.  O'Higgins also cites contemporary reviews that claim
the arguments of the book are weak compared to
the Inquiry. Still, weak or not, the arguments are certainly
consistent with the determinist position that Collins was holding in
the earlier work. The author also takes into account at least one of
Clarke's criticisms of the Inquiry.


The author of A Dissertation remarks that he will
“attempt to solve the Point of Free Will, by tracing the
progress of the Soul through all its Operations which we are conscious
of, and examining in each whether ‘tis Active or Passive”
(Collins, 1729 p. 1). The point is that at every stage in the process,
from perception to action, we are passive. The author apparently
accepted Clarke's point in his review of
Collins’ Inquiry that perception is not an action, for
he is now calling it not an ‘action’ but an
‘operation.’ The author explicitly takes up Clarke's views
when he argues that we are passive in judgment. He quotes Clarke at
length. Clarke holds that judgment is passive, but distinguishes
between judging and acting. The author continues: “But I
conceive the doctor here begs the Question, by asserting the
Self-motive Power in the Soul without proving it, and then reasons
from it as granted to him” (ibid., p. 6). The author
of A Dissertation thus returns to Clarke a charge that Clarke
had made about Collins in his 1717 review of A Philosophical
Inquiry Concerning Human Liberty.
4. Collins, Deism and Freethinking


The 17th and early 18th century in England saw a rationalist
treatment of theology that spanned many competing groups from the
Latitudinarians to the Dissenters to the Deists. Samuel Hefelbower in
The Relation of John Locke to English Deism remarks that
among the progressives—theologians, philosophers and deists—all
accepted a rationalistic religion. The question then becomes what
exactly is the role of reason vis à vis revelation. The
discussion of the relation of reason to revelation goes back at least
to Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas—that is to the scholastic
authorities. Albert held that reason has a role to play in religion,
but there are questions where philosophy has no final answer and
revelation must decide. Revelation is above reason but not contrary to
it. Thomas has a similar position (Hefelbower, p. 47). Locke holds
that reason is responsible for determining what counts as genuine
revelation.  Locke also holds the view that there is revelation that
tells us about things above reason but not contrary to it. “Thus
that part of the Angels rebelled against GOD, and thereby lost their
first happy state: And that the dead shall rise, and live again:
These, and the like, being beyond the Discovery of Reason, are purely
matters of Faith, with which Reason has directly, nothing to do.”
(IV. XVIII. 7. 10–14 P. 694) The Deists tend to hold a more radical
view than the one that Locke advocates.


Samuel Clarke in his Boyle lectures of 1704 distinguishes four
grades of deists. First there were those who acknowledged a future life
and other doctrines of natural religion. Second were those who while
denying a future life, admitted the moral role of the deity. Third are
those who acknowledged providence in natural religion, but not in
morality. And finally, those who denied providence altogether. Where
does Collins fit, in these grades of deism? According to O'Higgins: “In
his books, Collins came to emphasize the part that morality should play
in religion and to assert the importance of natural religion”
(O'Higgins, 1970, p. 40). Collins claims to believe in a future life
(if not natural immortality). Collins rejects Revelation. So, if
O'Higgins is right, Collins fits Clarke's first grade of deists. David
Berman has disputed this view, arguing that Collins is, in fact, an
atheist.
4.1 An Essay Concerning the Use of Reason, 1707

An Essay Concerning the Use of Reason, Collins' first book,
was published anonymously in 1707. The main thrust of the book is to
reject religious mysteries. Collins starts his approach to the issues
of religion and reason along the same lines that Locke does. He defines
reason as “that faculty of the Mind, whereby it perceives the truth,
Falsehood, Probability or Improbability of Propositions” (Essay, p. 3).
Propositions consist of words “which stand for Ideas concerning which
some agreement is affirm'd or deny'd” (Essay, pp. 3–4). Thus he accepts
Locke's definition of knowledge. He also distinguishes in the way Locke
does intuitive, demonstrative and probable truths, and treats claims
about revelation as probable propositions that largely derive from
testimony. Perhaps one diversion from Locke is that Collins
distinguishes between two different kinds of probability. The stronger
kind resembles demonstration but the connection between ideas is merely
probable. The weaker kind of probability is testimony. Collins'
position is that a person is not expected to believe anything that is
not comprehensible by the human intellect. So, if terms take on
meanings that cannot be understood, humans cannot be expected to
believe them.


O'Higgins sees a strong affinity between Collins' book and John
Toland's Christianity Not Mysterious, which had been published
in 1696. He quotes Toland's remark that:
We hold that reason is the only foundation of all
certitude...that nothing reveal'd, whether as to its manner or to its
existence, is more exempted from its disquisitions, than the ordinary
phenomena of nature ... that there is nothing in the gospel contrary to
or above it.


O'Higgins claims that this is very much the position that Collins is
taking in the Essay. There is, however, some reason to doubt
that O'Higgins is correct in equating Collins' position with that of
Toland.  It depends on how we interpret the phrase “contrary to or
above it.” Does this mean that Toland rejects all truths
above and, contrary to reason or that Toland rejects the
claim not only that there are no truths contrary to reason in the
gospel but also no truths above it—even those compatible with it?
If the first interpretation is correct, then O'Higgins is very likely
correct in claiming that Collins and Toland are holding the same
position, but if the second is correct then their positions are likely
distinct.

In An Essay Concerning Human Understanding Locke allowed that
there were some truths that were above reason but compatible with
it. Some scholars regard this as a mere verbal commitment to truths
above reason, while others regard it as substantive. What is clear is
that Locke would not accept truths above and contrary to reason. On
this point, Locke, Toland, and Collins are in complete
agreement. Collins, for example, claims that the distinction between
reasonable propositions and “things above, and things contrary to
reason” is the distinction that theologians use on behalf of mysteries
and theological contradictions against those who say that they can
only believe what they understand. (Collins, 1984, p. 24) Toland,
however, has a more radical position than Locke in that he rejects
truths above reason, even where these truths are compatible with
reason. (See Woolhouse 2007 p. 372) Thus Toland might well not accept
the story of the rebellion of the angels or the claim that the dead
shall rise. Collins, on the other hand, seems to hold the same
position Locke does. He quotes with approval a passage from Boyle who
uses an analogy of a deep sea diver to clarify the issue. If the diver
asks you if you can see to the bottom of the ocean and after you have
declared that you cannot, brings up oysters with pearls in them, you
will have no objection to the claim that there are oysters with pearls
in them at the bottom of the sea. If, on the other hand, the diver
claims that the pearls he shows you are larger than the shells
containing them, “you would doubtless judge what he asserts contrary
to the information of your eyes” (Collins, 1984 pp. 25–6) Turning from
analogy to theological doctrines, we find that Collins accepts, for
example, the resurrection of Christ while rejecting
transubstantiation. (ibid, Pg. 24) Collins also objects to
the doctrine of the Trinity because it is not understandable and on
some interpretations involves contradictions.  Acceptance of the
doctrine of the Trinity is the first of the Thirty-nine Articles to
which an Anglican was supposed to subscribe. It is plain that Collins,
like Locke, Newton, Clarke, Whiston, Toland and others, objected to
this article. Many of these men concealed their views about the
Trinity and claimed that they were orthodox Anglicans.  At any rate,
it seems clear that Collins holds much the same position as Locke in
respect to truths above and truths above and contrary to reason.
 
4.2 Analogical language


In A Vindication of the Divine Attributes, in some Remarks on His
Grace the Archbishop of Dublin's sermon intitled “Divine
Predestination Consistent with the Freedom of Man's Will”,
(published in 1710) Collins takes on another way of evading his demand
that whatever we believe must be comprehensible to us. This is the
doctrine of analogy that goes back to St. Thomas Aquinas. The form in
which Collins finds it in the works of Archbishop King of Dublin, is
the doctrine that not only does God not have hands and feet and a
beard in a literal sense, he does not have wisdom, benevolence or
justice in any sense that we can understand these terms. Thus King
remarked: “It does not follow from hence, that any of these are
more properly or literally in God after the manner they are in us,
than hands or eyes, than mercy, than love or hatred are.”
Collins rejects the claim that God's wisdom and benevolence could have
meanings that we do not comprehend. He asserts that God's knowledge
and his attributes are univocal with ours (O'Higgins, 1970,
p. 63).


David Berman in his A History of Atheism in Great Britain,
gives a number of reasons to take Collins as an atheist rather than a
deist. He sees Collins' account of the creation of matter ex
nihilo in the Answer to Mr. Clarke's Third Defence as an argument
for atheism disguised as an argument against atheism (Berman, 1988, pp.
80–81). He sees Collins as using Bayle to raise the problem of evil in
the Vindication of the Divine Attributes and then showing that
both the solution offered by Bayle and Dr. King are unacceptable.
Collins' official position at the end of the Vindication is
that King is wrong but atheism is avoidable. Berman asks what the
actual conclusion of the Vindication is. He continues:
It is simply that there are very formidable, or
insuperable, difficulties in the theistic conception of God—revealed
by the Manichean problems—and that the latest attempt to cope with,
or solve, these difficulties, i.e. King's theory, has failed; for the
medicine is as bad as the disease. But the disease remains! (Berman, p.
84)


Collins clearly rejects theism based on revelation. But one could
also be a theist based on arguments from natural religion. Berman sees
the Vindication as aimed at the heart of natural religion
(ibid.). If this were so, we would have good reason to regard
Collins as an atheist. On the one hand, Collins' position about
analogical language may seem to strongly support natural religion.
Insofar as the meaning of the divine attributes is univocal with our
use of the same words about human beings, the analogy that natural
religion relies on would work at its best. (The basic analogy on which
natural religion depends is that humans are to the machines they make
as God is to the world.) Archbishop King's position, on the other hand,
would completely undermine the analogy. There is, however, a second
consideration. Insofar as the problem of evil is left unresolved in
natural religion, it would suggest that it can provide no effective
answer to this fundamental difficulty in theism. This is Berman's
point. O'Higgins, by contrast, claims that in the Vindication
Collins simply sets aside the problem of evil (O'Higgins, 1970, p.
63).
4.3 A Discourse of Free Thinking, 1713


Like Locke, Collins is an advocate of the use of reason to determine
religious truths. One necessary condition for being able to think
freely is not to be persecuted for considering views that are different
from the accepted ones. Only in such an environment can one genuinely
consider alternatives. It must be possible to adopt whichever of the
possibilities turns out to be the most reasonable. Collins, like Locke,
is committed to the view that one should proportion assent to a
proposition on the basis of the evidence for it. Religious persecution
aims to limit the possibilities and the evidence that one can consider.
Though Collins was strongly anti-clerical, he does distinguish between
good priests and bad priests. The good priests are the ones who
advocate freedom of thought, the bad priests, on the other hand, are
persecutors who want to prevent people from thinking through the truths
of religion for themselves. In his own time, Collins most controversial
work was his A Discourse of Freethinking (1714).


Concerning the Discourse, J.M. Robertson writes that it
“...may be said to sum up and unify the drift not only of previous
English freethinking, but of the great contribution of Bayle, whose
learning and temper influence all English deism from Shaftesbury
onward” (Robertson, 1936 p. 722). Perhaps the motto of A Discourse
of Free-Thinking ought to be “Where experts disagree, any person
is free to reason for themselves.”  Collins is chiefly concerned with
religion, so the vast bulk of the disagreements he cites have to do with
religious issues, from whether one religion is better than another,
down to the details of Anglicanism. Looking at conflicting claims
often leads to skepticism. Where exactly this approach leads Collins is
a question that we will have to consider.


In A Discourse of Free-thinking Collins defines
free-thinking as “The Use of the Understanding, in endeavouring to find
out the Meaning of any Proposition whatsoever, in considering the
nature and Evidence for or against it, and in judging of it according
to the seeming Force or Weakness of the Evidence” (p. 5). Collins
claims that we have a right to think freely. Richard Bently in his
Remarks about a Late Discourse of Free-Thinking charges that
this definition is too broad—that it amounts to a definition of
thinking. James O'Higgins in his study of Collins agrees with Bently.
This, however, is not a good evaluation. Collins' account is surely
intended to rule out believing without evidence, or against the
evidence, or without carefully considering conflicting evidence. Either
these are not going to be admitted as thinking at all, or Collins'
definition is not too broad.


The Discourse is divided into three sections. In the first
two Collins gives a series of arguments in favor of free-thinking and
in the third he answers objections to free-thinking and gives a list of
historical figures who he views as free-thinkers. The arguments treat
thinking effectively as like a craft or art and a number of the early
arguments work on this analogy. He claims that just as putting
restrictions on painting would reduce the proficiency of the painter,
so putting restrictions on thinking can only reduce the proficiency of
the thinker. To fail to think freely leads to the holding of absurd
beliefs and superstition. Collins gives a brief history of the efforts
of priests to control what people believe by fraud from the ancient
world to the Reformation. Collins then claims that free-thinking is
responsible for the decline in the belief in witchcraft.


Section 2 begins with Collins arguing that right opinion in matters
of religion is supposed to be essential to salvation and errors to lead
to damnation. But if one is not to think freely oneself about such
subjects, then one must simply take up the opinions of those among whom
one happens to live. But this means that they will only be right by
accident. On the other hand, if people think freely, they will have
“the evidence of things to determine them to the side of truth”
(ibid., p. 33). There are in all ages an infinite number of
pretenders to revelations from Heaven, supported by miracles. These
pretenders offer new notions of the Deity, new doctrines, commands,
ceremonies and modes of worship. To decide which of these are genuine
and which spurious requires that one think freely about the competing
evidence that would show that one is genuine while the other an
imposter. Collins remarks that since the Anglican Church has an
organization to support foreign missionaries (The Society for
Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Lands) this really requires
supporting free-thinking throughout the world and therefore at home as
well. Indeed: “As there can be no reasonable change of opinions among
men, no quitting of any old religion, no reception of any new religion,
nor believing any religion at all, but by means of free-thinking; so
the Holy Scriptures agreeably to reason, and to the design of our
blessed Savior of establishing his religion throughout the whole
universe, imply everywhere and press in many places the duty of free
thinking” (ibid., pp. 43–6). Finally Collins claims that the
conduct of the priests “who are the chief Pretenders to be the Guides
to others in matters of Religion, makes free-thinking on the nature and
attributes of the eternal being of God, on the authority of the
scriptures, and on the sense of scriptures, unavoidable”
(ibid., p. 46). He goes on to list disagreements and
differences of opinion among priests on all these topics.


In section 3 Collins takes up various objections to free-thinking.  To
suppose that all men have a right to think freely on all subjects is
to suppose that they have the capacity to do so. But they do not. So
it is absurd to think that they have a duty to think freely. Collins
replies that to suppose a right to a thing “also implies a Right in
him to let it alone, if he thinks fit” (ibid., p. 100). As
for free-thinking being a duty, Collins responds that it is so only in
cases where those who contend “for the Necessity of all Men's
assenting to certain Propositions, must allow that men are qualify'd
to do so” (ibid.). If it were the case that the great bulk of
mankind lacked the capacity to think freely on matters of speculation,
then the priests should conclude that men should in no way be
concerned about truth and falsehood in speculative matters. In short,
they should hold no opinion. Even in this case, however, the right to
think freely would remain untouched in those disposed to think
freely. The second objection is that to encourage free-thinking “will
produce endless Divisions of Opinion and by consequence Disorders in
Society.” Collins suggests that the consequence is false and that any
remedy is worse than the disease. Third, free-thinking may lead to
atheism. Collins points out that many divines hold that there never
was a real atheist in the world while Bacon holds that contemplative
atheists are rare.  Still, even if free-thinking were to produce many
atheists, the number of those who are superstitious or enthusiastic
that will be produced in the absence of free-thinking is even
greater. And these are worse evils for society than atheism. Fourthly,
priests are the experts who are to be relied upon in their subject as
doctors and lawyers are to be relied upon in theirs. Collins argues
that the analogy between doctors and lawyers and priests does not
hold. First, while doctors and lawyers act for us, we need not believe
the principles or opinions on which one prescribes and the other
acts. But in matters of religion, “I am obliged to believe certain
opinions myself. No man's belief will save me except my own”
(ibid., p. 109). Finally, free-thinkers are “the most
infamous, wicked and senseless of all mankind.”  (Ibid.,
p. 118) Collins answers this objection in various ways—arguing
that in fact free-thinking makes one virtuous. He ends by listing a
variety of men he considers free-thinkers whose moral character was
impeccable—Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, Plutarch,
Cicero, Varo and others among the ancients. Among the moderns he
includes, Bacon, Hobbes and Archbishop Tillotson.
4.4 Interpreting A Discourse of Free Thinking


The Discourse leaves us with a variety of questions. What
exactly is Collins trying to achieve in this book? Reflecting on the
first two sections of the Discourse, James O'Higgins notes: “A
good deal of what he wrote can be interpreted as the writing of an
anti-clerical protestant, insisting on private judgment for the laity.
A few other passages ... such as those from Varo and Socrates, seem to
imply a bias against Christianity itself, or at least against
Revelation” (p. 89). Some of Collins critics accused him of being an
atheist. But, unless one gives the work an esoteric reading, this
hardly seems warranted. Collins is, however, clearly extolling a
universal religion based on reason.


The Discourse received a good number of replies. Steele
commented that the author of the Discourse deserved “to
be denied the common benefits of air and water” (quoted in
O'Higgins, 1970 p. 78). The Guardian campaigned against the
Discourse. Among the articles it published were some by the
young George Berkeley. There is a certain amount of scholarly debate
about how effective these replies were. From early on, historians have
often claimed that Richard Bently in his Remarks about a late
Discourse of Freethinking delivered a crushing rejoinder to
Collins. Robertson pretty much alone rejected this opinion. James
O'Higgins in his book-length study of Collins probably gives the most
balanced assessment. O'Higgins admits that Bently, on the whole, makes
a strictly ad hominem attack on Collins. He attacked Collins'
scholarship and accused him of atheism. O'Higgins thinks that Bently
succeeded in showing that “Collins was not the man to produce a
critical edition of the Bible” (O'Higgins, 1970, p. 84). O'Higgins also
remarks that Bently correctly points out that Collins did not
understand the role of textual variants in reducing (rather than
increasing) our uncertainty about the meaning of a text. Since Collins
is maintaining that everyone capable of doing so should reason about
religious matters, claims that he failed to reason correctly may have
more bite to them than other ad hominem arguments. But while
these are good points, set against the fact that Bently completely
failed to address the main issue of religious authority, this can
hardly amount to a crushing rejoinder. Robertson is also surely right
in holding that Collins' scholarship is not as bad as Bently claimed
and that Bently's scholarship is often not as good as historians have
claimed.
5. Collins and Religion
Edward and Lillian Bloom note in their introduction to A Discourse Concerning Ridicule and Irony in Writing that: 

For several years and in such works as Priestcraft in
Perfection (1710) and A Discourse of Free-Thinking
(1713), he was a flailing polemicist against the entire Anglican
hierarchy.  Not until 1724 did he become a polished debater, when he
initiated a controversy that made “a very great noise” and
which ended only with his death.  The loudest shot in the persistent
barrage was sounded by Grounds and Reasons and its last
fusillade by the Discourse Concerning Ridicule and Irony in
Writing. (Collins, 1729 p. iii) 


In Priestcraft in Perfection, 1710, and An Historical and
Critical Essay on the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of
England, 1724, Collins attacks the first clause of Article 20 of
the 39 articles: “The Church hath power to decree rites or
ceremonies, and authority in controversies of faith.” Collins
goes over the history of the clause in considerable detail to argue
that it is a forgery.  Clearly if this were a forgery, the church
would have no power to decree rites nor authority in controversies of
faith. The point is that: “...the just and true establishment of
religion lies, in allowing every man to have a conscience of his own;
to use and follow his own private judgment; and particularly, to
understand, profess and practice, what he thinks God teaches in the
holy scriptures” (Collins, Preface to the Essay, quoted
in O'Higgins, 1970 pp. 143–4).  O'Higgins notes that this might be the
position of any dissenting minister. O'Higgins gives a detailed
summary of the controversy in Chapter IX of his study of Collins.


In A Discourse on the Grounds and Reasons of the Christian
Religion, 1724, Collins attacks the basis of Christianity as a
revealed religion. In The Reasonableness of Christianity,
Locke had made the messiahship of Christ the single fundamental tenet
for being a Christian. In the Discourse Collins is rejecting
it. The argument is that Christianity is founded on Judaism, or the
New Testament on the Old. The New Testament is only of importance in
this regard insofar as it shows that the prophecies of the Old are
fulfilled. Collins rejects the claim that they are fulfilled in the
New Testament.This, he claims, is the only proof for Christianity.
Collins' critics disputed this claim; there was the proof from
miracles. But Collins rejected such proofs.


In rejecting the argument from prophecies Collins is once again
jousting with the Newtonians. William Whiston (1667–1752) was a close
associate of Newton's and was probably influenced by Newton's interest
in prophetic arguments. Stephen Snobelen points out in his review of
the controversy that Whiston hoped to set up an exact science of
prophecies. As Snobelen notes: “For Whiston, fulfilled prophecy
was as certain as a Boylean experiment or a Newtonian
demonstration”(Snobelen, p. 205). Collins shared much of
Whiston's desire for precision. Often it was allowed that a prophecy
in the old testament had dual fulfillments, one in the prophet's own
day and one in the more remote future. One of these was supposed to be
literal, the other allegorical. Both Whiston and Collins reject
‘allegorical’ interpretations for literal ones. But while
Whiston regarded the later fulfillment as literal and the earlier as
allegorical, Collins insisted that it was the earlier one that should
be regarded as literal.


Using the catalog of Collins' library produced by Giovanni Tarantino,
Jacopo Agnesina has persuasively argued that A Discourse
Concerning Ridicule and Irony in Writing published in 1729 is a
genuine work of Anthony Collins, though O'Higgins in his biography of
Collins doubted it authenticity. (Agnesina, 2009) Edward and Lillian
Bloom in their introduction to their reprint of the Discourse
remark that:
For the modern reader, the Discourse concerning
Ridicule and Irony is the most satisfying of Collins's many
pamphlets and books.  It lacks the pretentiousness of
the Scheme, the snide convolutions of the Grounds and
Reasons the argument by half-truths of the Discourse of
Free-Thinking.  His last work is free of the curious ambivialance
which marked so many of his earlier pieces, a visible uncertainty that
made him fear repression and yet court it.  On the contrary, his last
work is in fact a justification of his rhetorical mode and religious
beliefs; it is an apologia pro vita sua written with all the
intensity and decisiveness that such a justification demands.
(Collins, 1729. p. xv) 

The aim of the Discourse is to refute a claim by Nathanael
Marshall that while serious arguments about religious issues should be
allowed, ridicule and irony in attacks on established religion should
be prosecuted by the magistrate. This is a clear indication of how
much his Anglican opponents had let Collins' irreverent wit, biting
satire and ironical remarks get under their skin.  Collins' opponent
was vulnerable on a number of points and Collins makes telling
arguments against his claim.  He notes that the best writers on
religion will be found to be committing these crimes in disputation;
that the best punishment would be either to be ignored or to return
ridicule with ridicule – rather than to be punished by the
magistrate.  He points out that when Mr. Marshall discovers how many
of those who practice these crimes are of his party and are encouraged
in these practices he will give up his position, and so on. The theme
of allowing liberty of discourse in public debates about religion is
the over-arching theme of the Discourse, and it certainly one
of the main themes of Collins' work throughout his life.
6. Influences
6.1 In England


We have already considered in some detail Samuel Clarke's reaction
to Collins' views about emergent properties, personal identity and
issues about determinism and free will in the early eighteenth century.
The Collins Clarke correspondence of 1706–08 was reprinted twice and
referred to many times in the course of the eighteenth century (Martin
and Barresi, p. 33). The conservative reaction to Locke and Collins
concerning personal identity and materialism represented by Clarke
continued to be maintained by many thinkers in eighteenth century
England as well as on the continent. In fact, we can see an on-going
debate between the materialists and dualists on these topics all the
way through the eighteenth and into the early nineteenth century in
England.


Bishop Joseph Butler (1692–1752) a protege of Samuel Clarke attacked
the Locke/Collins account of personal identity in the Appendix on
Personal Identity to his Analogy of Religion. Butler largely
accepted Clarke's substantialist account of identity and personal
identity. Indeed he clarified Clarke's position by summarizing it
briefly and naming the distinction Clarke had been making between real
and fictional identity.  He called it the distinction between identity
in the strict and proper sense and identity in the loose and popular
sense. (Ducharme, p. 370) He reiterates Clarke's claim that Collins
account of personal identity is dangerous to religion and in
particular the doctrine of the resurrection. He accused Collins of
taking Locke's doctrines “to a strange length.” (Perry, Pg.102) By
this Butler meant that Collins account of personal identity would not
allow a person's identity to persist for more than a moment and thus
that Locke's account of personal identity implied and that Collins
explicitly stated a doctrine of successive persons. Butler claimed
that such a doctrine would destroy both morality and any doctrine of
the resurrection. This has been an influential misinterpretation of
Collins. (See Uzgalis 2008b)


George Berkeley (1685–1753) met Collins at a freethinking coffee
house meeting and later told his American follower, Samuel Johnson,
that Collins was an atheist. As noted earlier, Berkeley attacked the
Discourse of Free-Thinking in Steele's Guardian, and
continued his attacks on Collins in Alciphron. While Berkeley
holds a quite distinct set of philosophical views from those of Clarke,
together they represent a conservative Anglican response to Locke and
Collins on the issue of personal identity. Berkeley agrees with Clarke
about the substantial nature of persons.


Scholars are still debating the influence of Collins on David Hume
(1711–1776).  How much influence is attributed to Collins depends
largely on the interpretation given to Hume's philosophy. (See
Macintyre, 1994, Russell, 1995 and Harris, 2005) MacIntyre and Russell
despite their differences agree that in a Treatise Of Human
Nature Hume was systematically attacking Clarke's position on the
mind/body relation as articulated both in Clarke's Boyle lectures and
the Collins Clarke correspondence of 1706–08 and that many of Hume's
arguments resemble those of Collins. Harris, focusing on the issue of
free will and determinism and using the Enquiries to interpret the
Treatise, has a contrasting view. He argues that Hume's account of
necessity is weaker than “that defended by Collins and before him by
Hobbes,” and he goes on to claim that in giving this weaker account
Hume is giving the same kind of account that Bramhall and Clarke gave
in trying to find a middle way between necessitarianism and the
liberty of indifference. (Harris, p. 73) Harris may be correct in
noting a variety of ways in which Hume's account of causality and
necessity differs from that of Hobbes, Locke and Collins. On the other
hand, he fails to note the important way in which Collins' claims that
while some wholes are caused by a composition of their parts there are
a whole range of cases where this is not true distinguishes his view
from that of Hobbes and brings it closer to Hume's.  Hume's rejection
of heirloom theories of causality and the necessary connection that
goes along with them undermines Clarke's position on the causal
relation of mind and body far more than Harris seems to allow. I think
these considerations tend to weaken Harris' judgement that while
Collins is a dogmatist on these issues, Hume is a skeptic.  (See
Harris, note 22 p. 79) 


Thomas Reid (1710–1796) holds positions on materialism, personal
identity and free will that have much in common with the views of
Clarke. Reid deploys reduplication arguments in objecting to the views
about personal identity of Joseph Priestly (see Martin and Barresi, p.
47). Priestly's views have strong connections to those of Collins and
Locke.


Joseph Priestley (1733–1804) was sufficiently impressed with
Collins' Philosophical Inquiry Concerning Free Will to arrange
the publication of a new edition of that work. Priestley also held that
matter can think, but his views were based on a different conception of
matter than the one which Collins and Clarke shared. Priestley had an
active conception of matter derived from Boscovich. Priestley was also
impressed by Collins' work on the prophecies. (Yolton, 1983 pp. 108–113)
6.2 On the continent


Collins' influence on the continent in the second half of the
eighteenth century was much more considerable than his influence in
England. O'Higgins remarks that “Small though his part in English
literature may have been, during his own lifetime there were few
English writers who were more fully reported in the continental
journals, or more noted in foreign universities” (O'Higgins, p. 203).
Pierre Desmaiseaux knew Collins for some 26 years and was his friend
and collaborator. Desmaiseaux played an important role in raising
Collins reputation both in England and on the continent.  Collins
discussed Clarke's response to his book on determinism with Desmaiseaux
and Desmaiseaux kept Collins in contact with the intellectual life on
the continent and also served as a publicist for Collins. He had
Collins' Inquiry translated into French and handled the
printing of his other books. In 1720, under Collins' direction,
Desmaiseaux published A collection of several pieces of Mr. John
Locke, never before printed, or not extant in his works. Pub. by the
author of the Life of the ever-memorable Mr. John Hales, &c
which contained a number of Locke's letters to Collins. There was
considerable interest on the continent in the thinking-matter
controversy. There is a certain amount of debate about the influence
of Collins' book on free will and determinism on Voltaire.  O'Higgins
accepts the evidence produced by Torrey in Voltaire and the
English Deists that Voltaire was converted to determinism by
reading Collins (O'Higgins, pp. 219–20). As time passed free-thinking
came out into the open in France and Collins' name was associated with
it. Finally, his works on the materiality of the soul, determinism and
free will and the prophecies influenced the group around Baron
Holbach. (For a detailed treatment of Collins' influence on the
continent, see O'Higgins, 1970, Chapter XI.) Whether Collins would
have been happy with this depends on whether we view him as a deist
with O'Higgins, or as an atheist with David Berman. This disagreement
over whether to regard Collins as a deist or as an atheist (or someone
whose views changed over time or were unclear even to himself) is our
most serious unresolved problem in determining Collins' proper place
in the history of ideas.