Antoine Arnauld (1612–1694) was a powerful figure in the
intellectual life of seventeenth-century Europe. He had a long and
highly controversial career as a theologian, and was an able and
influential philosopher. His writings were published and widely read
over a period of more than fifty years and were assembled in
1775–1782 in forty-two large folio volumes.

Evaluations of Arnauld’s work as a theologian vary. Ian Hacking,
for example, says that Arnauld was “perhaps the most brilliant
theologian of his time” (Hacking 1975a, 25). Ronald Knox, on the
other hand, says, “It was the fashion among the Jansenists to
represent Antoine Arnauld as a great theologian; he should be
remembered, rather as a great controversialist… A theologian by
trade, Arnauld was a barrister by instinct” (Knox 1950, 196). It
is agreed on all sides, however, that Arnauld was acute and learned in
theology as well as in philosophy.

Arnauld was an important participant in the philosophical debates of
his century, and carried out famous intellectual exchanges with
Descartes, Malebranche, and Leibniz. In addition, the Port-Royal
Logic, l’Art de penser, which he co-authored with
Pierre Nicole, was a standard text in the field for two centuries.
Less attention has been paid to Arnauld’s lifelong efforts to
reconcile the doctrine of grâce efficace par
elle-même with freedom of will, though they have many
connections with the debate about determinism and free will that
continues to this day.
 
1. Life and Works

Antoine Arnauld was born in Paris on February 6, 1612, the twentieth
and last child of an important French family. He is often referred to
in the French literature as Le Grand Arnauld. Another famous
member of the family was his sister, Mère Angélique
Arnauld. Installed by her wealthy and powerful father as abbess of the
convent of Port-Royal in 1602 at the age of eleven, she later reformed
the convent and it became a center of intense religious life. Several
of Arnauld’s sisters were nuns at Port-Royal, where his mother
joined them after the death of his father in 1621.

The young Antoine attended the Collège de
Calvi-Sorbonne, where one of his fellow students was his nephew,
Isaac Lemaître de Sacy. Arnauld went on to study philosophy at
the Collège de Lisieux, and then decided to follow in
his father’s steps as a lawyer. However, under the influence of
his mother and her confessor, Jean Duvergier, the abbé de
Saint-Cyran¸ he changed his mind and began studies in
theology in 1633.

About 1640, he joined a small group of solitaires who lived
in the countryside near Port-Royal and were associated with the
convent. They included Pierre Nicole, Claude Launcelot, and Sacy. The
solitaires initiated the petites écoles de
Port-Royal which continued in various locations from the late
1630s until 1660. Their students included the dramatist Jean Racine.
Later on, Arnauld cooperated with Sacy in the first important French
translation of the
 Bible.[1]
 He also co-authored the Grammaire générale et
raisonnée with Lancelot and La Logique ou l’Art
de penser (hereinafter Logic), with Nicole. All of these
collaborative projects had their origins in the petites
écoles. Blaise Pascal was closely associated with the
solitaires beginning in 1655.

The year 1641 was an eventful one for Arnauld. He was ordained a
priest on September 21. During the year, he completed the
“Fourth Objections” to Descartes’
Meditations and wrote De la Fréquente
communion (published in 1643). The first work established his
reputation as a philosopher. The second went through many editions and
had an effect on Catholic sacramental practice up to the end of the
nineteenth century. Jansen’s Augustinus was also
published in Paris in 1641, having been published posthumously in the
Netherlands a year earlier. It was attacked by the official theologian
of Paris, Isaac Habert, who preached a series of sermons against
Jansen in the cathedral of Paris during Lent, 1643. Arnauld, who had
arrived at an interpretation of Augustine similar to, though not
identical with, that of Jansen, undertook, at the request of
Saint-Cyran, to defend Jansen against the accusation of heresy. This
he did in his Première Apologie pour Jansénius,
1644, and Seconde Apologie, 1645. Although Arnauld did not
agree with important details of Jansen’s view, he continued to
defend Jansen against the charge of heresy off and on for the rest of
his life.

In 1653 the famous five propositions attributed to Jansen were
declared to be heretical by Pope Innocent X in the Constitution
“Cum Occasione.” Arnauld and most of the
Port-Royal group claimed that the five propositions, although
heretical on their most likely interpretation, were not in fact in
Jansen’s work. The dispute led to Arnauld’s expulsion from
the Sorbonne after a celebrated trial, which lasted from December 1,
1655 to January 30, 1656. Pascal came to Arnauld’s defense with
the Provincial Letters, published in installments from
January 23, 1656 to May, 1657. The dispute lasted until 1669, when the
French bishops who supported Arnauld worked out a compromise with Pope
Clement IX, and Arnauld enjoyed almost a decade in the good graces of
both the court and the Pope. During this time, Arnauld wrote
voluminously on the Eucharist, but he also found time to co-author the
Port-Royal Grammar and Logic, and to write his
Nouveaux éléments de géométrie.
However, in the late 1670s, the attacks on Port-Royal by civil and
religious authorities resumed, and in 1679 Arnauld fled to the
Netherlands, where he remained until his death, in Liège, on
August 8, 1694.

The last fifteen years of Arnauld’s life, spent in self-imposed
exile, were among his most fruitful in philosophy. During this period,
he carried on his debates with Malebranche and Leibniz, and also
reexamined his position on human free will. Arnauld’s published
criticism of Malebranche began in 1683 with On True and False
Ideas (hereinafter Ideas). But the central topic of the
exchange was Malebranche’s use of occasionalism to explain how
it is that not all human beings are saved. Arnauld provided a
systematic criticism of that position in the three volumes of
Réflexions philosophiques et théologiques sur le
nouveau système de la nature et de la grâce
(hereinafter Réflexions), published in 1685 and 1686.
Arnauld’s famous correspondence with Leibniz was initiated by
Leibniz in 1686, when he sent Arnauld the section headings of his
projected Discourse on Metaphysics.
2. Arnauld on the Distinction between Philosophy and Theology

Arnauld considered it important to be clear about the distinction
between philosophy and theology. This concern is present in his work
from the beginning, in 1641, to the end of his published writings.
Thus, he divides the “Fourth Objections” to
Descartes’ Meditations into “the possible
philosophical objections regarding the major issues of the nature of
our mind and of God” and “the problems which a theologian
might come up against in the work as a whole”
(Descartes, 2:169). One of Arnauld’s criticisms of
Malebranche is that he does not establish many of the principles in
his system of nature and grace either by the proper methods of
philosophy or of theology. Again, in Règles du bon
sens, written the year before his death, Arnauld warns, “Be
very careful about the nature of the question in dispute, whether it
is philosophical or theological. For if it is theological, it must be
decided principally by authority, whereas if it is philosophical, it
must be decided principally by
 reason.”[2]

According to Arnauld, the chief purpose of theology is to defend the
truths revealed by God through Sacred Scripture and the teaching
tradition of the Church. Part of the ceremony in which he received the
doctorate in theology from the Sorbonne was a vow, made before the
altar of the Holy Martyrs, “that we will give our life before
leaving the truth undefended.” In the speech he gave on that
occasion, Arnauld emphasized the vow, which he said was instituted
because “the obligation to defend the truth with force and
courage is so indispensable in a theologian that those whose courage
in this regard could weaken, should be committed to it by the holiness
and piety of a solemn public vow” (Traduction du Discours
latin prononcé par M. Arnauld en recevant le Bonnet de
Docteur, OA, 43:12). This intense religious commitment to his
role as a theologian continued throughout his life. Combined with his
combative personality, it helps to explain the passion with which he
defended individual theologians, especially Saint-Cyran and Jansen, as
well as what he took to be the truths of revelation.

Regarding philosophy, Arnauld, like Descartes, held that its purpose
was to acquire useful knowledge through reason. That reason ought to
be employed only in the pursuit of useful knowledge is emphasized in
the opening pages of the Logic. Arnauld and Nicole say that
“speculative sciences, such as geometry, astronomy, and
physics” can be used as instruments for perfecting judgment and
reason. This provides a use for some of the “nooks and
crannies” of those sciences, which would otherwise be
“completely worthless.” They go on to say, “People
are not born to spend their time measuring lines, examining the
relations between angles, or contemplating different motions of
matter. The mind is too large, life too short, time too precious to
occupy oneself with such trivial objects. But they are obligated to be
just, fair, and judicious in all their speech, their actions, and the
business the conduct. Above all they ought to train and educate
themselves for this” (Logic, 5). Arnauld did not think,
however, that philosophical sciences are useful only as instruments
for acquiring virtues. Natural philosophy or physics can be made to
serve the good of human life in many ways and even metaphysics is
useful in that it can help the theologian in the task of defending the
truth.

An outstanding example of that sort of usefulness, in Arnauld’s
view, was Descartes’ argument for the distinction of the soul or
mind from the body. Arnauld refers to Descartes as a “Christian
philosopher,” echoing Descartes’ own use of the phrase in
the letter dedicating the Meditations on First Philosophy to
the Faculty of Theology of the Sorbonne, where Descartes says that he
carried out the injunction of the Fourth Lateran Council
(1513–17) that “Christian philosophers” should try
to prove the immateriality of the soul (Descartes, 2:4).

The authorities most often cited by Arnauld are Augustine and Aquinas
in theology, and Augustine, Aquinas, and Descartes in philosophy.
Arnauld’s attitude toward these predecessors is complex. From
the outset of his published work in philosophy, he claimed that
Augustinian themes were present in Descartes. However, in his late
work, beginning with On True and False Ideas in 1683, he
began to cite Aquinas frequently, as well as Augustine, both in
philosophy and theology. Thus, in the 181 folio pages of
Ideas, which Arnauld describes as dealing with a purely
philosophical topic, he cites Augustine twenty times and Aquinas six
times, always claiming that they agree with Descartes and with his own
position. Similarly, in the theological part of
Réflexions, Arnauld relies heavily on Aquinas’s
Christology while arguing that Malebranche’s theodicy leads him
into heterodox, if not downright heretical, positions (OA
39:777). Again, in his late work on the problem of human free will and
grâce efficace par elle-même, Arnauld took over
what he says is the Thomistic position that the will is free when it
is a potestas ou facultas ad opposita. And in the controversy
with Nicole and others over Nicole’s theory of a grâce
générale, Arnauld relied heavily on Aquinas’s
account of cognition. So frequently did Arnauld rely on Thomistic
formulations in his late work that his friends reproached him for
“abandoning Augustine in order to follow Aquinas, thus
preferring the disciple to the master” (Règles du bon
sens, OA, 10:154). This reproach had to do directly with
Arnauld’s rejection of the “Platonism” in Augustine
and Jansen. But as shown below, Arnauld, late in his career, also
parted company with Augustine and Jansen on the nature of human free
will, and with Jansen’s account of the nature of actual
grace.

Arnauld had a scholarly knowledge of the history of philosophy and
theology, and was certainly aware of the important differences among
Augustine, Aquinas, and Descartes on such issues as the role of sense
perception in human knowledge, the relation of the mind to the body,
and the nature of human freedom. But Arnauld wanted to emphasize the
continuity of Descartes with the Christian past. Arnauld feared that
Descartes’ philosophy would be made into a weapon against the
Christian tradition. Emphasizing those elements in Descartes’
philosophy that are in continuity with Augustine and Aquinas was part
of Arnauld’s effort to make of Cartesianism an ally, rather than
an enemy, of the faith.
3. Arnauld’s Cartesianism

Unlike Saint-Cyran, Jansen, and most of the Port-royalists, Arnauld
had a positive appreciation of philosophy, and a lively interest in
the subject (See Nadler 1989, 18 ff.). His philosophy is typically,
and correctly, classified as Cartesian. Indeed, Leibniz said, in 1691,
that Arnauld had been “in all ways for Descartes for a long
 time.”[3]
 Arnauld enthusiastically endorsed Descartes’ physics and the
approach to mind-body dualism to which it gave rise. He also adopted
some parts of Descartes’ views on philosophical method.

Arnauld’s Descartes, however, is unlike the Descartes who is
seen as the father of the enlightenment and who anticipated many of
the preoccupations of recent analytical philosophy. Arnauld claims to
set forth the gist of Descartes’ philosophy, but he did not
hesitate to replace parts of Descartes’ philosophy with
different though related propositions, especially when doing so made
Descartes a more reliable ally in what Arnauld took to be his primary
task, to defend the truths of the faith.
3.1 Philosophical method

In the Fourth Part of the Logic, “On Method,”
Arnauld and Nicole present an account of the distinction between
analysis and synthesis that they say is taken from a manuscript of
Descartes lent to them by Clerselier. What they present is a free
translation of Rule Thirteen of the Rules for the Direction of the
Mind. They then paraphrase the four rules given by Descartes in
Part Two of the Discourse on the Method, saying that although
the rules are “often difficult to follow,” yet “it
is always helpful to bear them in mind, and to heed them as much as
possible whenever we try to find the truth by means of reason”
(Logic, 234–39). But Arnauld developed the Cartesian
position on philosophical method in a distinctive way. In particular,
he reshaped the notion of an idea, of a confused idea, of a clear and
distinct idea, and of methodic doubt.

An idea, according to Arnauld, is the same thing as a perception (in
the broad sense of the term characteristic of seventeenth-century
philosophy), and every perception has an object distinct from the
perception itself. Every idea, i.e., every perception, is, in
addition, a consciousness of itself. But this “implicit
reflexion” makes present to the mind a perception that is, in
the first place, of an object distinct from itself. As Arnauld puts
it, “I know myself in knowing other things”
(Ideas, 6). It is obviously true, he says, that we can know
objects only through the mediation of our perceptions, i.e., our
ideas, of them: “But if, by not knowing them
immediately, is meant being able to know them only by
representative beings distinct from perceptions, I hold that
in this sense we can know material things, as well as God and our
soul, not only mediately but also immediately, i.e.,
that we can know them without there being any intermediary between our
perceptions and the object” (Ideas, 31).

Arnauld says that the object of any perception has objective
being in the perception. Furthermore, the object has objective
being in the perception as having properties. If an object
exists objectively in a given perception as having a given property,
then Arnauld says that the perception represents the object
as having that property, that is, makes the object known to the mind
as having that
 property.[4]
 Furthermore, an idea (or perception) can represent its object to the
perceiving mind as having this or that property contingently or
necessarily. Arnauld cites the dictum, “it is in the idea of
each thing that we see its properties,” and takes it to refer to
an explicit reflection upon an idea that represents its object as
having certain properties necessarily.

Arnauld argues at length that this theory of ideas was also held by
Descartes (Ideas, 26ff.). This claim has puzzled philosophers
from Thomas Reid to the present. (Reid 1785, 169.) A good example of
the more common interpretation of Descartes’ theory is provided
by Ian Hacking, who also attributes the theory, as he understands it,
to the Port-Royal Logic. Hacking begins with the first
sentence of the First Part of the Logic: “We have no
knowledge of what is outside us except by the mediation of
the ideas within us,” and continues, “The Cartesian ego
has set the stage. The ego able to contemplate what is within it
ponders what lies outside …There are some objects that we can
contemplate without being logically committed to the existence of
anything other than the ego. These objects are ideas.” Borrowing
an example from Elizabeth Anscombe’s comment on Berkeley,
Hacking says that in the Cartesian (and Port-royalist) theory,
“Ideas [in the mind] are paradigm ‘objects’ and
coins [in a man’s pocket] are not” (Hacking 1975b,
28–30). But the sentence that Hacking quotes from the First Part
of the Logic does not demand the interpretation he gives it.
It is consistent with the position Arnauld develops in Ideas
(published in the same year as the fifth and last edition of the
Logic), according to which ideas are primarily perceptions of
external objects distinct from the perceiver, objects.like coins in a
man’s pocket; and only secondarily objects of reflexive
perception. Arnauld makes a good case for the claim that this position
was also held by Descartes, but the claim is not universally
accepted.

Arnauld’s account of clarity and distinctness, obscurity and
confusion of ideas can be found in the First Part, Chapter 9, of the
Logic. The discussion proceeds by way of examples, rather
than general definitions, but it can be summarized as follows: The
basic properties of ideas are clarity and confusion. Clarity of ideas
is the same as vividness, and this is a matter of degree; the opposite
of clarity is obscurity. Confusion of ideas results when a number of
ideas are connected by false judgments, and confusion produces
obscurity. Opposite to confusedness of ideas is distinctness. Arnauld
and Nicole apply these distinctions to the idea of pain: “We can
say that all ideas are distinct insofar as they are clear, and that
their obscurity derives only from their confusion, just as in pain the
simple sensation which strikes us is clear and also distinct. But what
is confused, namely that the sensation is in the hand, is by no means
clear in us” (Logic, 48). Again, Arnauld and Nicole
speak of “the obscure and confused ideas we have of sensible
qualities, the soul adding its false judgments to what nature causes
us to know” (Logic, 49–50). The simple idea of
pain, for example, is a clear and distinct idea of a sensory state in
the mind, and the idea of the pain in the hand is a compound and
confused idea of something in the hand that exactly resembles pain.
Being confused, the idea is also obscure, because what it is in the
hand that exactly resembles pain is “by no means clear to
us.”

These comments on the idea of pain are part of a larger position on
“ideas of sensation.” In a famous passage in the
“Fourth Objections,” Arnauld objected to Descartes’
statement, “If cold is merely the absence of heat, the idea of
cold which represents it to me as a positive thing will be materially
false” (Descartes, 2:145). As part of his reply,
Descartes says, “If cold is simply an absence, the idea of cold
is not coldness itself as it exists objectively in the intellect, but
something else, which I erroneously mistake for this absence, namely a
sensation which in fact has no existence outside the intellect”
(Descartes, 2:163). Arnauld developed a general account of
sensory ideas that builds on this part of Descartes’ reply. He
sets out his account clearly in Ideas: Sensory ideas, like
the idea of pain and the idea of cold, are perceptions of mental
states. Taken apart from the judgments in which we falsely identify
these mental states with states of material things, sensory ideas are
clear and distinct. They become confused, and hence obscure, only as a
result of the precipitous, false judgments of childhood. Arnauld
quotes Descartes’ Principles of Philosophy, Part I, #68
in support of his account: “We know pain, color and the other
sensations clearly and distinctly when we consider them simply as
thoughts, but when we would judge that color, pain, etc., are things
which subsist outside our thought, we do not conceive in any way what
that color, that pain, etc., is” (Quoted by Arnauld in
Ideas, 132).

Arnauld’s theory of clear and confused ideas implies that ideas,
as they are given to us by nature, and thus by God, are clear and
distinct, and therefore cannot be deceptive, or “materially
false.” Any deceptiveness in our ideas derives from their
confusedness and is the result of our misuse of freedom. It is not God
who confuses us, but we who confuse ourselves.

Arnauld also gave a distinctive interpretation of Descartes’
method of doubt. In the “Fourth Objections,” Arnauld
offers, as the first of “the problems which a theologian might
come up against in the work as a whole,” the following: “I
am afraid that the author’s somewhat free style of
philosophizing, which calls everything into doubt, may cause offence
to some people” (Descartes, 2:151). Arnauld recommends
that the First Meditation be “furnished with a brief preface
which explains that there is no serious doubt cast on these matters
but that the purpose is to isolate temporarily those matters which
leave room for even the ‘slightest’ and most
‘exaggerated’ doubt,” and that the clause
“since I did not know the author of my being” be replaced
by “since I was pretending that I did not know the author of my
being.”

Arnauld was asking Descartes to make clear that his method did not
involve real doubt, but only a consideration of what would happen
if one were to doubt. Consider this passage from the
Port-Royal Logic: “If there were people able to doubt
that they were not sleeping or were not mad, or who could even believe
that the existence of everything external is uncertain … at
least no one could doubt, as St. Augustine says, that one exists, that
one is thinking, or that they are alive… From this clear,
certain, and indubitable knowledge one can form a rule for accepting
as true all thoughts found to be as clear as this one appears to
be” (Logic, p.
 228).[5]
 This is as close as Arnauld comes to using methodic doubt, but it
does not imply that one can really doubt the existence of an external
world, much less that one ought to do so, even once in one’s
lifetime.

It is not clear to what extent Descartes would have agreed with that
interpretation of methodic doubt. He did not adopt the first of
Arnauld’s two suggested revisions. Perhaps he thought that the
point was covered in the “Synopsis” of the
Meditations. But he did adopt Arnauld’s second
recommendation by adding some words in parentheses in the Sixth
Meditation, thus: “The second reason for doubt was that since I
did not know the author of my being (or at least was pretending not
to), I saw nothing to rule out the possibility that my natural
constitution made me prone to error even in matters which seemed to me
most true” (Descartes, 2:53). On the other hand,
Descartes begins the Principles of Philosophy with the
remark, “It seems that the only way of freeing ourselves from
these [prejudices of childhood] is to make the effort, once in the
course of our life, to doubt everything which we find to contain even
the smallest suspicion of error” (Descartes, 1:193).
Here Descartes advocates an effort to develop a real doubt on a wide
scale, the sort of advocacy that had aroused Arnauld’s
theological concern in the “Fourth
 Objections.”[6]

In sum, Arnauld adopted the Cartesian method that seeks to develop
clear and distinct ideas and to limit assent to what is represented by
them. But he gave his own distinctive interpretation of the key
concepts in the method, and eliminated from it anything that he saw as
being theologically dangerous.
3.2 Mind-body dualism

If there is one part of Descartes’ philosophy that met with
Arnauld’s enthusiastic approval, it is Descartes’
mind-body dualism. Yet even here Arnauld’s version of the
Cartesian philosophy departed in important ways from Descartes’
own views. Arnauld’s departure did not have to do with the
distinction between mind and body; here he largely contents himself
with endorsing what Descartes
 says.[7]
 It had to do rather with the union of the mind and body in a human
being. Arnauld rejected a claim at the core of Descartes’
position, namely, that the union of a person’s mind and body
makes it possible for the mind and the body to exercise real causal
action on one another. Arnauld explicitly says that a person’s
body cannot act causally on his mind, and had at least some difficulty
with the notion that a person’s mind can act causally on his
body.

In 1680 Arnauld wrote an extended defense of the “the philosophy
of Descartes” regarding “the essence of body and the union
of the soul with the body,” against an attack by Fr. Etienne Le
 Moine.[8]
 Throughout this work, Arnauld quotes Malebranche as representative of
the Cartesian position, and what he defends under the heading,
“the philosophy of Descartes,” is actually a modified
version of
 Malebranche.[9]
 According to the Cartesian philosophy, says Arnauld, “All the
union (alliance) of the mind and the body which is known to
us consists in a natural and mutual correspondence of thoughts in the
soul with traces in the brain and of emotions in the soul with
movements of the [animal] spirits.” “It is not
denied,” he adds, “that there may be something unknown to
us in the union God has brought about between our soul and our
body”; what we do know, however, suffices to show that the mind
is not related to the body as a pilot to his ship, but rather that the
two are united in “a greater and more intimate union” by
which they form a single whole (Examen, OA,
38:141).

Arnauld next takes up a criticism raised by Le Moine against the
Cartesian account of sense perception, and this leads to the question,
“whether it is the bodily movements [in the eye] that cause the
perceptions in the soul; or whether they are only the occasion on
which the soul forms [the perceptions] in itself; or whether God gives
[the perceptions] to [the soul]” (Examen, OA,
38:146). Arnauld says that it is “easy” to eliminate the
first alternative: “For since the motion of a body can at best
have no other effect than to move another body (I say at best
because it may have not even that), who does not see that it can have
no effect on a spiritual soul?” He adds that St. Augustine
considered it beyond doubt that a body can have an effect only on our
body, and not on our soul. Arnauld rules out the second of his three
alternatives on the grounds that the soul cannot form sensible
perceptions in itself on the occasion of particular motions in the
bodily sensory apparatus because the soul is not aware of those
motions. This leaves Arnauld with the third alternative, which he
accepts, adding that God voluntarily undertakes to cause in our soul
perceptions of sensible qualities whenever the corresponding motions
occur in the sensory organs “according to the laws He himself
has established in nature” (Examen, OA,
38:148). He summarizes this conclusion by saying that our body does
not act on our soul as a “physical cause (cause
physique)” but only as a “moral cause (cause
morale)” (Examen, OA, 38:150).

Arnauld had a quite different position regarding the causation of
voluntary movements in the body. He held that, in general, it is
possible for immaterial, thinking beings to act causally on material
things, and that, in fact, God has on occasion given angels the power
to do so. He also held that the mind of Adam and of Eve had the power
to bring about voluntary motions in their bodies before the Fall, and
that the minds of the blessed in heaven will enjoy that power. He
suggests that the voluntary bodily motions of human beings in this
life here below are not caused by the person’s volitions. His
reason for this negative position is that post-lapsarian human beings
do not know how to bring about the movements of the animal spirits
that cause the motions of their muscles and limbs. Thus he says,
“If one can say [that God has not given our soul a real
power to determine the course of the animal spirits toward the muscles
of the parts of our body that we want to move], it is not [on the
grounds of a general occasionalism like Malebranche’s]…
It is only because our soul does not know what must be done in order
to move our arm by means of the animal spirits” (My italics;
Dissertation sur les Miracles de l’ancienne loi,
OA, 38:690). Steven Nadler cites this text while arguing that
Arnauld was an “occasionalist” both about the causation of
sensory perceptions by bodies, and about the causation of voluntary
movements by the human mind (Nadler 1995, 138). Nadler recognizes that
Arnauld had quite different attitudes toward the two cases, but
nevertheless says that Arnauld “alone among Cartesians”
recognized mind-body interaction as a specific problem in
Descartes’ metaphysics, and “used an occasionalist
solution” (Nadler 1995, 144).

Arnauld’s treatment of the union of mind and body shows that he
was not a docile follower of Descartes, and indeed was prepared to
develop “the philosophy of Descartes” in ways that
Descartes would probably not have accepted. It also shows that Arnauld
was prepared to modify Descartes’ philosophy in a way that
increased its similarity to Augustine. It is well known that Arnauld
pointed out similarities between Augustine and Descartes from the
beginning of his published work, in the “Fourth
Objections.” In the present case, however, Arnauld changes the
philosophy of Descartes in a way that increases its similarity to
Augustine. Arnauld did not mention Aquinas, though he could have done
so, as another authority who held that a material thing cannot produce
an immaterial effect. It was only a few years later, in On True
and False Ideas, that Arnauld began to claim an affinity between
the views of Descartes and those of Aquinas. But in his development of
the Cartesian position on the union of mind and body, one can already
see Arnauld attempting to make of Descartes a Christian philosopher
standing in continuity with his great patristic and scholastic
predecessors. This attempt on Arnauld’s part is explored in the
journal Dix-Septieme Sciecle, 2013/2 no. 259. 
3.3 The Creation of the Eternal Truths

There is a continuing discussion of Arnauld’s attitude toward
the view which Descartes expressed in answer to Mersenne’s
question “by what kind of causality God established the eternal
truths.” Descartes replied, “by the same kind of causality
as he created all things, that is to say, as their efficient and total
cause” (Descartes, p.
 25).[10]
 The debate has been greatly influenced by Jean-Luc Marion’s
interpretation, in La théologie blanche de Descartes,
according to which Descartes’ position on the matter is
fundamental to his metaphysics. Consequently, to the extent that
Arnauld, in his mature writings, adopted Descartes’ metaphysics,
it has seemed reasonable to say that Arnauld agreed with Descartes
about “the creation of the eternal truths.” Various
attempts have been made to to explain why Arnauld never made his
posiiton explicit. The discussion is complicated by the difficulty of
interpreting Descartes’ own view.
4. Arnauld and Malebranche

Nicolas Malebranche was born in 1638, when Arnauld was twenty-six
years old. In 1660, Malebranche joined the Oratory, a center for
priests in Paris that had many connections with Port-Royal.
Malebranche and Arnauld were on friendly terms in the early 1670s, but
late in the decade they had a falling out over Malebranche’s
explanation of the fact that not all men are saved, and related
 matters.[11]
 In 1680, Malebranche published his position, against Arnauld’s
advice, in the Treatise of Nature and Grace (hereinafter
TNG). The ensuing public controversy between the two was a
central event in the intellectual life of Europe in the late
seventeenth century.

Arnauld’s attack on TNG began in a surprising way, with
the publication of On True and False Ideas in 1683. In it,
Arnauld presents his own position on the nature of ideas, which was
described above, and argues that Malebranche’s view that we see
all things (or at least all bodily things) in God and by means of
God’s ideas is not only mistaken, but thoroughly confused and
wrong-headed. This work engendered a preliminary debate that lasted
for two years. The publication of Réflexions in
1685–86, preceded in 1685 by the publication of Arnauld’s
 Dissertation sur les miracles de l’ancien loi,
provoked further exchanges between the two in 1687, with a last gasp
on Arnauld’s part in 1694, the year of his death, and on
Malebranche’s part ten years later, in
 1704.[12]
4.1 Malebranche’s position in the Treatise of Nature and Grace

TNG provides a general account of God’s reasons for
creating a world with the evils that the world contains. But
Malebranche is mainly interested in one particular evil, namely, that
not all men are saved. That not all men are saved he took to be a
datum of revelation, plainly expressed in the Scriptures. But he
denied that it follows that God does not want all men to be saved.
Indeed, he says his motive in writing TNG was to refute those
who concluded that God did not have a “sincere will” to
save all men:

If there were not in this century people determined to hold that God
does not have a sincere will to save all men, it would not be
necessary to establish principles suitable for destroying that unhappy
opinion. But the need to combat errors brings to light principles
suitable to that end. I protest before God that that was the principal
motive that made me
 write.[13]


If God wants to save all men, something must prevent Him from doing
what He wants to do. In the “Troisième
Eclaircissement” to TNG, Malebranche says that
since God is omnipotent, He can bring about whatever He wants to bring
about. But because His will is “the love He bears for His own
attributes,” He cannot, by a “practical”
 will,[14]
 will anything or will in any way that is not wise: “The wisdom
of God renders Him impotent in this sense that it does not permit him
to will certain things, or to act in certain ways” (OM,
5:180). What prevents God from carrying out His will to save all men,
Malebranche concludes, must be that doing so would require ways or
manners of willing that are unwise. As he puts it a few pages later,
God’s wisdom “holds His volitions in check, in the sense
that not all of His volitions are practical volitions”
(OM, 5:184).

Malebranche argues that God’s wisdom restrains Him from
sanctifying and saving all men because it directs Him not only to
create a world that is good, but also to create “in a way worthy
of Him, by ways (par des voyes) that are simple, general,
constant, and uniform” (OM, 5:49). More precisely,
God’s wisdom directs Him to an act of creating that best
combines goodness or perfection of the created world with simplicity
of ways of creating. An analogy may help explain Malebranche’s
position. Suppose that someone sets out to buy a car and wants to do
the best possible job of car-buying. Suppose further that the
second-best car is available at a much better price than the best car.
In this case, doing the best job of car-buying might require buying
less than the best car. In a somewhat similar way, Malebranche holds
that the best job of creating, the one most worthy of God, involves
creating a world less perfect than He might have made it, in
particular, a world in which not all human beings are saved.

Malebranche’s notion of the simplicity of God’s ways of
creating depends on his occasionalism. According to that theory of
efficient causality, God is the only true efficient cause. When
creatures appear to be efficient causes, they are really only
occasional causes. That is, the events in which the apparent created
causes take part are followed by other events in accordance with laws
of nature, which are God’s general volitions. But the created
“causes” do not really cause the events that follow. These
events, like every created reality, are really caused by
 God.[15]
 For Malebranche, the simplicity of God’s ways depends on there
being a small number of laws of nature, and on there being few
exceptions to the laws. Malebranche maintains that in order to do the
job of creating that best combines goodness of the world created with
simplicity of ways of creating, God had to make a world with precisely
the natural evils (misshapen animals, human suffering, ugly
landscapes, etc.) that that are present in the world as it is.

The anomalies in the order of grace are explained in a similar way.
Malebranche divides grace, the divine assistance given to human
beings, into two kinds, which he calls “grace of light
(lumière)” and “grace of feeling
(sentiment)” (OM, 5:96–97; 131). The
former is, quite simply, knowledge. Malebranche also calls it
“the grace of the Creator,” because it is given, in
different forms, both to Adam and Eve and to human beings after their
Fall. Grace of feeling is “the grace of Jesus Christ,” and
was merited for human beings by the life and death of Jesus.
Malebranche also describes it as a “pleasure
(délectation)” which makes a person love God
(TNG, OM, 5:135). According to Malebranche, the
grace of the Creator is “dry, abstract, entirely pure and
entirely intelligible” and does not lead us to love God. The
grace of Christ, in contrast, is “efficace par
elle-même” in that it “always has its effect, always
carries us toward God” (OM, 5:132). Human beings, after
the fall of Adam, are unable to grow in holiness, or even to be saved
from damnation, without the grace of Christ. But the love of God
produced by grace is a sort of instinctive love, which is not
meritorious and is not sufficient for salvation. Whether the person
who receives the grace of Christ is saved depends on the
person’s free consent to the movement toward God that grace
produces, which converts the instinctive love of God into a
“free and rational” love. This consent is not produced by
grace.

Now Malebranche holds that God could give to each person grace that
would assure the person’s salvation: “God is the master of
hearts. He can give to the impious a grace such that it will convert
him, since God knows what degree of grace to give, and when it must be
given, in order that it bring about the conversion of the
sinner” (OM, 5:186). Similarly, God knows what sort of
grace would ensure that any person is not only saved, but also attain
the maximum holiness of which he or she is capable. But many who
receive grace do not grow in holiness and are not saved. For example,
many who enter the Church later fall away. On the other hand, many
fail to receive the grace that would ensure their holiness or even
their salvation. For Malebranche, this is a troubling disorder in the
distribution of grace parallel to the disorder found in nature:
“God often distributes graces, without their having the effect
that His goodness makes us believe He would make them have. He makes
the piety of some people increase right up to the end of their life,
but sin overcomes them at death and throws them into Hell. He makes
the rain of grace fall upon hardened hearts as well as on earth that
is prepared: people resist it and make it useless for their salvation.
… How can that be reconciled with wisdom?” (OM,
5:48)

Malebranche’s answer is that God’s wisdom dictates that He
act, in the distribution of both sorts of grace, according general
volitions determined by created occasional causes to particular
effects. In the case of the grace of the Creator, the general
volitions are laws of nature and the occasional causes are “the
diverse movements of our will” and “the encounter of
sensible objects that act on our mind” (TNG, 5:102).
For the grace of Jesus Christ, the occasional cause if Jesus Christ,
in his human nature, and the general volition is that grace be given
to human beings if and only if Jesus Christ, in his human nature, asks
that it be given. Jesus’ requests for grace are made in view of
the needs of the Church. But Jesus, in his human nature, does not
always think of “the future determination of the will” of
those for whom he requests grace. The result is that, often enough,
people receive grace that does not lead to their holiness and
salvation, or fail to receive the grace that would have done so
(TNG, OM, 5:83).
4.2 Two themes in Arnauld’s criticism of the Treatise of Nature and Grace

Arnauld thought that Malebranche’s position was dangerous, and
that if accepted it would have ruinous consequences for the Catholic
faith. He was “furious,” as Denis Moreau has aptly said,
“and decided to leave nothing standing in a philosophy that
clearly frightened him” (Moreau 1999, 240). Here only the
general lines of Arnauld’s attack are clarified. First, two
pervasive themes in Arnauld’s criticism are described: (1) that
Malebranche often did not proceed by the proper method of either
philosophy or theology; and (2) that Malebranche speaks of God in
anthropomorphic terms, as if He were subject to the limitations of a
human
 agent.[16]
 Then we turn to Arnauld’s main criticisms of
Malebranche’s position that God acts vis-a-vis creatures by
“general volitions.”

1. Throughout Réflexions, beginning with the
“Avant-Propos” to the work, Arnauld challenges Malebranche
to make clear whether his claims are based on reason or on Scripture
and
 tradition.[17]
 He had mounted this sort of challenge even earlier, in
Ideas: “He does not say that he learned those grand
maxims on which all of that [Treatise of Nature and Grace]
turns by the revelation of God: that if God wills to act
externally, it is because He wills to obtain an honor worthy of
Himself; that He acts by the simplest ways; that He does not act by
particular volitions; but by general volitions which are determined by
occasional causes” (Ideas, 174). Nor could all of
those maxims be demonstrated, in Malebranche’s sense of the
term, for Malebranche says that only necessary truths can be
demonstrated, and yet he admits that God does sometimes act by
particular volitions, namely, when He performs miracles. Hence
Malebranche himself would have to admit that the third maxim, at
least, is not demonstrable. In Arnauld’s view, Malebranche came
to accept such principles because he thought they made God more
loveable and hence were favorable to the cause of religion. Thus he
introduces, on the basis of religious considerations, principles that
are not found in Scripture and tradition.

Arnauld thought that this unholy introduction of religion into what
ought to be treated as philosophical questions began with
Malebranche’s theory of ideas, according to which “we see
all things in God.” Thus, in the “Conclusion” of his
Défense contre la Réponse au livre des vraies et des
fausses Idées (OA, hereafter
Défense), Arnauld takes up “two or three
objections” that might be raised against Ideas. The
second objection is one that had been raised by Nicole: “I could
have avoided this philosophical topic [of the nature of ideas] so as
not to interrupt what I had begun to write about the Treatise of
Nature and Grace.” In reply, Arnauld says, “What was
at the outset a question of philosophy … is not such for
[Malebranche]. For him it is a question of theology, very sublime and
very elevated. He considers it a religious duty to devote his whole
mind to its defense. He finds it bad that others should disagree with
him, and even says that anyone who is not of his opinion must be
‘either an unenlightened philosopher or a man insensitive to his
duties.’ Thus he has changed the form of the dispute. He has
involved religion, and has become so devoted to his novel thoughts as
to hold that anyone who does not approve of them lacks respect for the
wisdom of God Himself” (Défense, OA,
39:666).

In Arnauld’s direct attack on TNG, he says again and
again that Malebranche relies on principles that have neither a proper
theological basis in Scripture and tradition, nor a proper
philosophical basis in reason. Clearly he thought that this criticism
applied as well to Malebranche’s theory of ideas. But if Arnauld
took seriously the remark at the beginning of the Logic,
“The reflections we can make on our ideas are perhaps the most
important part of logic, since they are the foundation of everything
else,” he may well have thought that Malebranche’s theory
of ideas was an important source of the confusion of theology with
philosophy that plagues TNG. That, in turn, would help to
explain his decision to begin his attack on TNG with a
treatise on the nature of
 ideas.[18]

2. Arnauld agreed with Malebranche that God’s will is
reasonable, but he disagreed with Malebranche’s way of
conceiving God’s
 reasonableness.[19]
 In both Book I and Book II of Réflexions, he tries to
show that Malebranche conceives of God’s reasonableness as if it
were the reasonableness of a human being. In the second chapter of
Book I, he reports a series of arguments given by Malebranche early in
TNG for the conclusion that God acts in the order of nature
only by general volitions. These arguments, says Arnauld, are
“only comparisons with men, which … cannot prove anything
with regard to God; or popular thoughts not worthy … of a
philosopher” (OA, 39:188). For example, Malebranche
says that God decides to create that which can be produced and
conserved by the simplest laws because he is an excellent workman, and
“an excellent workman … does not do by complicated ways
what he could carry out by simpler ones” (TNG,
OM, 5:28). Arnauld objects that there is no similarity
between an excellent human workman and God, “since all the ways
of executing His plans are equally easy for Him, and ‘His
power,’ as the author [Malebranche] recognizes, ‘makes Him
so much the master of all things, and so independent of help from
elsewhere, that it suffices that He will, in order for His volitions
to be carried out’ (OA, 39;189–90). Hence
God’s volitions are not based on reasoning about the means to
achieve a desired end.

Book II of Réflexions, which deals with God’s
way of acting in the order of grace, opens with a related criticism.
Arnauld begins by analyzing a line of thought that Malebranche
presents in the ”Troisième
Eclaircissement“ to TNG ” (OA,
39:425–51). The line of thought begins with two claims: that
“God can act only for Himself. If He wills to act, it is because
He wills to procure an honor worthy of Himself” and that
“God can receive an honor worthy of Himself only from
Himself.” Yet I am created, so I must be able to render to God
an honor worthy of Him. This I can do, says Malebranche, only by
becoming a part of the Church, of which the Incarnate Second Person of
the Trinity is the cornerstone. More generally, “God’s
great plan is to build in His own honor a spiritual temple, of which
Jesus Christ is the cornerstone … His plan is that this Temple
should be as large and perfect as possible.” Malebranche then
draws an important conclusion: “God wills that all men enter
into this spiritual building, to enlarge it. God wills that all
men be saved … God also hopes that men will merit
outstanding degrees of glory: His will is our
sanctification” (OM, 5:183). But although God
wants the salvation and sanctification of all men, “He loves His
wisdom infinitely more,” and His wisdom requires that He act in
the way that is wisest and most worthy of Himself, that is, in
“general, constant and uniform way,” with the result that
“He does not save all men, although He truly wills that they all
be saved” (OM, 5:185).

Arnauld has much to say against that line of thought, and he begins be
attacking its very first step, the claim that God “can act
externally only in order to procure an honor worthy of Himself”
(OA,
 39:428–40).[20]
 He objects that this is not a proper way to speak about an infinitely
perfect being. Once again, Malebranche is guilty of anthropomorphism.
For he says, in effect, “that [God] could resolve to create me,
me and the other creatures, only for some advantage He wanted to
obtain for Himself by creating us…. That is how [Malebranche]
lowers [God], by claiming that He cannot decide to create anything
externally, except to procure an honor worthy of Himself”
(OA, 39:429). Arnauld goes on to contrast Malebranche’s
way of describing God’s creation with that of St. Thomas, who
say that the reason God creates is that His goodness tends to overflow
and communicate itself to other
 things.[21]

Arnauld also says that to speak about God as consulting His
wisdom before acting is to speak about God as one would about a human
being who wills an end and is thereby caused to will the means to that
end (OA, 39:432). It is to compare God to a man who consults
his wisdom about everything he wants to do “as if he were afraid
of not acting well, and his will needed to be ruled by something other
than itself in order to do only what is good” (OA,
39:599–600). “Is it an expression of rigorous
exactitude to say of God that He consults His wisdom,
and that is how it comes about that everything He wills is
wise,” Arnauld asks, “as if the word consult is
suitable for an infinitely perfect being when one professes not to
speak in popular language? As if God needed to consult His wisdom so
that what He wills should be wise? As if His will were not His wisdom?
As if everything He wills were not essentially wise, by virtue of the
fact that He wills it?” (OA, 39:578). God’s will
is not a force that needs to be tamed. The truth, according to
Arnauld, is that it is impossible that God should have an actual
(sincere) will for something that is not in fact wise.

In a related criticism, Arnauld chides Malebranche for allowing
“very little freedom and indifference” in God’s
creative action. Arnauld quotes Malebranche: “Assuming that God
wills to produce outside of Himself a work worthy of Himself, He is
not indifferent in the choice; He ought to produce
the most perfect work possible by relation to the simplicity of the
ways by which He acts; He owes it to Himself to follow the rules of
his wisdom” (Quoted by Arnauld at Réflexions,
OA, 39:598, from TNG, OM, 5: 110).
Malebranche tries to save for God at least freedom and indifference
with regard to creating or not creating. But Arnauld suggests that
this move is ruled out by “the way in which he conceives
God’s action,” for supposedly, on Malebranche’s
view, God would consult His wisdom before deciding whether to create
or not, and just as His wisdom advises Him to create this world rather
than a less perfect one, assuming that the two could be created in an
equally simple way, His wisdom would also advise Him that it is better
to create than not to create (OA,
 39:599–600).[22]
4.3 Does God act only by general volitions?

Arnauld devoted much of Réflexions to
Malebranche’s position that God acts by general volitions and
not by particular volitions. In Book I of Réflexions,
his focus is on the order of nature and he tries to show that
Malebranche’s claim that God acts only by general volitions is
confused and even self-contradictory. In Book II, his focus is on the
order of grace and he attacks Malebranche’s claim that God does
not distribute grace by particular volitions.

Arnauld begins his criticism in Book I by claiming that Malebranche
confuses acting by general volitions and acting according
to general laws. Arnauld grants that God acts according to
general laws. But against the claim that God acts by general
volitions, he provides an argument that is simple, and, his view,
decisive: “Whatever [God] does, He does in particular, and not
in general. But since to will and to do, in God, are the same
thing, given that He creates each soul by a particular action, He must
also will to create it by a particular will” (OA,
39:175).

In some passages, Malebranche’s language suggests that
God’s wisdom dictates that He engage in the act of creating that
best combines the goodness of the world created with the simplicity of
the laws according to which the world is created, and not
with simplicity of the volition whereby God creates
(TNG, OM, 5:147). This suggests that for Malebranche
God does will particular created effects, though He wills that they
take place according to certain laws. But Arnauld did not think that
this was Malebranche’s view. For suppose that God creates the
world according to a simple set of laws. Let these laws, as regards
bodies, be the laws of motion. A world created according to such laws
might be more perfect than a world not created according to general
laws, or created according to a different set of laws. But that would
be of no help to Malebranche. For he does not say that a world
regulated by simpler laws is a more perfect world. Rather he maintains
that creating such a world is a simpler act of creation in God
Himself. But it is not at all clear how simplicity of laws according
to which the world is created would make God’s way of creating
simpler, especially if God’s creative activity includes the will
to create every particular part of the creative world.
Malebranche’s real position, according to Arnauld, emerges in
those passages in which he identifies the “ways” in which
the word is created with the actions whereby God creates. For example,
in the passage, “An excellent workman ought to proportion his
action to his work; he does not accomplish by highly complex ways
(voyes) what He can execute by simpler ones” (TNG,
OM, 5:28). To this Arnauld objects that the volitions by which
God creates are particular.

Arnauld next points out that Malebranche does not say, without
qualification, that God creates by general volitions. Rather,
Malebranche says that God’s creative will is “the cause of
a particular effect; but he calls it general, because he holds that
God has this will only when He is determined to have it by an
occasional cause, which must be a creature” (OA,
39:176). In other words, according to Malebranche, God causes
particular effects in creation, but the contribution of God’s
volition, as opposed to the contribution of created occasional causes,
is general. Later on, Arnauld says that, on Malebranche’s view,
it is really only the free volitions of creatures that can be said to
determine God, in view of His general volitions, to produce a
particular effect. For, according to Malebranche, God is the cause of
every bodily event, including those which, together with the general
laws, are supposed to determine any given consequent event.
(OA, 39:230). But Malebranche is committed, so Arnauld
argues, to the position that the free volitions of creatures are not
caused by God (OA,
 39:248–57).[23]

Arnauld goes further and says that Malebranche’s position on
God’s creative will is, in fact, self-contradictory. For
Malebranche “was not of the opinion of those philosophers who
believe that God originally created all things, gave them the
qualities necessary for their conservation and the powers they needed
in order to act, and then left them to act without further involving
Himself.” On the contrary, Malebranche insists that “God
is the sole cause of everything in the world, up to the smallest
movement of the smallest atom.” But he also holds that God
“acts in the world only as a universal cause, whose general
volitions are determined by the … changes … in
creatures, as by so many occasional causes.” Arnauld tries to
show that these two positions are inconsistent with one another
(OA, 39:231–37).

Near the end of Book II of Réflexions, Arnauld takes
up Malebranche’s arguments for the claim, “God does not
act, in the order of grace, by particular volitions,” as
summarized by Malebranche in the Premier Eclaircissement to
TNG (OA, 39:621). Malebranche says that the
proposition in question can be proved by reason “in two ways;
à priori & à posteriori; that is, by our
idea of God, and by the effects of grace.” The chief “a
priori” argument involves the claim that “to choose
occasional causes, and to establish general laws for carrying out some
work, indicates an infinitely more extensive knowledge than to act by
particular volitions.” Arnauld retorts, “Is it something
to be put up with, that human beings … should have the temerity
to make themselves judges of what is a sign in God of greater
intelligence and wisdom?” (OA, 39:624).

Arnauld quotes Malebranche’s statement, “The à
priori proofs are too abstract to convince most people of the
truth I am proposing. It is more à propos to prove it
à posteriori,” and goes on to consider the a
posteriori arguments (OA, 39:625–43). He is less
sarcastic in dealing with these arguments than with the a priori ones.
He says that there are “three or four of them, but they all
amount to the same thing: There are graces that are inefficacious, and
this would not occur if God gave His graces by particular
volitions.” He mentions three such arguments, based on the
premise that graces are given to sinners who are not entirely
converted; on the premise that grace often falls upon hearts disposed
in such a way that the grace does not bear fruit; and, finally, on the
premise that graces given to sinners sometimes end up making them even
more guilty.

Arnauld assumes that these arguments have to do with “the true
grace of Jesus Christ, as defined by St. Augustine: Inspiratio
dilectionis, ut cognita sancto amore faciamus, an inspiration of
love given to us so that we should do the good with holy
affection.” Such grace is efficacious if it infallibly has its
effect. But the effect in question may be either proximate
(prochain) or remote (éloigné). As in
the famous example of Augustine, a grace may be efficacious in that it
produces the desire to be chaste, and yet not efficacious in that it
fails to produces chastity itself. Similarly, Malebranche’s
arguments assume that “Every grace has the effect for which God
gives it.” But once again, this phrase may refer to the effect
for which God gives the grace by His absolute will, or to the effect
that grace tends to produce by its nature and which for which God
gives the grace by His antecedent will. Arnauld grants that if God
gives efficacious graces by particular volitions, then there are none
that fail to have the proximate effect, which God intends they have by
His absolute will. But they may well fail to have remote effects to
which they tend by their nature and which God wills only by His
antecedent will. For example, if an efficacious grace has the effect
that a sinner repents, only to lapse back into sin, then the grace had
the proximate effect God intended it to have by His absolute will,
even though it failed to have all the effect to which it tended by its
nature and which God willed by His antecedent will. In this way, he
disposes of Malebranche’s three a posteriori arguments.

Arnauld ends Book II with a consideration of what he takes to be
Malebranche’s master argument. It is a fourth a posteriori
argument. He quotes from the Troisième
Eclaircissement: “There is no other way than [by saying
that God does not act by particular volitions] to reconcile the
proposition in Holy Scripture, ‘God wants to save all
men,’ with this proposition, ‘Not all men are
saved’” (OA, 39:637). Arnauld rejects this
argument mainly because, like the other three a posteriori ones, it
assumes that “God wills, by a true volition, the salvation of
all men, and the conversion of sinners” (OA,
39:641).

Arnauld agreed with Malebranche that God could have brought it about
that all men are saved and did not do so. But he favored an
Augustinian view that “all men” in this context means
“all sorts of men,” that is, men of all races,
occupations, etc. He did not entirely reject the Thomistic view that
God’s will for the salvation of all men is God’s
“antecedent will” rather than His “consequent
will,” that is, God’s will other things being equal rather
than God’s will all things considered. Arnauld points out that
Malebranche’s position might be thought to be a version of the
Thomistic one, but adds that according to St. Thomas God’s
antecedent will is a wish rather than an absolute volition (une
velleité plutôt qu’une volonté absolue)
(Réflexions, OA, 39:198, cf.
 39:576).[24]
 Arnauld firmly rejects any notion that God wills the sanctification
and salvation of each and every person in a strong sense of
“will” such that His will would be carried out unless
there were something to prevent it, or, in Malebranche’s words,
to hold it in
 check.[25]
4.4 Arnauld’s Criticism of Malebranche’s Occasionalism

Arnauld opened a different line of attack in his Dissertation sur
les miracles le l’ancien loi. This new attack is directed
against the occasionalism which is assumed in Malebranche’s
account of the wisdom of God’s ways of creating. In a foreword
to the Dissertation, Arnauld says that he had completed his
treatment of the first two books of the Reflexions, and was
beginning work on the third, when he received the fourth edition of
the
 Treatise:[26]

I had finished two books examining the new system of nature and grace,
and there remained only one further book to complete the task, when I
received from Rotterdam a new edition of the Treatise,
published that year, 1684, with several additions. The main one was a
third Eclaircissement, with the title: The frequent
miracles of the Old Law do not at all indicate that God often acts by
particular volitions. And the only reason which the author of the
system gives is that the miracles were done by the ministry of the
angels, who were their occasional causes.


Arnauld interrupted his work on the Reflexions to write the
Dissertation, which was published in 1685 together with the
first chapter of Book Three of the Reflexions, a chapter
dealing with Malebranche’s position that Jesus Christ, in his
human nature, is the occasional cause of the distribution of grace.
Arnauld raises theological objections to both positions, but also
attacks the underlying occasionalism. The Dissertation
touched off a rapid series of replies and ounter-replies in 1685. The
first volume of Reflexions was published later in 1685, and
the second and third volumes in 1686. 

Arnauld begins his attack by citing the opening sentence of the
Dernier Eclaircissement, in which Malebranche says that he
expects his readers to agree with the principle that “God causes
(fait) everything, and hence He communicates His power to
creatures only by establishing them as occasional
causes…” (OM, 5, 197). Arnauld adds that Malebranche
“does not understand ‘God causes everything’ as
ordinary philosophers do, who say that the creature does not act at
all unless God acts with it, which they call ‘concurrence’
… But what he means when he says that God causes everything is
that He causes everything that one imagines the creature causes, and
that the creature causes nothing at all.” It is not difficult,
Arnauld says, to show that the first conjunct, so understood, is
false. For “it destroys the nature of intelligent beings, who
would not be free if they did not, as real causes, form in themselves
the determination of their will toward particular
goods”. (As Arnauld points out, the italicized words are
Malebranche’s.) The second conjunct of the principle is
dispatched in a similar way: “For intelligent beings receive
from God their power to form the determination of their will toward
particular goods. But it is not only as occasional causes but as real
causes that they form in themselves that determination of their
will” (OA, 5, 198).

Having established to his satisfaction that the principle “taken
generally” is false, Arnauld goes on to say that there is no
reason to deny that God has given angels power to move bodies and that
they are real, not mere occasional, causes of the miraculous events
attributed to them. Again, “it is not so easy to
demonstrate” that our soul does not have the real power to move
the parts of the body to which it is united.

In the exchange of publications that grew out of the
Dissertation, Arnauld objects in a similar way to
Malebranche’s use of occasionalism to explain “how grace
acts in us without wounding [liberty]” (OM, 5, 8). In his
explanation, Malebranche distinguishes the effect of grace, which is
from God and is not free, from the recipient’s free response,
which is from the recipient and not from God. Arnauld says that
Malebranche would have done well to heed Aquinas’s advice that
one should not distinguish “between what is from grace and what
is from free will, as if the same thing could not be from both”
(OA, 39, 114).

Both Malebranche and Arnauld continued to write about divine causality
and human freedom in their later work. Arnauld’s late work on
the topic is describe in Section 6 below. Malebranche’s last
effort on the topic was his Reflexions sur la Premotion
Physique, published in 1715, the year of his death.
5. Arnauld and Leibniz

On February 11, 1686, while the controversy between Arnauld and
Malebranche was at a peak of intensity, Leibniz wrote to Landgrave
Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels, asking that the Landgrave send Arnauld a
summary of “a short discourse” on “questions of
grace, the concourse of God and creatures, the nature of miracles, the
cause of sin and the origin of evil, the immortality of the soul,
ideas, etc.” (The Leibniz-Arnauld Correspondence,
Die Philosophischen Schriften von Leibniz, herausgegeben von K. I.
Gerhardt, Vol. 2, hereinafter LA, 11). The ensuing
correspondence occurred at a crucial point in the development of
Leibniz’s philosophy. The Discourse on Metaphysics, the
final version of the short discourse, marks the beginning of
Leibniz’s mature metaphysics, and it shows the influence of the
correspondence with Arnauld.

Leibniz had corresponded with Arnauld some fifteen years earlier, in
connection with Leibniz’s efforts to reunite the Christian
churches. These efforts took a new turn in March, 1672, when Leibniz,
then just 25 years old, left Mainz for Paris on a secret political
mission for his patron, Baron Johann Christian von Boineburg, who was
in turn minister to Johann Philipp von Schönborn, the Elector of
Mainz. Both men were converts from Lutheranism to Catholicism.
Leibniz’s diplomatic mission was a failure, but he had other
reasons for wanting to visit Paris. He was eager to enter into the
brilliant intellectual life of the French capital, and he stayed
there, with a brief sojourn in England, until 1676, making the
acquaintance of a number of leading intellectuals. During this time,
he undertook for the first time the serious study of mathematics. But
he also continued to work toward a philosophical position that he
hoped would help reunify the churches.

Before coming to Paris, he had discussed the project of reunifying the
churches with his patron Boineburg, and had corresponded with Arnauld,
in 1671, about the Eucharist, proposing an account of the real
presence that he thought would be acceptable to both Lutherans and
Catholics. But it was Leibniz’s interest in theodicy, and
related problems about justification, that flourished in Paris. There,
in 1673, he composed Confessio Philosophi, a dialogue in
Latin between a theologian and a philosopher that is sometimes
referred to as “his first theodicy.” Thirty-seven years
later in the Theodicy, Leibniz says, “While I was in
France, I communicated to M. Arnauld a dialogue I had written in Latin
on the cause of evil and the justice of God. This was not only before
his disputes with R. P. Malebranche, but even before the book on
The Search after Truth had appeared. The principle that I
here maintain, that sin was permitted because it was involved in the
best plan for the universe, was already employed there, and M. Arnauld
did not seem hostile to it” (Theodicy, #211).

Soon after Leibniz’s arrival in Paris, both Boineborg and von
Schönborn died, and Leibniz turned for support to another
important German noble and convert from Lutheranism to Catholicism,
Johann Friedrich von Braunschweig-Lüneberg (Hannover). On 26
March 1673, Leibniz wrote as follows to Johann Friedrich:

The famous Arnauld is a man of the most profound and wide-ranging
thought that a true philosopher can have; his aim is not only to
illuminate hearts with the clarity of religion, but, further, to
revive the flame of reason, eclipsed by human passions; not only to
convert heretics, but, further, those who are today in the greatest
heresy—the atheists and libertines; not only to vanquish his
opponents, but, further, to improve those of his persuasion. His
thoughts, then, come to seeking how, so far as it is possible, a
reform of abuses, frankly wide-spread among dissidents, would overcome
the cause of the division. In this design, on several points of
importance, he has made the first step and, as a prudent man, he goes
by degrees. I am distressed that we have lost von Boineburg just when
I have struck up an acquaintance with Arnauld; for I had hoped to
bring these two minds, so similar in their honest soundness, on the
road to a closer agreement, The Church, as well as the Fatherland, has
sustained a loss with this man (Quoted in Sleigh 1990, 15–16).


There is no record of any response by Arnauld to the Confessio
Philosophi, but when Leibniz returned to the problems of
theodicy, in 1686, he once again sought Arnauld’s cooperation by
sending Arnauld the outline of the Discourse on Metaphysics
that was mentioned above. The outline sent to Arnauld was no more than
a list of the propositions that were to appear as the titles of the
thirty-seven sections of the Discourse; the entire
correspondence was carried out through the intermediary of
Hessen-Rheinfels; and the copies of letters received by the two major
correspondents were sometimes defective. These facts, together with
the extreme subtlety of the philosophical contents of the letters,
have made interpretation of the correspondence very difficult.

Proposition 8 in Leibniz’s outline is: “In order to
distinguish the actions of God from those of creatures, it is
explained wherein consists the notion of an individual
substance” (LA,8). The notion of a substance is, for
Leibniz, the notion of a thing that acts. To explain the notion of a
created individual substance, therefore, he has to explain the notion
of a created agent, which requires that he distinguish correctly
between the actions of creatures and the actions of God. Part of
Leibniz’s account of the notion of an individual substance is
given in Proposition 13: “The individual notion of each person
includes once and for all everything that will ever happen to
him,” so that “one sees in [that notion] a priori
proofs of the truth of each event, that is, why one [event] has
occurred rather than another” (LA, 8). The debate
between Arnauld and Leibniz begins here. Proposition 13, Arnauld said
in his first letter to Leibniz, implies that “once God decided
to create Adam, everything that has happened since and will ever
happen to the human race was and is obliged to happen with a more than
fatal necessity” (LA, 27). For example, given
proposition 13, if Adam exists, then necessarily Adam is father of
Cain and Abel as sons, grandfather of their children,
great-grandfather of their children, etc., and everything that will
ever happen to all of them is already determined.

After a complicated three-way exchange of letters, Arnauld withdrew
his complaint in a letter dated September 28, 1686. At the outset,
Arnauld assumed that according to Leibniz whatever is contained in the
individual notion of a person is contained there as a necessary
property of the person. But in response to Arnauld, Leibniz says that
he does not “ask for more of a connection here” than that
which obtains between an individual substance and its “external
denominations” (LA, p. 56). Given this understanding of
the way that individual notion of a person contains everything that
will ever happen to him, Arnauld was prepared to concede that
Leibniz’s position did not involve fatalism (LA,
63–64).

Arnauld adds that he continues to have difficulty with Leibniz’s
account of “the possibility of things” and his conception
of God as choosing the actual world out of an infinity of possible
worlds, a point on which Leibniz agreed with Malebranche. But Arnauld
says he does not want to go into that difficulty. Instead, he asks
Leibniz to clarify his “hypothesis of concomitance or agreement
between substances,” and his statement that if a material thing
is not merely an appearance, like a rainbow, or an accidental
aggregation of parts, like a pile of stones, it must have a
“substantial form.” Leibniz had mentioned both of these
points in his immediately preceding letter (LA, 64–66,
58). According to the hypothesis of concomitance no created substance
ever acts upon any other created substance. But every later state of
any given created substance is caused by an earlier state of the same
substance, and the histories of the individuals are coordinated by God
so that they fit together into the history of the actual world.
Leibniz also says that one substance, x, may
“express” another substance, y, more distinctly
than y expresses x, and in that case, one may say
that x causes changes to occur in y. He uses this
position to explain the relation of mind and body. Arnauld asked him
to explain his view further by applying it to the example of a man who
feels pain when his arm is wounded, and the example of a man wants to
take off his hat and raises his arm. Arnauld also raises seven
objections to Leibniz’s claims about substantial forms
(LA, 66–67) and defends the Cartesian view that
extension is the real nature of matter, which he takes to imply that
bodies have only varying degrees of “improper unity”
(LA, 88).

Leibniz provided the further clarification Arnauld requested in
several long letters, which drew two replies from Arnauld. Arnauld
continued to find Leibniz’s position unclear. “I have no
clear notion,” says Arnauld, “of what you mean by the word
‘expression’, when you say that our soul expresses more
distinctly (all other things being equal) what pertains to its body,
since it is an expression even of the whole universe in a certain
sense” (LA, 105). He takes Leibniz’s views about
substantial forms to be a strange and unsuccessful attempt “to
ascribe true unity to bodies [in particular the bodies of animals]
which would not otherwise have it” (LA, 107).

Arnauld’s last letter to Leibniz is dated August 28, 1687.
Leibniz tried to get Arnauld to continue the discussion, but Arnauld
was fully occupied with other projects. On August 31, 1687, Arnauld
wrote to Hessen-Rheinfels, saying, “It would be preferable if
[Leibniz] gave up, at least for a time, this sort of speculation, and
applied himself to the greatest business he can have, the choice of
the true religion… a decision that is of such importance for
his salvation” (LA, 110).

Evidently Arnauld had less interest in Leibniz’s philosophy than
Malebranche’s, and less patience with it. This is not
surprising, given that Arnauld considered his work in philosophy
subordinate to his work as a theologian. The fact that Malebranche was
a Catholic made his philosophically motivated departures from the
tradition all the more dangerous in Arnauld’s eyes. It also gave
Arnauld some hope that he could lever Malebranche out of his position
by pointing out its heterodox implications. Leibniz did not pose a
similar danger, nor were there grounds for a similar hope in his
regard, unless, of course, he heeded Arnauld’s advice and
converted to Catholicism.
6. Arnauld’s Compatibilism

Throughout his enormously active life as a philosopher and theologian,
Arnauld was above all concerned to defend the doctrine that human
beings, after the fall of Adam, can perform meritorious actions, but
only if the actions are the result of a supernatural grâce
efficace par elle-même. Arnauld claimed to find this
doctrine in the writings of Augustine; he defended Jansen’s
version of the doctrine against the charge of heresy, even though
Jansen’s version was significantly different from that espoused
by Arnauld himself; and he attributed the doctrine to Aquinas. But
Arnauld, like Augustine, Aquinas, and Jansen, also held that actions
are meritorious only if they are free. For this reason,
Arnauld is sometimes said to be a “compatibilist.” For
example, Robert Sleigh says, “It is worth noting that Leibniz
and Arnauld both ascribed compatibilism to St. Thomas and that both
accepted compatibilism as well” (Sleigh 1990, 29).

There is, however, a case to be made that the position Arnauld
defended and attributed to St. Thomas is in fact quite different from
what is nowadays referred to as “compatibilism.” The
position is connected with Arnauld’s treatment of free will
during the last decade of his life, at the time when he was wrestling
with Malebranche’s theory of nature and grace. At that time,
Arnauld adopted the position that the human will is free when and only
when it is a “potestas ou facultas ad
opposita.” But first, it is necessary to provide some
background for the notion of grâce efficace par
elle-même.
6.1 The Congregationes de Auxiliis and seventeenth-century controversy about grace

The point of departure for the disputes about grace and free will in
seventeenth-century Europe was the inconclusive ending of the
Congregationes de Auxiliis Divinae
 Gratiae.[27]
 These were ad hoc committees of Cardinals convoked to
resolve a dispute between the Jesuits and Dominicans about grace,
predestination, and free will. The dispute was concerned with a work
by the Jesuit Luis de Molina, whose lengthy title indicates the scope
and complexity of the dispute: Concordia Liberi Arbitrii
cum Gratia Donis, Divina Praescientia, Providentia, Praedestinatione
et Reprobatione ad Nonnullos Primae Partis Divi Thomae Articulos
(The Agreement of Free will with the Gift of Grace, Divine
Foreknowledge, Providence, Predestination and Reprobation, according
to several articles in the First Part of St. Thomas). The work
was published in 1588 and was immediately attacked by the Dominican
school of Salamanca, led by Domingo Bañez. The
Congregationes were convoked by Pope Clement VIII with the
aim of resolving what had become a widespread struggle between the two
orders. His hope was frustrated; the meetings began on January 2, 1598
and were terminated on August 28, 1607 (the feast day of St.
Augustine!) by Pope Paul V, who declared that neither side was
heretical and that both sides had merit.

A central question at the meetings of the Congregationes had
to do with the relation of supernatural grace to meritorious, free
acts of will. It was assumed on both sides that a human being cannot
perform a meritorious act of will without supernatural assistance from
God, that God sometimes gives this assistance, and that it is
sometimes part of God’s providential plan that the recipient
freely cooperate and thus perform the act in question. Meritorious
acts of will include, among others, the decision to pray, to seek
forgiveness for past sins, and to perform a good action for the love
of God. It was assumed by both Jesuits and Dominicans that God’s
providential plan is infallibly realized. Hence both sides agreed that
supernatural grace is, in at least some cases, infallibly
efficacious (Vansteenberghe 1928, #2140). The issue was
whether the supernatural grace in question is efficacious by
itself, in other words, intrinsically efficacious, or
whether it is efficacious only by virtue of the independent, divinely
foreknown cooperation of the one who receives the grace
(Vansteenberghe 1928, #2154–65). Several sorts of supernatural
grace were distinguished. For our purposes, the most important
distinctions are (a) between habitual grace (especially the
theological virtues of faith, hope, and charity) and actual grace; (b)
between external actual grace (e.g., hearing a good sermon) and
internal actual grace (grace consisting in internal, mental acts); and
(c) between internal actual grace of the intellect and internal actual
grace of the will. The question was whether the actual grace of the
will that infallibly produces a meritorious act of will is efficacious
by itself, or whether instead its efficaciousness is explained in part
by God’s knowledge that the recipient would cooperate with the
grace.
6.2 Bañez, Jansen, and Arnauld on the nature of efficacious actual grace of the will

Jansen and Arnauld, like Bañez, defended the position that
actual grace of the will is sometimes intrinsically
 efficacious.[28]
 But they disagreed about the nature of such grace. According to
Bañez, efficacious grace is the supernatural counterpart of
“physical premotion.” The elusive notion of physical
premotion is part of a general account of God’s causation of the
actions of creatures. According to this account, God is a cause of a
creature’s action by bringing about in the creature a
“premotion” that results in the creature’s carrying
out the action in question. For Bañez, then, the actual grace
in question is a sort of supernatural beginning of volition that is
produced in the human being by God and that infallibly results in a
meritorious act of will. Jansen rejected this notion, arguing that it
is an obscure hypothesis that explains nothing. He held that
efficacious grace is, instead, a feeling of love, which he called a
“delectatio victrix (victorious pleasure)” and
which infallibly leads to a meritorious act.

Arnauld accepted neither of those views. In a work published in 1656,
he considers two positions on the nature of efficacious grace, in so
far as it is the principle of good will: “Some say that such
grace consists in the mercy of God and in an inherent form [in the
creature],” while others say that it consists “only in the
mercy of God, which brings about (operatur) the interior
movement of the mind.” Arnauld says “I am not far”
from the second position, which he attributes to “Bradwardine,
Estius, Tiphanius, and many other [Thomists]” (Dissertatio
theologica quadripartita, OA, 20:237).

When Arnauld returned to questions about efficacious grace and free
will toward the end of his life, he was more categorical: “The
true opinion of St. Augustine, St. Bernard, and St. Thomas concerning
actual grace, is that of Estius, who posits nothing created by God in
the will in between the will of God, which he calls uncreated grace,
and the free movement of the human will which the uncreated grace
produces in the human will.” Jansen was “surely
mistaken,” Arnauld adds, when he defined actual grace as a
non-deliberate “victorious pleasure” (Letter to du Vaucel,
8 May 1693, OA,
 3:636).[29]
 In a short treatise on human freedom written almost a decade earlier,
Arnauld illustrates his criticism of Jansen (without mentioning him by
name) with an example: “Suppose that a man who is not very
generous is approached by a beggar who asks him for alms. He
deliberates, proposes to himself the commandment of Christ, and gives
alms for the sake of God” (De la liberté de
l’homme, OA, 10:620). Hereinafter
Liberté). Jansen assumes that there is a
non-deliberate act of victorious pleasure in between the man’s
deliberation and his decision to give alms for the sake of God, and
that this non-deliberate pleasure is the actual grace that enables him
to act in a meritorious way. Arnauld rejects this position and instead
identifies the efficacious grace with God’s merciful will that
the man arrive at the deliberate decision to give alms for the sake of
God.

Yet Arnauld also assumed that the man’s decision, like any
meritorious act of will, was free. Arnauld’s basic position on
the compatibility of the intrinsic efficacy of grace with the freedom
of the volitions produced by the grace, is that we know from Scripture
and Tradition, supported by philosophical reflection on God’s
omnipotence (a) that the grace of Christ is intrinsically efficacious;
and we know “from our own experience” (b) that our
volitions of the relevant kind are free. Hence we know that (a) and
(b) are consistent, even though we have “great difficulty”
in seeing how they fit together (OA, 10:436).
6.3 The limits of Arnauld’s compatibilism

Arnauld was, then, a compatibilist of sorts. The compatibilism he
espoused, and attributed to St. Thomas, however, was limited, and
differs in a number ways from the sort of position philosophers now
label “compatibilism.”

1. Arnauld was not a determinist, nor did he attribute determinism to
St. Thomas. Arnauld cites Aquinas (Summa Theologicae I, 19,
3) as an authority in favor of his own view that God’s will with
regard to creatures are not necessary (OA, 39:598).

2. Arnauld held that freedom of human volitions is
incompatible with the determination of the choices by laws of
nature together with temporally antecedent events. Thus he responds to
Malebranche’s statement that the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans some seventy years after the death of Jesus was “a
necessary outcome of the laws of nature,” by saying, “It
is clear … that a long series of diverse events, that depended
on an infinity of free movements of the wills of men, could have been,
and indeed were, regulated by the providence of Him who has an
almighty power to move the hearts of men, and to direct them as He
pleases … But it cannot be said that it was a necessary
consequence of the laws of nature without degrading human beings,
making them act like lower animals, and depriving them of their
liberty, a position that has been declared anathema by the
Council of Trent” (OA, 39:301). He repeats the
criticism a few pages later: “As I have shown above, to hold
that events that depended on an infinity of free volitions of human
beings were a necessary consequence of laws of nature is to
deprive human beings of their freedom, after the example of
Wycliffe” (OA,
 39:316).[30]

3. According to the position Arnauld attributes to Aquinas, the
sinful choices of human beings are not determined by any
cause exterior to the sinner. Arnauld agreed with Aquinas that God is
the sole exterior cause of the volitions of a human being, that is,
the only efficient cause of volitions outside the human being himself
or herself, but God never causes a person to sin. Arnauld cites
Summa Theologiae, I-IIae, 9, 6, ad 3, in which Aquinas
answers the objection that God cannot be the sole exterior cause of
sinful choices. Aquinas says, “God, as the universal mover,
moves the will of man to the universal object of the will, which is
the good. And without this universal movement man cannot will
anything; but man through reason determines himself to will this or
that, whether it be a true or only an apparent good. Nevertheless God
sometimes moves some men especially to will something determinate that
is good (interdum movet Deus specialiter aliquos ad aliquid
determinatè volendum quod est bonum), as in those He moves
by grace” (Vera S. Thomae de gratia sufficiente et efficaci
doctrina dilucide explanata, OA,
 20:63).[31]
 Arnauld’s purpose in citing this text is to show that,
according to Aquinas, when one sins, one is not moved by
 grace.[32]
 But the text, together with the premise that there is no exterior
cause of human volition other than God, implies that sinful choices
are not determined by any cause outside the sinner.
6.4 Arnauld’s late position on the nature of free will

In several letters toward the end of his life, Arnauld recommends a
“little Latin text” on human freedom that he wrote at the
time he was wrestling with Malebranche’s theory of nature and
grace, saying that it is particularly helpful in connection with the
problem of reconciling intrinsically efficacious grace with freedom of
 will.[33]
 The core of Arnauld’s new theory is that the human soul has
freedom of will with respect to a true or apparent good when it has
the power to will that good and the power not to will it. In such
cases, the soul “determines itself” to will or not will
the good in question. The human soul is said to have this power with
respect to any particular good it apprehends, as long as the
particular good does not encompass all the good toward which the will
tends. Arnauld cites I-IIae, 13, 6 as part of the Thomistic origin of
his theory:

Man does not choose of necessity. And this is because that which is
possible not to be, is not of necessity…. For man can will and
not will, act and not act; again, he can will this or that, and do
this or that. The reason of this is seated in the very power of the
reason. For the will can tend to whatever the reason can apprehend as
good. Now the reason can apprehend as good, not only this, viz.
“to will” or “to act,” but also this, viz.
“not to will” or “not to act.” Again, in all
particular goods, the reason can consider an aspect of some good, and
the lack of some good, which has the aspect of evil: and in this
respect, it can apprehend any single one of such goods as to be chosen
or to be avoided. The perfect good alone, which is happiness, cannot
be apprehended by the reason as an evil, or as lacking in any way.
Consequently man wills happiness of necessity, nor can he will not to
be happy, or to be unhappy… Therefore man chooses not of
necessity, but freely. (cited at OA, 10:630–31)


Arnauld follows Aquinas in saying that the will is not free with
regard to two objects, first, happiness, apprehended as the ultimate
object of volition, and, second, God, seen face to face by the blessed
in heaven. In these two cases, one wills (or loves) the object with
“necessity of nature,” and hence not freely. In all other
cases, the will is free, and when one wills, one does so
 freely.[34]
 Arnauld provides a compact formula for this theory: “The best
and shortest notion one can have of free will is to say with St.
Thomas that it is potestas ou facultas ad opposita”
(Letter to Bossuet, juillet 1693, OA,
 3:662).[35]
6.5 The advantages Arnauld claims for his new theory over Jansen’s theory

Arnauld claims a number of advantages for his theory of free will over
that of Jansen. In particular, he claims that, when combined with the
account of the nature of grace that he found in Estius, it makes it
easier to reconcile the intrinsic efficacy of grace with freedom.
“In following [Estius’s opinion regarding efficacious
grace], it is much easier to explain the efficacy of the grace, and to
reconcile it with freedom, especially when we define free will,
following St. Thomas, as a facultas ad opposita”
(Letter to Bossuet, juillet 1694, OA, 3:664).

Explaining the efficacy of grace is easier on Estius’s theory
than on the competing theories, because it is simpler. On the
competing theories, which include Jansen’s, the efficacy of
actual grace of the will depends on a connection of some sort, within
the mind of a creature, between a created grace, like Jansen’s
“victorious pleasure,” and a meritorious choice.
Estius’s theory is simpler: The efficacy of actual grace is a
direct consequence of the general principle that God’s absolute
will is infallibly realized.

But how does Estius’s theory, combined with the account of free
will that Arnauld derived from St. Thomas, help to reconcile the
efficacy of grace with free will? According to Jansen, freedom of will
is the same as spontaneity, and so every act of will is essentially
free. Jansen qualifies that position by adding that during life here
on earth, human beings have another kind of freedom: “The
freedom of man the pilgrim is not only exempt from constraint, but
even from immutable voluntary necessity (necessitatis
immutabilis voluntariae), that it, this freedom is indifferent
between doing good and doing evil, between acting and not
acting” (Quoted by Arnauld in Seconde Apologie,
OA, 17:242). When he says that the will is indifferent as
between doing good and doing evil, and between acting or not acting,
during this life here below, Jansen means that during life on Earth,
the will remains mutable or “flexible” between doing good
and doing evil, and again, willing or not willing any particular
action or end. In other words, the will is not confirmed in good or
evil during this life in such a way that it could not fall away from
willing the good or be converted from willing what is evil, and again
in such a way that it could not cease willing what it does will or
begin willing what it does not will.

Now on theories like those of Jansen and Bañez, the intrinsic
efficacy of grace involves the determination of a person’s
volition by an antecedent state of his or her mind, and this seems to
conflict with the proposition that the volition is free. On
Estius’s view, on the other hand, a person’s meritorious
volition is determined not by an antecedent state of his or her mind,
but rather by the will of God. Is this an improvement, with respect to
explaining the compatibility of efficacious grace with free will?
Arnauld says it is, “especially when we define free will,
following St. Thomas, as a facultas ad opposita.”

Here Arnauld appeals to the Thomistic principle that when God causes a
creature to act, He always causes the creature to act in accordance
with its nature. Paraphrasing Aquinas (Summa Theologiae, I,
82, 1, ad 3), Arnauld says,

When God works our volition in us, He brings it about that we will in
conformity with our nature, that is by determining ourselves to what
we are not determined by nature. Thus no matter with what efficacy the
mind is moved by God, it acts as master of its very own action, and it
wills because it wills, determining itself to all other things by its
volition to be happy, and hence it acts freely.
(Liberté, OA,
 10:616).[36]


Arnauld’s line of thought seems to be as follows: Human beings
are attracted to limited goods only as means to the unlimited good of
happiness. Therefore, whenever a human being is attracted to a limited
good, he or she can attend to its goodness and will it, or attend to
some way in which it falls short of the unlimited good and refrain
from willing it. Which of these options is realized is determined by
the human being, or more precisely, the human being’s mind;
thus, in willing or not willing any limited good, the human mind is
self-determining and free. All this is part of the nature of the human
mind. So if God moves the human mind to will a limited good, He moves
it to will in a self-determining and free way.

If pressed for more details about how God by His merciful will
(uncreated grace) moves a human being to will a particular good, while
yet leaving it up to the human being whether he or she wills that
good, Arnauld would surely say that we human beings cannot understand
God’s causality well enough to supply such details. Our
inability to understand God’s causality with regard to the
created world is a common theme in Arnauld. It is expressed forcefully
in his first contribution to the Leibniz-Arnauld exchange, written in
1686, not long after Liberté. Arnauld says that
although we are certain that God, “by a single and very simple
act, which is His essence,” knows all things, including things
that might not have been, and wills things that He might not have
willed by His will, which is also His essence, nevertheless we cannot
understand how God does these things, because “as far
as we are concerned (à notre égard) God dwells
in inaccessible light” (LA, p.
 31–32).[37]

Before presenting the above theory of free will in
Liberté, Arnauld prepares the ground by presenting two
examples in which a person’s volition occurs
“infallibly” and yet freely, in the sense of freedom
“that is necessary and sufficient for merit or demerit”
(Liberté, OA, 10:620). The examples are preceded by
the statement, “However infallible be the determination by which
the will is determined with the attention of reason, to objects to
which it is not naturally determined, freedom suffers no damage
(préjudice); because the infallible determination does
not prevent the soul from willing because it wills; and hence it is
master of its action” (Liberté, OA,
10:615–16). The first example is that of a prince who is in love
with a woman and has “a vehement passion for the pleasures of
the flesh.” If the woman offers herself to the prince, “he
will infallibly satisfy his passion.” The second example is that
of a cruel and revengeful king, who has been offended by one of his
subjects and has the subject in his power: “Infallibly he will
destroy
 him.”[38]
 Everyone who is not “entirely barbarian,” says Arnauld,
will agree that the prince and the king have acted demeritoriously and
deserve punishment. Thus all such people agree that the king and the
prince acted in a relevantly free way.

One might take these passages to suggest that the freedom necessary
and sufficient for merit and demerit is compatible with determination
of the will by psychological causes. But this misses Arnauld’s
point, and is an unlikely interpretation. To begin with, Arnauld
surely realized that neither the lascivious prince nor the cruel
tyrant infallibly act in the ways described, in any strict
sense of the term. People do sometimes act out of character. Arnauld
seems to think of infallibility, like its cousin, certainty, as a
matter of degree. This is indicated by the phrase, “However
infallible be the determination by which the will is determined with
the attention of reason …” The certainty that the cruel
king and the lascivious prince will act in the ways indicated is so
high that one would say, in a loose and popular sense of the word,
that infallibly the king will revenge himself and the prince
satisfy his passion.

Arnauld’s point is not that the actions of the prince and the
king are causally determined by psychological states antecedent to
their volitions. In both cases he says that the action is free because
the person could have willed not to perform the action, or again,
because the person’s will was a potestas ad opposita.
Arnauld’s point is that our certainty that the prince and the
king will act in the ways described does not lessen our certainty that
they will act freely. The same, he says, is true of our certainty that
a meritorious act will be carried out as a result of efficacious
grace, that is, as a result of God’s merciful will moving a
person to that act. Arnauld claims that our certainty about the
freedom of the act produced by efficacious grace, like our certainty
about the freedom of the actions of the prince and the kind, is well
grounded because in all of these cases, the person had the power to
refrain from the act in question; in all of these cases, the
person’s will is a facultas ad opposita.

There is, of course, an important difference between examples like
those of the prince and the king, and example of an action to which
one is moved by efficacious grace. In examples of the former sort, the
action occurs only with very great, but not absolute, certainty,
whereas in the case of efficacious grace, the action follows with
absolute certainty upon God’s intention that it take place. This
difference may seem to damage Arnauld’s case: One can plausibly
say that it was within the power of the prince, for example, not to
will to satisfy his lust, precisely because it was not absolutely
certain that, in the given circumstances, he would do so. But no
similar claim can be made about the person whom God moves, by
efficacious grace, to elicit a meritorious volition. Yet Arnauld
insists that in the latter case also, it is within the power of the
person not to elicit the volition. It is at this point that
Arnauld’s views about the mysteriousness of divine causality
come into play. Our inability to understand how God moves a person to
a meritorious volition, while leaving it within the person’s
power not to elicit the volition, thus moving the person to will in a
self-determining way, is not, in Arnauld’s view, surprising, for
we are unable, in general, to understand how God produces effects
outside of Himself.

Arnauld’s work between 1682 and 1694 is a testament to his
intellectual vitality. It is remarkable that he was hard at work,
until his death at the age of 82, on a set of connected controversies
and issues, both philosophical and theological, having to do with
creation, grace, and free will. Though he did not construct a
philosophical system, he stands out in a century of geniuses for the
vigorous and penetrating way in which he dealt with many of the
important philosophers and philosophical problems of the time.