Arcesilaus (316/5-241/0 BCE) was a member and later leader
(‘scholarch’) of Plato's Academy. He initiated the skeptical
phase of the Platonic school (‘Academic skepticism’) and was an
influential critic of Stoic epistemology.


The ancient evidence about Arcesilaus' philosophy is difficult to
evaluate and, in some respects, inconsistent. As a result, scholars
interpret his skepticism in several ways. Some see his philosophical
activity as entirely negative or destructive of all philosophical
views. Others regard him as endorsing the position that nothing can be
known on the basis of philosophical arguments he is committed to. This
would make his skepticism similar to Descartes' at the start of the
Meditations, where he doubts everything he previously thought
he knew. Others take him to have held no positive views on any
philosophical topic, including the possibility of knowledge. On this
view, his skepticism is very similar to the Pyrrhonian skepticism
advocated by Sextus Empiricus: the skeptic is someone who refuses to
accept any philosophical theory or proposition as rationally warranted,
and insists that further examination is always required.
 
1. Life and work


After an early education in geometry and astronomy in his native
Pitanê (in Aeolis, the northwest Aegean coast of modern Turkey),
Arcesilaus escaped to Athens against his guardian's wishes. There he
is said to have studied rhetoric in association with Theophrastus
(Aristotle's successor) until c. 295-290 BCE, when he abandoned it to
study philosophy in Plato's Academy with Crantor (d. 276/5) and its
leaders Polemo (d. 270/69) and Crates (d.268/7). He became the
scholarch after Crates' death, and led the school for more than 25
years until his own death in 241/0 BCE.


Like Socrates, his philosophical model, and Carneades, who carried
forward his skepticism in the 2nd c. BCE, Arcesilaus did
not write any philosophical works. His arguments were initially
preserved by his students — including Pythodorus, who wrote up
some of them, and Lakydes, his successor as scholarch — and in
the work of his opponents, most notably, the Stoic Chrysippus, whose
reformulation of Stoicism was prompted by Arcesilaus' criticisms of
the views of the first generation of Stoics. But Arcesilaus' arguments
were later overlaid by Carneadean elaborations and subsumed into the
general Academic and anti-Academic traditions; and it is only through
those later traditions that we know about them. Our knowledge of his
work depends on scraps from the biographical tradition (preserved in
Diogenes Laertius and Philodemus) and brief general reports from later
skeptical writers — Cicero and Sextus Empiricus and Plutarch
— and their opponents — Antiochus and Numenius (preserved
in Cicero and Eusebius respectively). And since these offer
incompatible interpretations of Arcesilaus' philosophical position
reflecting the writers' distinctive views about later developments in
the skeptical Academy, the precise nature of his skepticism remains
controversial.
2. Skepticism: method or doctrine


The central question presented by the inconsistent evidence for
Arcesilaus' skepticism is how to reconcile his dialectical method with
the ‘doctrines’ he is reported to have accepted — viz.,
that nothing can be known (akatalêpsia) and that one
should suspend assent universally (universal epochê),
i.e., form no beliefs. Our sources agree that Arcesilaus' dialectical
method constituted the core of his philosophical activity (see e.g.,
Diogenes Laertius 4.28). This method presents two basic difficulties
for any attempt to reconcile it with these doctrines.


First, the dialectical method meant that rather than arguing in favor
of any doctrine or set of doctrines, Arcesilaus restricted himself to
arguing against the views proposed by his opponents or
interlocutors. At first sight, this method may not look incompatible
with affirming akatalêpsia and
universal epochê since the repeated result of practicing
it was that the views argued against did not stand up to criticism.
These repeated failures could suggest that in fact nothing can be
known and that one should form no beliefs at all. But our sources
confirm that Arcesilaus took his method to entail that he should not
reveal his own view on the matter in question in any case, if he had
one, including, for instance, the view that the claim argued against
is false (see e.g., Cicero De oratore 3.67). It is clear that
he went to some lengths not to make positive affirmations of any sort
in his own right in his arguments (see Diogenes Laertius 4.36,
Philodemus Index Academicorum 20.1-4, cf. 18.40-19.9).


We can see why Arcesilaus' dialectical method may have had these
implications by looking at the model he claimed to be following:
Socrates' practice in the Socratic dialogues of Plato (see Cicero,
Academica 1.44-5, De oratore 3.67, De
finibus 2.2, On the Nature of the Gods 1.11). In those
dialogues, Socrates challenges the pretensions of his interlocutors to
knowledge by showing, through premises they accept, that they are
committed to inconsistent beliefs. To achieve this result, it is
crucial that the arguments — the premises, the inferences, and
the conclusions — depend entirely on the beliefs of the
interlocutors. If they do, the result of a successful Socratic
encounter will be that the interlocutor is at a loss: the
interlocutors now recognize that they have inconsistent beliefs, since
they have both their initial reasons for the thesis or knowledge-claim
they made and their newly-discerned reasons against it. If they also
hold some generally accepted views about knowledge (for example, that
one can't know something about which one holds inconsistent beliefs),
the interlocutors will be rationally constrained to aver that they
don't know whether their thesis is true or false, and hence to suspend
assent on the thesis while awaiting further investigation and
argument. But no such result holds for Socrates. For, although he
represents himself as being in the same aporetic boat — and may
in fact be perplexed for exactly the same reasons — his method
does not commit him to the premises, inferences or conclusions of the
arguments, or even to the regulating ideas about knowledge. His views
(if he has any) are not at issue in the argument.


There is good evidence that Arcesilaus followed the Socratic model
consistently and refrained from making any positive arguments or even
affirmations of any kind. Our most detailed sources actually identify
the radical change of position in the Platonic school he introduced
— the transition from the Old to the skeptical Academy —
in terms of his adoption of this method (see Diogenes Laertius 4.28,
Philodemus Index Academicorum 18.7-16 & 21.36-42 and
Sextus Outlines of Pyrrhonism 1.220-35, esp. 232). And this
explains his reputation as a ‘dialectician’ (or, more
negatively, as a ‘sophist’ or ‘eristic’ or
‘magician’), as well as why the skeptical Academy came to
be defined primarily by its critical stance towards the doctrines of
other schools (and particularly towards the energetic philosophical
programs of the new movements initiated by Epicurus and Zeno during
his lifetime). But if Arcesilaus followed this model consistently by
arguing against every philosophical position that came to his notice
and refraining from making any positive arguments or affirmations on
any philosophical question, it is hard to see why we should think that
he accepted any doctrines, including akatalêpsia and
universal epochê.


The second difficulty involved in reconciling Arcesilaus' dialectical
method with the doctrines that nothing can be known and that we should
suspend assent universally is more straight-forward.  These doctrines
are conclusions of some of his best known arguments, but these are
clearly dialectical anti-Stoic arguments. That is, they are arguments
that depend crucially on Stoic premises: they argue that, despite the
Stoics' general epistemological commitments, certain premises accepted
by the Stoics entail that nothing is known, and that we should suspend
assent universally. (See below, sect. 3.) But, given his Socratic
method, we would only have reason to ascribe these conclusions to
Arcesilaus himself if we had independent evidence that he accepted
those premises. And there is good reason to think that Arcesilaus did
not accept anything of Stoic epistemology.


The first question about Arcesilaus' skepticism is thus whether it
involved any commitment to the doctrines of akatalêpsia
and universal epochê at all. A negative answer to this
question — based on something like the considerations given
above — yields a dialectical interpretation of Arcesilaus
(adopted by e.g., Couissin 1929 and Striker 1980). The drawback to
this interpretation is that it involves the rejection of a central
claim about him in all but one of our major sources: Cicero, Numenius,
Sextus, Diogenes and Plutarch ascribe some degree of commitment to at
least one of these doctrines, the doctrine of universal
epochê. The exception is Philodemus. Rejecting this
evidence might be justified by the lateness of these sources and their
associations with later Academic developments; but this seems hard to
maintain when we learn that Arcesilaus' contemporary opponents,
including Chrysippus, also ascribed universal epochê to
him (see Plutarch On Stoic Self-Contradictions 1036a with
1037a, and Against Colotes 1122a).


If we accept that the evidence constrains us to look for a positive
answer to the first question (at least as regards the recommendation
of epochê), the second question is how to reconcile
Arcesilaus' method with his commitment to these doctrines. The answer
to this question remains open. But the dominant solutions on offer
fall roughly into two main groups: first an Academic
interpretation, based on the evidence of Cicero and Numenius, which
argues that Arcesilaus was led to adopt his method by his prior
acceptance of (at least one of) the doctrines (this solution is
adopted by e.g., Schofield 1999 and Ioppolo 1986); and, secondly, a
Socratic interpretation, based primarily on Sextus, which
derives Arcesilaus' attenuated commitment to the doctrines from his
application of the Socratic method (this solution is adopted by e.g.,
Cooper 2004 and Frede 1974 & 1984).


To decide between these interpretations of Arcesilaus' skepticism,
we need to examine his arguments.
3. Criticism of Stoic epistemology


Arcesilaus' best known arguments, and the only ones that survive in
any detail, are his criticisms of Stoic epistemology (Sextus
Against the Logicians M. 7.150-9, Cicero
Academica 2 passim, esp. 2.66-7 & 2.77).


The Stoic theory of knowledge represented a radical shift in
epistemology, since it offered an empirically-based route to the kind
of wisdom Socrates had sought (see Frede 1999). Its basis was three
novel claims made by Zeno, the founder of the Stoa (see Cicero
Academica 1.40-2). First, Zeno proposed a new psychological
theory: to form a belief of any kind is to give one's assent to one's
‘impression’ (or appearance: phantasia) about the
matter. Secondly, he claimed that some of our perceptual impressions
are ‘cognitive’ or self-warranting, so that assenting to
them constitutes a cognition or grasp (katalêpsis) of
their objects. And, thirdly, he argued that we ought to restrict our
assent to just cognitive or kataleptic impressions, since it is
contrary to reason to form (true or false) ‘opinions’ by
assenting to inadequately warranted, non-cognitive impressions. But,
given that there are cognitive impressions, we can attain infallible
knowledge or wisdom by restricting our assent to them, since our
beliefs will then be constituted entirely by cognitions derived from
perception or from concepts warranted by perceptual cognitions.


The focus of Arcesilaus' attack on Zeno's theory was its center-piece,
the theory of cognitive impressions. Zeno defined a cognitive
impression as one that came from what is stamped and impressed exactly
in accordance with it, and was such that it could not be false (Sextus
M. 7.248, Cicero Academica 2.77) — i.e.,
roughly, that an impression is cognitive if [a] it is true, [b] it is
caused in the appropriate way for correctly representing its object,
and [c] its truth is warranted by the inimitable richness and detail
of representation guaranteed by its causal history. Arcesilaus' tactic
was to grant that conditions [a] and [b] are often met, as Zeno
claimed, but to argue that condition [c] never obtained (M.
7.154, Academica 2.77). Although his detailed arguments for
this have not survived, it is fairly clear from later Academic and
Stoic arguments that he followed two main lines of attack. One line
depended on the existence of indistinguishable — or, at any
rate, indiscernibly distinct — objects, such as twins, or pairs
of eggs, manufactured items (statues or impressions on wax of the same
letter-seal), and grains of sand (Academica 2.54-8 &
2.84-6, M. 7.408-10). Any of these could be mistaken for
another no matter how good one's impression of it was. The second
depended on abnormal states of mind, such as dreams, illusions, and
fits of madness (Academica 2.47-53 & 2.88-90, M.
7.402-8). In either case, Arcesilaus argued that, whether the nature
of the objects or of our minds were at fault, it was always possible
to have a false impression with exactly the same phenomenal content as
a true impression [a] that also met condition [b]. But if so, no
impression could be self-warranting in virtue of the way in which its
content was represented. So condition [c] never obtains.  Hence, on
the Stoic view of the requirements for cognition, there is no
cognition. And if knowledge is derived entirely from perceptual
cognition and concepts warranted by it, as Zeno supposed, it follows
that nothing can be known. (Intricate Stoic-Academic debates on these
issues lasted for another 150 years; they can best be traced through
the arguments of Chrysippus and Carneades, preserved in some detail in
Cicero's Academica and Sextus M. book 7.)


The argument is standardly summarized as follows:

Some impressions are true (a Stoic view).
False impressions are non-cognitive (Zeno's condition [a]).
If the content of a true impression is potentially
indistinguishable or indiscernible from that of a false impression, it
is non-cognitive (Zeno's condition [c]).
The content of all true impressions is potentially
indistinguishable or indiscernible from that of false impressions
(Arcesilaus' argument).
So, there are no cognitive impressions. (See Academica
2.40 & 2.83.)



And, since for Zeno knowledge itself depends on cognitive
impressions, this argument leads to the further conclusion that nothing
can be known (akatalêpsia).


Arcesilaus followed up this argument against the cognitive
impression with a briefer argument against Zeno's ideal of wisdom:

there are no cognitive impressions (as Arcesilaus has argued),
&
it is irrational to hold ‘opinions’, i.e., to assent to
non-cognitive impressions (as the Stoics held); therefore,
it is irrational to assent to any impressions at all. (See
M. 7.155-7 & Academica 2.66-7.)



That is, Arcesilaus pointed out to the Stoics that if his argument
[1]-[5] against condition [c] of the definition of the cognitive
impression is successful, they are also committed to the conclusion
that it is rational to suspend assent universally (universal
epochê).
4. The original Academic interpretation


These arguments are presented in two very different ways in our two
sources. In Sextus' account (followed above), they are presented as
explicitly dialectical arguments, relying on clearly marked Stoic
views, and leading to the conclusion that the Stoic sage will have no
beliefs. In the report of Cicero (who was himself an adherent of
Academic philosophy), however, we are informed that Arcesilaus was
committed to the conclusions of both arguments: Arcesilaus believed
that condition [c] of the Stoic definition of the cognitive impression
could never be met, and hence concluded that nothing can be known; and
he believed premises [5] and [6] of the second argument, and hence
concluded that assent to any impression was irrational
(Academica 2.66-7 & 2.77). And this historical version of
the Academic interpretation of Arcesilaus' skepticism is supported
elsewhere in Cicero with a view of the history of philosophy that has
Arcesilaus following Socrates (and Presocratic philosophers such as
Democritus, Parmenides and Empedocles) in concluding that nothing can
be known by perception or reason, and hence adopting a method of
argument that would lead others to refrain from all assent
(Academica 1.43-6; but see Cooper 2004).


But this historically Academic interpretation is liable to two
serious objections. The first is that the argument against the
existence of cognitive impressions only leads to the conclusion that
nothing can be known if one subscribes to the Stoic epistemological
framework as a whole. For the conclusion doesn't follow unless it is
true that there are impressions, that some are true, that there are no
other routes to cognition, that the Stoic definition of cognition gives
necessary and sufficient conditions for knowledge, etc. But there is no
reason to think that Arcesilaus subscribed to these Stoic views, since
we have slight, but sufficient evidence that he argued against every
aspect of Stoic epistemology and psychology. Plutarch, for instance,
mentions an objection to the Stoic theory of the soul's interaction
with the body, which implies that Arcesilaus argued against the
fundamental mechanism of perception in Zeno's account (On Common
Conceptions 1078c). Another fragment from Plutarch suggests that
Arcesilaus argued against Zeno's causal theory of perception (Fragment
215a). And Sextus reports that Arcesilaus also objected to Zeno's
conception of belief as assent to an impression, on the ground that
assent is a matter of reason or thinking, rather than the acceptance of
a non-rational ‘impression’ (M. 7.154).


In these cases, as with his argument against the satisfiability of
condition [c] of the Stoic definition, it seems possible to trace a
definite strategy behind Arcesilaus' arguments: he argued against
Zeno's empiricist presuppositions by deploying Platonic objections and
theories (see Schofield 1999, von Staden 1978). One might conclude, as
some did in antiquity, that Arcesilaus therefore had a hidden objective
of undermining Stoic or Epicurean empiricism in favor of Platonic
doctrine (see Sextus Outlines of Pyrrhonism 1.234). But
Arcesilaus' method implies that he would argue against Platonic
doctrines as well, if anyone proposed them. So if he did hold the view
that nothing can be known, it seems more plausible to think that, like
Socrates (on some accounts), he held it as a tentative consequence of
the success of his arguments against all conceptions of knowledge,
rather than as the conclusion of an argument relying on a particular
epistemological theory.


The second objection to the historical version of the Academic
interpretation of Arcesilaus' skepticism is that it is inconsistent.
The inconsistency is not in believing that nothing can be known, since,
unlike Socrates (on this account), Arcesilaus explicitly disclaimed
second-order knowledge of this claim (Cicero Academica 1.45).
It lies rather in believing that nothing can be known in conjunction
with the belief that it is irrational to hold opinions in the absence
of knowledge. If the former is true, the latter rules out believing the
premises of the argument that supports both claims.
5. The practical criterion


The original Academic interpretation thus seems inadequate to overturn
a dialectical understanding of Arcesilaus' principal anti-Stoic
arguments. Modern proponents of this view, however, offer a more
complicated explanation for Arcesilaus' adherence to
akatalêpsia, or at least, universal
epochê (see e.g., Schofield 1999 and Ioppolo 1986). On
this version of the Academic interpretation, Arcesilaus' acceptance of
these theses is not explained in terms of the straight-forward
belief in the premises and conclusions of his arguments, of
the sort which would lead a Stoic convinced by Arcesilaus to the
inconsistent position examined in sect. 4. It is justified instead by
Arcesilaus' ‘practical criterion’ for action, which is
supposed to allow him to endorse ‘reasonable’ views
without assent, i.e., without believing them. For if Arcesilaus holds
that action is possible on the basis of ‘reasonable’ views
that don't amount to belief, his acceptance of
akatalêpsia or universal epochê can be
explained in the same way. So the revised Academic interpretation
suggests that these philosophical theses are not beliefs but
‘reasonable’ or tentative hypotheses that guide
Arcesilaus' philosophical activity. His acceptance of them as
hypotheses does not require assenting to them.


Arcesilaus' argument for a ‘practical criterion’ for
action is a defence of the possibility of suspending assent
universally given in response to two Stoic objections. The Stoic
objections are, first, that life is impossible without assent, since
action is caused by assent to an impression of something
oikeion, i.e., suited to the agent's nature (Plutarch
Against Colotes 1122a-d, cf. Cicero Academica
2.37-8); and, secondly, that a good or successful life is impossible
without assent, since a good life requires knowledge and hence assent
(Sextus M. 7.158; cf. Cicero Academica
2.39). Arcesilaus' reported replies to these objections are brief, and
accordingly difficult to interpret (see Bett 1989). His counter to the
first objection is the suggestion that action is possible without
assent, since even on the Stoic account animal action is triggered
directly by their impressions of something oikeion: the
addition of a belief that the object is in fact oikeion is
redundant and liable to be a cause of error. In response to the second
objection, however, Arcesilaus argued that the person who suspends
assent universally will successfully guide his actions by applying his
sense of what is ‘reasonable’ as a ‘practical
criterion’.


The most promising way to read these brief counter-arguments as a
positive theory of Arcesilaus' is something like this. The first
response argues that our action isn't always caused by occurrent
beliefs — we sometimes act through habit, or by instinct, for
instance. By itself, this doesn't go very far, however, since the
Stoics will object that, even if this were possible, this account
can't describe the voluntary and responsible actions of a rational
agent.  (The Stoics defined responsible or voluntary action in terms
of assent, since this was the mechanism through which our rationality
acts on the world.) So Arcesilaus enlarges on his account in the
second response: there is space for rationality and responsibility on
this view, in the production of the impressions or thoughts motivating
us when we act — we can act in accordance with what strikes us
as the reasonable thing to do upon reflection, but still refrain from
assent, i.e., refrain from forming the belief that this is the right
thing to do.


The revised Academic interpretation suggests that this theory of
‘reasonable’ action represents Arcesilaus' own explanation for
his actions, given that he doesn't do them on the basis of knowledge or
belief. And, although this is not explicit in the texts, it suggests
that Arcesilaus' adherence to the thesis that one should suspend assent
universally is also to be explained as a second-order case of something
that seems reasonable, rather than as the inconsistent belief that one
should not hold beliefs.


There are three serious problems with this interpretation. The first
is that it is not supported by the evidence to which it appeals. In
Sextus, the source for the notion of ‘the reasonable’ as
the criterion, this criterion is explicitly marked as one that
Arcesilaus did not adhere to, but constructed as “a counterblast
to that of the Stoics” (M. 7.150, Bury
trans.). (Sextus' later account of Arcesilaus in another work is also
incompatible with his holding such a theory in his own right; see
Outlines of Pyrrhonism 1.232-3.)  And Cicero and Numenius,
our other sources for the historically Academic interpretation of
Arcesilaus, do not mention his adoption of a ‘practical
criterion’ — in fact, both authors suggest that
Arcesilaus' position on how one might live without assent was
indefensible, and required a significant revision under Carneades'
hands (Academica 2.32 & 2.59; Numenius fr. 27.14-32, cf.
Eusebius Praeparatio Evangelica 14.7.15 [=
‘Numenius' fr. 26.107-11]).


The second problem is that even if the context did not show that
Arcesilaus' practical criterion was a dialectical ploy, the argument
Arcesilaus used to support it only makes sense if it is construed
dialectically. The argument he gives is this:

a good life is guaranteed by practical wisdom;
practical wisdom consists in a disposition causing right or
successful actions;
right or successful actions are those that, once done, have a
reasonable defense (or justification);
the wise person will be guided by what is reasonable (which is
what practical wisdom amounts to, Arcesilaus is arguing, given that
there is no knowledge);
hence, the wise person will go right or be successful. (Sextus
M. 7.158).



Premises [8] through [10] present two difficulties for a
non-dialectical reading. One is that it is hard to see why Arcesilaus
should be committed to them, or how such commitment could be
consistent with the doctrine of universal suspension of assent they
are supposed to justify or at least make compatible with action. For
these premises imply that Arcesilaus, like the Stoics, believed that
success is entirely a matter of making rational (or rationally
defensible) choices. But this view — the claim that virtue is
sufficient for happiness — was the most contentious issue in
Hellenistic ethics (Stoics maintained it, Peripatetics denied it). And
it is also one that Arcesilaus must have argued against, since it is
reported that he argued not just against the Stoic theory (see below)
but against all ethical views (Philodemus Index Academicorum
18.40-19.9, Diogenes Laertius 7.171, Numenius fr. 25.154-61,
cf. fr. 25.41-5).


The second difficulty is that these premises are manifestly variants
of the Stoic theory adapted to the Arcesilean context, in which
nothing can be known and the wise person does not assent to
anything. The Stoics claimed that a good life is the result of
performing ‘appropriate actions' — defined as “those
that, once done, have a reasonable defense” — from a
disposition of wisdom, i.e., knowledge of what is good, bad and
neither. But if nothing can be known, as Arcesilaus has already argued
([5]-[7] in sect. 3, above), the wisdom of the sage consists in not
having any beliefs. This disposition will still allow the sage to
perform the appropriate actions, however, if, as the Stoics claim,
they are defined by reasonable defenses or justifications: for wise
people will do what they consider reasonable.  The connection between
performing such actions through a wise disposition and success is,
Arcesilaus suggests, something that the Stoics can't deny, because
they agree that opinion is the cause of error (this is the
justification for premise [6] in sect. 3, above). Hence, the perfect
exercise of our rationality — reflection without assent, as
Arcesilaus has argued — will lead us to find the action that is
naturally appropriate to us as rational animals, i.e., the reasonable
thing to do, and this guarantees success.


The third problem is that Arcesilaus' positive doctrine appears to
rest on a hugely implausible claim about our rationality, viz., that it
is possible to think or reflect, and come up with ‘reasonable’
conclusions, without assenting to anything, i.e., without having any
beliefs of any kind or degree (see Frede 1979, Bett 1989). It is not
implausible to argue that we sometimes or often act or think on the
basis of tentative views, or on the explicit assumption that something
is the case (which we don't know or firmly believe). But these actions
seem possible only within the context of a large web of back-ground
beliefs — or within the framework of Stoic beliefs about human
nature, rationality, and happiness that Arcesilaus playfully deploys in
the argument he actually gives.
6. The Socratic interpretation


If Arcesilaus did not defend the possibility of living without
beliefs by advocating a positive theory of action, we need to find
another way to explain his attested commitment to the views that
nothing can be known and that one should not form beliefs. The Socratic
interpretation suggests that we should understand the first view as a
way of expressing the cumulative results of Arcesilaus' method, rather
than as the beliefs that motivated it. The suggestion is that, like
Socrates, Arcesilaus was engaged in a search for the truth about
philosophical questions. But, like Socrates, he found that the
arguments in favor of any position were always inadequate, or balanced
by equally convincing arguments against it (cf. Diogenes Laertius 4.28,
Cicero Academica 1.45). The view that nothing can be known is
thus not the conclusion of an argument relying on a theory about
knowledge or our cognitive faculties; it is not a theoretical
or rationally warranted belief, but just the way things strike him.


If this is on the right lines, we should also look to features of the
Socratic method to explain the view that we should not form
beliefs. But in this case, it seems that the view does depend —
at least in part — on a theoretical belief or, at least, a
philosophical commitment. For Socratic investigations are motivated by
the thought that it is very important to acquire philosophical
knowledge, indeed, so important that we should not permit ourselves to
stop inquiring even when we have found a really plausible and
well-supported opinion that nonetheless faces unresolved difficulties.
Several sources suggest that this was precisely what motivated
Arcesilaus: Cicero, for instance, stresses repeatedly that he agreed
with Zeno that it is irrational to hold opinions, i.e., inadequately
warranted assents — premise [6] in sect. 3, above —
(Academica 2.66-7); and Sextus suggests that he thought that
individual cases of suspending assent — presumably in the light
of inconclusive arguments — were good (Outlines of
Pyrrhonism 1.233).


The problem with this solution, however, is that it still leaves
Arcesilaus with an inconsistent position. The difficulty now is not
that Arcesilaus appears over-committed to Stoic epistemology, as he
seemed to be on the Academic interpretation, since the present
assumption is that he shared only premise [6], not their theories of
perception, belief, cognition, action, virtue and happiness, etc. It is
rather that even the view that it is irrational to hold (mere) opinions
presupposes a set of epistemological beliefs (i.e., opinions, assuming
that knowledge is inaccessible, or has so far proven to be). If
Arcesilaus is not committed to any set of assumptions about the nature
and requirements of rationality or about belief and knowledge —
which he ought not to be, given that he had argued against the various
views on offer, and hence, ex hypothesi, suspended assent about them
— it doesn't look like he can consistently believe that it is
irrational to hold opinions.


But perhaps we can salvage the Socratic interpretation by applying
the notion of a non-theoretical — or rationally unwarranted
— belief to this view as well. On this version, Arcesilaus begins
by being motivated by the same pre-theoretical beliefs as Socrates,
i.e., that philosophical knowledge is important and mere opinion
inadequate. But one result of his repeated and extensive Socratic
investigations is the realization that even these regulating
assumptions of his philosophical practice have failed to be warranted,
and may be incorrect. He has kept on looking for the truth, on the
assumption that obtaining it is of crucial importance for his life. But
he has never obtained it, and it begins to strike him that perhaps he
never will. Perhaps, it was not, after all, so important for his life
to have it: maybe mere opinion is all we need. It doesn't follow that
he should give up (as false) his belief that it is irrational to hold
opinions, since it would only be correct to give it up if it actually
is rational to hold opinions — but this is something that his
arguments don't warrant, any more than they warrant the opposite
conclusion.


The suggestion, then, is that Arcesilaus' beliefs in the importance
of knowledge and the inadequacy of mere opinion are explicitly
non-rational, in the sense that he is not persuaded that they are
warranted by a rational argument or theory, or even by the extensive
argument he has devoted his life to. He believes that he hasn't found
knowledge and that it is irrational to assent to anything without
knowledge, but realizes, as a result of the unrestricted application of
his Socratic method, that there are strong reasons against these
beliefs. He is thus not in a position to give his rational assent to
the belief that it is irrational to hold opinions — he just finds
that that is how things strike him, i.e., that's what he believes. The
Academic skeptic, on this view, is someone whose sustained but
pre-theoretical commitment to rational investigation undermines their
confidence in rationality. The result is not a negative theory —
e.g., the theory that we can't acquire knowledge owing to the
limitations of our cognitive or rational capacities — but a
pervasive lack of theory sustained by a dialectical method.


If this is correct, the basic philosophical puzzle about Arcesilaus'
skepticism is not whether it is possible to live without beliefs, but
whether it is possible to be committed to rationality and yet
sufficiently detached from it to recognise that, whatever it is, it may
not work.
7. Conclusion


It is clear that any interpretation of Arcesilaus must take into
account both his reputation as a master dialectician who deployed
Socrates' method ruthlessly against his philosophical contemporaries,
and his notorious advocacy of akatalêpsia and
epochê. Given the contradictory nature and scarcity of
the evidence, it is perhaps not surprising that modern critics do not
agree about the success of the ‘dialectical’,
‘Academic’ and ‘Socratic’ interpretations of
Arcesilaus or about the consistency of the very different kinds of
skepticism they propose. But further progress is not ruled out, since
it is open to us to offer more sophisticated philosophical
elaborations of those forms of skepticism and to test their historical
plausibility by appealing to the diverse, but better attested
traditions in the later Academy.