An assertion is a speech act in which something is claimed to hold,
for instance that there are infinitely many prime numbers, or, with
respect to some time t, that there is a traffic
congestion on Brooklyn Bridge at t, or, of some person x
with respect to some time t, that x has a tooth ache at
t. The concept of assertion has occupied a central place in the
philosophy of language, since it is often thought that making
assertions is the use of language most crucial to linguistic
meaning. In recent years, by contrast, most of the interest in
assertion has come from epistemology.
The nature of assertion and its relation to other categories and
phenomena have been subject to much controversy. Some of the ideas of
assertion will be presented below. The article will situate assertion
within speech act theory and pragmatics more generally, and then go on
to present the current main accounts of
assertion.[1]
By an account of assertion is here meant a theory of what
it consists in to make an assertion. According to such
accounts, there are deep properties of assertion: specifying
those properties is specifying what a speaker essentially
does in making an assertion (e.g., express a
belief). There must also be surface properties, which
are the properties by which we can tell whether an utterance is an
assertion, for instance that it is made by means of uttering a sentence in
the indicative mood. Some accounts specify deep properties only, while
others relate deep properties to surface properties, as we shall
see.
 
1. Speech acts
Gottlob Frege characterized the assertoric quality of an utterance
as an assertoric force (“behauptende
Kraft”; Frege 1918b: 22) of
the utterance. This idea was later taken over by J.L. Austin
(1962: 99–100), the founding
father of the general theory of speech acts. Austin distinguished
between several levels of speech act, including these: the locutionary
act, the illocutionary act and the perlocutionary act. The locutionary
act is the act of “‘saying something’
in the full normal sense” (1962:
94), which is the utterance of certain words with certain
meanings in a certain grammatical construction, such as uttering
‘I like ice’ as a sentence of English.
The notion of an illocutionary act was introduced by Austin by
means of examples (1962: 98–102),
and that is the normal procedure. Illocutionary acts are such acts as
asserting, asking a question, warning, threatening, announcing a
verdict or intention, making an appointment, giving an order,
expressing a wish, making a request. An utterance of a sentence, i.e.,
a locutionary act, by means of which a question is asked is thus an
utterance with interrogative force, and when an assertion is
made the utterance has assertoric force
(sometimes ‘assertive’ is used instead). Each
type of illocutionary act is a type of utterance with the
corresponding illocutionary force.
The perlocutionary act is made by means of an illocutionary act,
and depends entirely on the hearer's reaction. For instance, by means
of arguing the speaker may convince the hearer, and by means
of warning the speaker may frighten the hearer. In these
examples, convincing and frightening are perlocutionary acts.
The illocutionary act does not depend on the hearer's reaction to
the utterance. Still, according to
Austin (1962: 116–7) it does
depend on the hearer's being aware of the utterance and understanding
it in a certain way: I haven't warned someone unless he heard what I
said. In this sense, the performance of an illocutionary act depends
on the “securing of uptake” (Austin
1962: 117). However, although Austin's view is intuitively
plausible for speech acts verbs with speaker-hearer argument structure
(like x congratulates y) or speaker-hearer-content
argument structure (x requests of y
that p), it is less plausible when the structure is
speaker-content (x asks whether p). The
verb ‘assert’ is of the latter kind, as
opposed to, for example, ‘tell’. It may be
said that I failed to tell him that the station was closed, since he
had already left the room when I said so, but that I
still asserted that it was closed, since I believed he was
still there. As we shall see, several theories of assertion focus on
hearer-directed beliefs and intentions of the speaker, without
requiring that those beliefs are true or the intentions fulfilled.
Austin had earlier (1956) initiated
the development of speech act taxonomy by means of the distinction
between constative and performative
utterances. Roughly, whereas in a constative utterance you report an
already obtaining state of affairs—you say
something—in a performative utterance you create something new:
you do something (Austin 1956:
235). Paradigm examples of performatives were utterances by
means of which actions such as baptizing, congratulating and greeting
are performed. Assertion, by contrast, is the paradigm of a constative
utterance. However, when developing his general theory of speech acts,
Austin abandoned the constative/performative distinction, the reason
being that it is not so clear in what sense something
is done, for instance by means of an optative utterance, whereas
nothing is done by means of an assertoric one. Austin noted, for
example, that assertions are subject both to infelicities and to
various kinds of appraisal, just like performatives
(Austin 1962: 13–66). For
instance, an assertion is insincere in case of lying as a
promise is insincere when the appropriate intention is lacking
(Austin 1962: 40). This is an infelicity
of the abuse kind. Also, an assertion is, according to
Austin, void in case of a failed referential presupposition,
such as in Russell's

(1)
The present King of France is bald.
 (Austin 1962: 20)


 This is then an infelicity of the same kind—flaw-type
misexecutions—as the use of the wrong formula in a legal
procedure (Austin 1962: 36), or of the
same kind—misinvocations—as when the requirements
of a naming procedure aren't met (Austin 1962:
51), or again when I try to sell you something that isn't mine
(Austin 1962: 137).
Further, Austin noted that when it comes to appraisals, there is
not a sharp difference between acts that are simply true and false,
and acts that are assessed in other respects
(Austin 1962: 140–7). On the one
hand, a warning can be objectively proper or improper, depending on
the facts. On the other hand, assertions (statements) can be assessed
as suitable in some contexts and not in others, and are not simply
true or false. An example is

(2)
France is hexagonal.[2]


As an alternative, Austin suggested five classes of illocutionary
types (or illocutionary verbs): verdictives,
exercitives, commissives, behabitives and
expositives (Austin 1962:
151–64). You exemplify a verdictive, for example, when as
a judge you pronounce a verdict; an exercitive by appointing, voting
or advising; a commissive by promising, undertaking or declaring that
you will do something; a behabitive by apologizing, criticizing,
cursing or congratulating; an expositive by acts appropriately
prefixed by phrases like ‘I reply’, ‘I argue’,
‘I concede’ etc., of a general expository nature.
In this classification, assertion would best be placed under
expositives, since the prefix ‘I assert’ is or may be of
an expository nature. However, an assertion need not in itself be
expository. As a classification of illocutionary types Austin's
taxonomy is thus not completely adequate.
Other taxonomies have been proposed, for instance by Stephen Schiffer
(1972), John Searle (1975b), Kent Bach and Robert M. Harnish (1979),
and Francois Recanati (1987). In Bach and Harnish's scheme, similar to
Searle's, there are four top
categories: constatives, directives (including
questions and prohibitives), commissives (promises,
offers) and acknowledgments (apologize, condole, congratulate)
(1979: 41). The category of constatives
includes the subtypes, in Bach and Harnish's terms,
of assertives, predictives, retrodictives,
descriptives, ascriptives, informatives,
confirmatives, concessives, retractives,
assentives, dissentives, disputatives,
responsives, suggestives and suppositives
(1979: 41).
In this list, predictives are distinguished by concerning the future
and retrodictives by concerning the past, dissentives by the fact that
the speaker is disagreeing with what was earlier said by the hearer,
and so on. Assertives, according to this taxonomy, is not
distinguished from other constatives by any such feature. As Bach and
Harnish point out (1979: 46), most of
the specialized types of constatives satisfy the definition of
assertives (see section 3.1). This type then
stands out as a higher category, including most but not all of the
constatives; not for instance suggestives (suggesting, conjecturing)
and suppositives (assuming, stipulating).
A leading idea in the taxonomies of Searle
(1975a) and Recanati (1987) is to
distinguish between between types according to direction of
fit. Constative utterances have a word-world direction of fit
(what is said is supposed to conform to what the world is like), while
performative utterances have world-word direction of fit (the world is
supposed to be changed to fit what is said). Again, assertion is the
paradigmatic constative type, if not the constative type itself.
2. Pragmatics
Assertion is generally thought of being open, explicit and direct,
as opposed for instance to implying something without explicitly saying
it. In this respect, assertion is contrasted
with presupposition and implicature. The contrast
is, however, not altogether sharp, partly because of the idea of
indirect speech acts, including indirect assertions.
2.1 Presupposition
A sentence such as

(3)
Kepler died in  misery.
is not true unless the singular term ‘Kepler’ has
reference. Still, Frege argued that a speaker asserting that Kepler
died in misery, by means of (3) does not also assert that
‘Kepler’ has reference (Frege 1892:
574). That Kepler had reference is not part of the sense of the
sentence. Frege's reason was that if it had been, the sense of its
negation

(4)
Kepler did not die in misery.
would have been that Kepler did not die in misery or
‘Kepler’ does not have reference, which is
absurd. According to Frege, that ‘Kepler’ has reference is
rather presupposed, both in an assertion of (3) and in an
assertion of its negation.
The modern treatment of presupposition has followed Frege in
treating survival under negation as the most important test for
presupposition. That is, if it is implied
that ppp, both in an assertion of a
sentence sss and in an assertion of the
negation of sss, then it is presupposed
that ppp in those assertions (unless
that ppp is entailed by all
sentences). Other typical examples of presupposition
(Levinson 1983: 178–81) include


(5)
John managed [didn't manage] to stop in time.
implying that John tried to stop in time, and

(6)
Martha regrets [doesn't regret] drinking John’s home brew.
implying that Martha drank John's home brew.
In the case of (3), the presupposition is clearly of a semantic
nature, since the sentence ‘Someone is identical with
Kepler’, which is true just if ‘Kepler’ has
reference, is a logical consequence both of (3) and of (4). By
contrast, in the negated forms of (5) and (6), the presupposition can
be cancelled by context (e.g., as in (7))

(7)
John didn't manage to stop in time. He didn't even try.
This indicates that in this case the presupposition is rather a
pragmatic phenomenon; it is the speaker or speech act rather than the
sentence or the proposition expressed that presupposes
something. However, the issue of separating semantic from pragmatic
aspects of presupposition is complex, and regarded differently in
different approaches to presupposition (for an overview,
see Simons
2006).[3]
In either case, presupposing should be kept distinct from
asserting. One further reason is that the presupposition occurs in
other illocutionary types as well. For instance, in asking

(8)
Did John [didn't John] manage to stop in time?
the speaker normally assumes that John tried and is only asking
about the success. Still, it is not easy to distinguish assertion from
presupposition in pure speech act terms. Typically, the distinction is
based either on the meaning properties of the sentence used, or on
properties of the conversational setting, that is on what is taken for
granted (cf. section 5, regarding Stalnaker's
account).
For instance, by

(9)
We regret that the pool will be closed today.
a concierge may inform a group checking in to a hotel about the
state of the pool.[4] 
Formally, in (9) it is presupposed rather
than asserted that the pool will be closed, but the information is
conveyed equally well by means of the presupposition as by means of a
more direct assertion with

(10)
The pool will be closed today.
given that the guests did not already know that the pool
would be closed, and given that the guests were able
to compute the presupposition (both taken for granted by the
concierge). By contrast, assuming that the concierge believes that a
guest does know that the pool will be closed, (9) will not be
used to convey information about the pool, only about the attitude of
the staff, while a sincere utterance of (10) is an assertion that the
pool will be closed, whatever is assumed about the hearer's prior
knowledge. The contrast between (9) and (10) highlights a common
intuition about a central feature of assertion: explicitness. On this
intuition, only the content that is explicitly expressed is asserted,
while further contents may be indirectly conveyed, relying on
background knowledge and reasoning. This idea is controversial,
however, and the opposite intuition is that indirect ways of conveying
information can be assertoric in their own right. More on this theme
below.
2.2 Implicature
Frege noted (1879: 20) that there is
no difference in truth conditional content between sentences such
as

(11)

a.
John works with real estate and likes fishing. 


b.
John works with real estate but likes fishing.
‘And’ and ‘but’ contribute the same way to
truth and falsity. However, when using (11b), but not when using
(11a), the speaker indicates that there is a contrast of some kind
between working with real estate and liking fishing. The speaker is
not asserting that there is a contrast. For instance, forming
a conditional with (11b) in the antecedent preserves the contrast
rather than make it hypothetical:

(12)
If John works with real estate but likes fishing, I think we can bring him along.

It is usually said that the speaker in cases like (11b) and
(12) implicates that there is a contrast. These are examples
of implicature. H. Paul Grice (1975,
1989) developed a general theory of implicature. Grice called
implicatures of the kind exemplified conventional, since it
is a standing feature of the word ‘but’ to give rise to
them.
Most of Grice's theory is concerned with the complementing kind,
the conversational implicatures. These rely on general
conversational maxims, not on features of expressions. These maxims
are thought to be in force in ordinary conversation. For instance, the
maxim Be orderly! requires of the speaker to recount events
in the order they took place. This is meant to account for the
intuitive difference in content between

(13)

a.
John took off his shoes and sat down.  


b.
John sat down and took off his shoes.
According to Grice's account, the speaker doesn't assert, only
implicates that the events took place in the order recounted. What is
asserted is just that both events did take place.
Real or apparent violations of the maxims generate implicatures, on
the assumption that the participants obey the over-arching Cooperative
Principle. For instance, in the conversation

(14)

A: 
Where does John spend the summer? 


B:
Somewhere in Canada.
B implicates that he doesn't know where in Canada John spends the
summer. The reasoning is as follows: B violates the Maxim of Quantity
to be as informative as required. Since B is assumed to be
cooperative, we can infer that he cannot satisfy the Maxim of Quantity
without violating some other maxim. The best candidate is the
sub-maxim of the Maxim of Quality that requires you not to say
anything for which you lack sufficient evidence. Hence, one can infer
that B doesn't know. Again, B has not asserted that he doesn't know,
but still managed to convey it in an indirect manner.
The picture is more complex because of a distinction Grice
made within the domain of conversational implicatures,
between particularized and generalized implicatures
(Grice 1975: 37–8). Generalized
implicatures do not depend on contextual features, but are default
inferences associated with ways of including or not including explicit
information. One of Grice's own examples is

(15)
X is meeting a woman this evening. (Grice 1975:  37)

 carrying the generalized implicature that the woman is not
“X's wife, mother, sister or perhaps even close
platonic friend”.[5]
2.3 Indirect speech acts
The clear distinction between assertion and implicature, as Grice
thought of it, is to some extent undermined by
acknowledging indirect assertion as a kind of assertion
proper. A standard example of an indirect speech act is given by

(16)
Can you pass the salt?

By means of uttering an interrogative sentence the speaker requests
the addressee to pass the salt. The request is indirect. The question,
literally concerning the addressee's ability, is direct. As defined by
John Searle (1975b: 59–60), and
also by Bach and Harnish (1979: 70), an
indirect illocutionary act is subordinate to another, more primary act
and depends on the success of the first. An alternative definition,
given by Sadock (1974: 73), is that an
act is indirect just if it has a different illocutionary force from
the one standardly correlated with the sentence-type used.
Examples of indirect assertions by means of questions and
commands/requests are given by

(17)

a.
May I tell you that, obviously, the square root of a quarter is a half?


b.
Let me tell you that, obviously, the square root of a quarter is a half! (Levinson 1983:  266)
 Rhetorical questions also have the force of assertions:

(18)
Is not Switzerland a peace-loving nation?

Another candidate type is irony:

(19)
Switzerland is known for its aggressive foreign policy.

assuming the speaker does mean the negation of what is literally
said. However, although in a sense the act is indirect, since the
speaker asserts something different from what she would do on a
normal, direct use of the sentence, and relies on the hearer to
realize this, it is not an indirect assertion by either definition. It
isn't on the first, since the primary act (the literal assertion)
isn't even made, and it isn't on the second, since there is no
discrepancy between force and sentence type.
Irony does, however, qualify as indirect assertion on the
definition given by Recanati (1987:
125). According to Recanati, an indirect speech act is a
special kind of conversational implicature, where the speaker not only
implicates some proposition ppp, but
also intends to convey that ppp. In
the case of (19), there is an apparent flagrant violation of the
Quality principle to say only what is true. On the assumption that the
speaker is cooperative, together with background knowledge of her
political awareness, the hearer can infer that she does not mean what
she literally says, but rather the opposite, that is, that what
she wants to communicate is the negation of what she
says. For Recanati, the communicative intention is what brings this
act under the category of assertion proper (see
section 3.1).
Although Searle's definition of indirect speech acts is different,
Searle too thinks that they work by means of an inferential mechanism,
including that of conventional implicature. The hearer is supposed to
understand that the speaker cannot merely be performing the primary
act, since that would violate conversational principles, and then
again conclude by conversational reasoning what other act has been
performed.
The very idea of indirect speech acts is, however,
controversial. It is not universally agreed that an ordinary utterance
of (16) is indirect, since it has been denied (e.g., by
Levinson 1983: 273–6) that a
question has really been asked, over and above the request. Similarly,
Levinson have questioned the idea of a standard correlation between
force and sentence form, by which a request would count as indirect on
Sadock's criterion.
The notion of an indirect assertion is controversial, and in need
of further clarification. What is common to all ideas is that indirect
assertions are not explicit: what is expressed, or literally said, is
not the same as what is asserted. One question is whether an utterance
is an assertion proper that ppp if that
content is not exactly what is expressed, or whether it is an act of a
related kind, perhaps an implicature. Another question is how far an
utterance may deviate from explicitness and yet be counted as an
assertion, proper or indirect. This question comes up in discussion of
proposed counterexamples to certain theories (cf. sentence (21)
in subsection 3.2).[6]
3. Social character
Many accounts of assertion emphasize, one way or another,
its social character. Some do it from a normative, and some
from a descriptive, perspective. In this section and the next, we
shall focus on the descriptive versions. These fall into two broad
types: the communicative intentions type and what we shall
here call the commitment type. According to the former, it is
the intentions a speaker has with respect to the mind of the hearer that
constitutes assertion, while according to the latter, assertion is
constituted by the change of the social relation between speaker and
addressee that the utterance brings about.
By an utterance we shall here understand any physical
item, event or state of affairs by means of which a speaker
communicates. This may be an oral utterance (vocalizing), a physical
gesture or sequence of gestures (as in sign languages), an inscription
(analogue or digital), or the intentional creation or preservation of
some state of affairs (e.g., a configuration of
objects). A hearer is someone who observes the utterance and
who can understand its communicative significance (exactly what this
modal qualification amounts to will not be an issue here). We will
need to distinguish between being an addressee, that is
the intended receiver of an utterance, and being an actual
hearer. There may be other hearers of the utterance than the
addressee, some known by the speaker to be hearers (as when speaking
to one member of a group of people) and perhaps some unknown (e.g.,
eaves-droppers). It may also be that the addressee is in fact not a
hearer (i.e., does not in fact notice the utterance), only intended to
be so by the speaker. We shall first be concerned with the intentions
variety.
3.1 Communicative intentions
Typically, the speaker who makes an assertion has
addressee-directed intentions in performing a speech act. The
speaker may intend the hearer to come to believe something or other
about the speaker, or about something else, or intend the hearer to
come to desire or intend to do something. Such intentions can concern
institutional changes, but need not. Intentions that are immediately
concerned with communication itself, as opposed to ulterior goals, are
called communicative intentions.
The idea of communicative intentions derives from
Grice's (1957)
article ‘Meaning’, where Grice defined what
it is for a speaker to non-naturally mean something. Grice's
idea can be set out as follows:

S non-naturally means something by an
utterance uuu if, and only if, there is a
hearer HHH such that
i) SSS intends u to bring about a
response RRR
in HHH, and
ii) SSS
intends HHH to recognize that (i), and
iii) SSS intends at least part
of HHH’s reason
for RRR to be that (i).

(cf. Strawson (1964: 28);
here ‘that (i)’ is short
for ‘that S intends uuu
to bring about a response R
in H’). That is, the speaker intends the hearer
to react in a certain way because of recognizing that the speaker
wants him to react in that way. Often, for instance in Grice's original
examples, the intended reaction is one of coming to believe something,
and that is a reaction that typically fits the speaker's intention or
at least desire when making an assertion. Although Grice did not
explicitly attempt to define assertion, the idea can be
straightforwardly applied to provide one:

(Gr-A)
S asserts that p by the utterance u iff there is a hearer H such that 


i.
S intends u to produce in H the belief that p



ii.
S intends H to recognize that i)



iii.
S intends H to believe that p at least partly for the reason that i)


In the early to mid 1960s Austin's speech act theory and Grice's
account of communicative intentions began to merge. The connection is
discussed in Strawson 1964. Strawson
inquired whether illocutionary force could be made overt by means of
communicative intentions. He concluded that when it comes to highly
conventionalized utterances, communicative intentions are largely
irrelevant, but that on the other hand, convention does not play much
role for ordinary illocutionary types. Strawson also pointed out a
difficulty with Grice's analysis: it may be the case that all three
conditions are fulfilled, but that the speaker intends the hearer
to believe that they aren't, for instance by intending the hearer to
believe that the speaker wants him to believe
that ppp for an entirely different
reason.
Such intentions to mislead came to be called sneaky
intentions (Grice 1969), and they
constituted a problem for speech act analyses based on communicative
intentions. The idea was that genuine communication is essentially
open: the speaker's communicative intentions are meant to be fully
accessible to the hearer. Sneaky intentions violate this requirement
of openness, and therefore apparently they must be ruled out one way
or another. Strawson's own solution was to add a fourth clause about
the speaker's intention that the hearer recognize the third
intention. However, that solution only invited a sneaky intention one
level up (cf. Schiffer 1972:
17–42).
Another solution was to make the intention reflexive. This
was proposed by Searle (1969), in the
first full-blown analysis of illocutionary types made by appeal to
communicative intentions. Searle combined this with an appeal to
social institutions as created by rules. We return to these in the
following subsection.
Searle criticized Grice for requiring the speaker to
intend perlocutionary effects, such as what the speaker shall
come to do or believe, pointing out that such intentions aren't
essential (1969: 46–7). Instead,
according to Searle, the speaker intends to be understood,
and also intends to achieve this by means of the hearer's recognition
of this very intention itself. Moreover, if the intention is
recognized, it is also fulfilled: ‘we achieve what we try to do
by getting our audience to recognize what we try to do’
(Searle 1969: 47). This reflexive
intention is formally spelled out as follows:

(Srl-I)
S utters sentence T and means it (i.e., means literally what he says) = S utters T and


a)
S intends (i-1) the utterance U of T to produce in H the knowledge (recognition, awareness) that the states of affairs specified by (certain of) the rules of T obtain. (Call this the illocutionary effect, IE)



b)
S intends U to produce IE by means of the recognition of i-1



c)
S intends that i-1 will be recognized in virtue of (by means of) H's knowledge of (certain of) the rules governing (the elements of) T. (Searle 1969: 49–50)


The illocutionary effect IE is the effect of generating the state
specified in the constitutive rule. In the case of assertion, the
speaker intends that her utterance counts as an undertaking
that p represents an actual state of affairs, depending on
the constitutive rule (see next subsection).
Bach and Harnish follow Searle in appealing to reflexive
communicative intentions. On their analysis
(Bach & Harnish 1979: 42), assuming
a speaker S and a hearer H,

(BH-A)
S asserts that p  iff S expresses


i)
the belief that p, and



ii)
the intention that H believe that p.


According to Bach and Harnish's understanding, a
speaker S expresses an attitude just in
case S R-intends (reflexively intends) the hearer to
take S's utterance as reason to think S has that
attitude. They understand the reflexive nature of the intention pretty
much like Searle. They say (1979: 15)
that the intended effect of an act of communication is not just any
effect produced by means of recognition of the intention to produce a
certain effect, it is the recognition of that intention.
These appeals to reflexive intentions were later criticized, in
particular by Sperber and Wilson (1986:
256–7). Their point is that if an intention I
has as sub-intentions both the intention J and the intention
that the hearer recognize I, this will yield an infinitely
long sequence: the intention that: J and the hearer recognize
the intention that: J and the hearer recognize the intention
that: J and …). If this is an intention content at
all, it is not humanly graspable.
Another variant of the communicative intention analysis is
Recanati's. Part of Recanati's solution to the sneaky intention
problem, following Grice (1969),
consists in simply demanding that sneaky intentions be absent. This is
what it is for an intention to be open,
or default-reflexive (Recanati 1987:
191–207). He also follows Sperber and Wilson's idea of
making something manifest, i.e., perceptible or inferable
(1987: 120,
180; Sperber & Wilson 1986:
38). Putting the various ingredients together (including
prototypicality conditions of
assertion—Recanati 1987: 183), we
get:

(Re-A)
To assert that p is to make an utterance u by which it is made manifest that the speaker has an open (default-reflexive) intention that


(a)
u gives the audience reason to believe that the speaker knows
		that p and wishes to share that knowledge with the audience, and



(b)
the audience recognize (a), and recognize it as open.


This is another complex analysis. The complexity of these accounts
is itself a problem, since it assumed that ordinary speakers are in
the habit of making assertions, and thereby to have the required
intentions for doing it. But since it requires detailed analytic work
to come up with the accounts, and there even are competing accounts,
it is unlikely that ordinary speakers have the intentions required. If
they do, they are clearly not aware of having them as agents usually
are aware of their intentions. Postulating such intentions in ordinary
speakers is clearly problematic.
The difficulty is made more severe, because there are speakers with
a demonstrated inability to understand belief and other cognitive
attitudes. Some speakers with autism, who are clearly by everyday
standards using language for making assertions, fail so-called
false-belief tests. Thereby they reveal an inability to distinguish
between a proposition being believed and being true, and hence (since
they do distinguish between truth and falsity), reveal a lack of
understanding of what it is to believe something. If you cannot
understand what it is to believe something, you cannot intend someone
to believe something either (cf. Glüer &
Pagin 2003). All in all, the complexity and sophistication
required of asserters by these communication-intentions accounts,
gives a reason to suspect that they do not provide necessary
conditions for making assertions.
Normative and commitment accounts of assertion do not seem in
general to suffer from these problems.
3.2 Communicative commitments
The other aspect of the social character of assertion concerns what
the speaker does by means of making an assertion. The idea is
often stated in terms of making a commitment/undertaking,
or taking responsibility. This was emphasized by
C.S. Peirce:

What is the nature of assertion? We have no magnifying-glass that
can enlarge its features, and render them more discernible; but in
default of such an instrument we can select for examination a very
formal assertion, the features of which have purposely been rendered
very prominent, in order to emphasize its solemnity. […] This
ingredient, the assuming of responsibility, which is so prominent in
solemn assertion, must be present in every genuine assertion. For
clearly, every assertion involves an effort to make the intended
interpreter believe what is asserted, to which end a reason for
believing it must be furnished. But if a lie would not endanger the
esteem in which the utterer was held, nor otherwise be apt to entail
such real effects as he would avoid, the interpreter would have no
reason to believe the assertion. (Peirce 1934:
547)

We can distinguish three ideas in the quote from Peirce, and add a
fourth that has been proposed by later authors. Firstly, as a
matter of socio-linguistic observation, speakers in fact in some sense
take responsibility for, or commit themselves to, being right in what
they say. The speaker puts her cognitive authority behind it, so to
speak, and has to suffer some measure of social humiliation if what
she says turns out false. This idea of commitment can also serve to
distinguish between assertion proper and weaker constative forms, such
as guesses and conjectures, since these differ from assertion with
respect to commitment.
Secondly, there is the further idea that the commitment is
made to the addressee or the hearers in general. The speaker who makes
an incorrect assertion opens himself to criticism by his addressee,
perhaps for misleading him, in a way similar to a subject who fails to
live up to a promise. In this respect, the social relation
between speaker and addressee has changed because of the
assertion. Typically, the addressee will hold the speaker accountable
for the correctness of the assertion, and the speaker accept to be
held so accountable. This is again a socio-linguistic observation: it
does not follow that the speaker actually is accountable.
Thirdly, Peirce has the idea that it is the
responsibility-taking that gives the addressee the reason to
believe what is asserted. It is unclear whether Peirce speaks of
reasons in the descriptive sense (a person's actual reason, good or
bad) or in the normative sense (a good reason, actual or not). It is
again probably socio-linguistically true that hearers are more prone
to believe the speaker when they perceive him as sincere,
thereby as taking responsibility. However, a speaker may be sincere
but unreliable (prone to error) and also reliable but insincere (for
instance, conveying messages without caring about their accuracy). As
regards having a good reason, it seems that the reliability
of the speaker is the crucial factor, not sincerity (but
see Moran 2005 for the opposite
view).
Fourthly, we might take the commitment idea to be what
essentially characterizes assertion: on this idea, asserting
that ppp consists in committing
oneself to the truth of ppp. This is the
leading idea of commitment accounts of
assertion.[7]
Commitment-making is a central idea in Searle's
(1969) account. In Searle's view, there
are five rules for the use of force indicating devices, that is, devices
that exhibit the utterance as having a particular force. In the case
of assertion, they are as follows. Here S is the speaker
and H the hearer:

(Srl-A)

1.
The propositional content rule: what is to be expressed is any proposition p. 


2.
First preparatory rule: S has evidence (reasons etc.) for the truth of p. 


3.
Second preparatory rule: It is not obvious to both S and H that H knows (does not need to be reminded of, etc.) p.


4.
Sincerity rule: S believes p.


5.
Constitutive rule: Counts as an undertaking to the effect that p represents an actual state of affairs.

The fifth rule is the crucial one, and it is held to
be constitutive of assertion. Constitutive rules are
contrasted with regulative rules rules (the terminology is
taken from Kant). Roughly, whereas regulative rules regulate a
pre-existing activity, such as traffic regulations regulate traffic,
constitutive rules in a sense create a new activity. Paradigm
examples are rules of games, taken as defining the games, and thus
making it possible to play them. The distinction was introduced by
Rawls (1955), and also suggested by
C.G.B. Midgley (1959), in the same terms
and format as later by Searle (1969:
33–42; cf. Glüer & Pagin
1999).
That is, according to Searle, without rule 5, the practice of
assertion would not exist. Once the rule is in force, an utterance
with the relevant assertion-indicating device creates the
undertaking, and thereby also the assertion itself. According to
Searle (1969: 65), the
speaker expresses the state required by the sincerity rule,
i.e., in the case of assertion, expresses a belief. Also, the
speaker implies that the preparatory conditions are met.
The analysis is completed by first requiring that normal input and
output conditions obtain, second that the conditions of Rules
1–4 are met, and finally that the semantical rules of
the dialect spoken by S and H are such that T is
correctly and sincerely uttered if and only if the aforementioned
conditions are met. Searle's account is thus a complicated combination
of appeals to linguistic conventions, social relations, and reflexive
communicative intentions (see previous subsection).
Later social accounts have tended to focus either on the
conventional/institutional or on the intentional features. An example
is Kotatko (1998: 236–9), who like
Searle stresses the importance of social conventions about what counts
as making a commitment or undertaking. Another example
is Alston (2000: 120):

(Als-A)
U asserted that p in uttering S iff


1.
U R'd that p



2.
S explicitly presents the proposition that p, or S is uttered as elliptical for a sentence that explicitly presents the proposition that p.


Here the locution

“RRR'd that ppp” is short for “UUU took responsibility for its being the case that ppp” (2000:  7).
There is in such accounts a question of what it exactly consists in
to make a commitment or undertaking to the truth of a proposition. One
elaboration of this idea is provided by Brandom
(1994). According to Brandom
(1994: 173–5), the nature of
assertion consists in the fact that in asserting, the speaker achieves
two different social results at the same time: on the one hand
she authorizes the hearer to claim anything that follows from
what is asserted and on the other she undertakes the responsibility
of justifying it.
Another suggestion is given in MacFarlane
(2005):

(MF1-A)  (W*) In
asserting that p at C1C1C_{1}, one commits oneself to withdrawing
the assertion (in any future context C2C2C_{2}) if p is shown to
be untrue relative to context of use C1C1C_{1} and context of assessment
C2C2C_{2}.  
This is the idea that assertion is partly characterized by a
commitment to take back, withdraw, or (in later
writings) retract, the assertion in later adverse
contexts. MacFarlane's framework is relativist, with the idea
that the truth of a sentence, as well as the evaluation of an
assertion, for some particular kinds of sentences (e.g., concerning
future contingents) must be judged with respect to both the original
context of use, and a separate independent context of
assessment (e.g., by an assessor at a future time). As we shall see,
later MacFarlane restates the idea in terms of norms of assertion, but
then too, the idea of retraction of an assertion is
central.
It may be noted here that Dummett in passing expresses a related
idea in saying that “an assertion is a kind of gamble that the
speaker will not be proved wrong”
(Dummett 1976: 84). Should it turn out
that the speaker was wrong, he “may subsequently be compelled to
withdraw it as incorrect” (Dummett 1991:
165).
Both Searle and Brandom took an analysis of promising as
the role model for analysing assertion. There are clear
similarities. For instance, by means of a sincere utterance of

(20)
I promise to call the repair shop
the speaker has committed herself, in relation to the addressee, to
do something. Both speaker and hearer will regard the speaker as
having incurred an obligation to the addressee. The relation between
asserting and promising is discussed in detail
in Watson 2004. Watson elaborates on the
similarities in commitments made with assertions and with promises:
both involve a secondary commitment of what to do in case
things go wrong (2004: 67). But he also
emphasizes the basic difference: that in the case of assertion, but
not in the case of promises, the commitment is to something that
is independent of the speaker. According to Watson, this is
not the truth of what is asserted, but
its defensibility (2004: 68). A
consequence of this is that the speaker is obliged to to defend the
assertion if challenged (2004: 70).
Sandy Goldberg (2013) has recently
drawn attention to the phenomenon of anonymous assertion,
which is exemplified in particular in anonymous posts in comment
threads or discussion forums on the Internet. He remarks that in such
circumstances, hearers cannot hold speakers responsible for their
utterances, and have no means of assessing the epistemic credentials
of the speakers, which leaves them without warrant to trust the
speakers, and speakers know this. As a result,
 when it is mutually known by all parties that a
claim was made under conditions of anonymity, this has a diminishing
affect on the sort of (assertion-generated) expectations that speakers
and hearers are entitled to have of one
another. (2013: 135)
The question is how much of the commitment
 remains. If utterances in these circumstances are still recognizably
 assertions, there seem to be assertions without, or with hardly any,
 speaker commitments. Although this is not an issue raised by
 Goldberg, it seems hard for a commitment account to accommodate.
Suppose, nonetheless, that it is true that in general (or perhaps
even always), that speakers do make commitments when
asserting. Suppose, similarly, that in general, or perhaps always,
speakers do have communicative intentions of some kind when
asserting. Would either assumption directly provide
an account of assertion in these terms? The answer is no, for
the assumptions are only that committing oneself, or having certain
communicative intentions, is a necessary condition for making
an assertion. It is a further step to infer that the respective
conditions are sufficient as well, that is, that there are no
other ways of expressing the relevant commitments or communicative
intentions that are not assertions.
Are there other ways? It is argued in Pagin
(2004) that there are, since one can use the very statement of
a social character account itself to construct an utterance type that
isn't assertoric, but that would be assertoric by the account
in question. A simple example is given by

(21)

I hereby commit myself to the truth of the proposition that there are black swans.

Intuitively, a sincere utterance of (21) would not be an assertion
that there are black swans. What is said does not entail that there
are black swans. It seems to be no more than a declaration of the
speaker's stand on the issue, and that declaration may be accurate
even if there are no black swans. Still, it does incur a commitment to
the truth of the proposition that there are black swans. If
this is right, then incurring a commitment to truth is not sufficient
for asserting. Similar constructions can be made out of other
accounts, for instance by letting the speaker declare herself to have certain
complex intentions.
Pagin's arguments have been criticized. For
instance, Pegan (2009) argues, among
other things, that the proposed counterexamples can be blocked by
carefully amending the theory (cf. Pagin
(2009) for a reply). Both MacFarlane
(2011) and García-Carpintero
(2013) argue that we should distinguish between what is said
and what is asserted, and that this allows us to maintain that
an indirect assertion that swans are black are made by means
of directly saying that the speaker commits
himself. According to both, Pagin's attempt to block the indirect
assertion route fails.
4. Self-representation
According to Frege (1918a: 22), an
assertion is an outward sign of a judgment
(Urteil). The term ‘judgment’ has been used in
several ways. If it is used to mean either belief, or act
by which a belief is formed or reinforced, then Frege's view is
pretty close to the view that assertion is the expression
of belief.
How should one understand the idea of expressing here? It is
natural to think of a belief state, that is, a mental state of the
speaker, as causally co-responsible for the making of the
assertion. The speaker has a belief and wants to communicate it, which
motivates an assertoric utterance. But what about the cases when the
speaker does not believe what he asserts? Can we still say, even of
insincere assertions, that they express belief? If so, in what
sense?
Within the communicative intentions tradition, Bach and Harnish
have emphasized that an assertion gives the hearer evidence
for the corresponding belief, and that what is common to the sincere
and insincere case is the intention of providing such evidence:

For S to express an attitude is
for S to R-intend the hearer to take S's
utterance as reason to think S has that
attitude. (Bach & Harnish 1979: 15),
italics in the original)

(‘R-intend’ is, as above, short for
‘reflexively intend’). On this view, expressing is wholly
a matter of hearer-directed intentions.
This proposal has the advantage of covering both the sincere and
the insincere case, but has the drawback of requiring a high level of
sophistication. By contrast, Bernard Williams
(2002: 74) has claimed that a sincere
assertion is simply the direct expression of belief, in a
more primitive way. Insincere assertions are different. According to
Williams (2002: 74), in an assertion,
the speaker either gives a direct expression of
belief, or he intends the addressee to “take it”
that he has the belief (cf. Owens
2006).
Presumably, the intention mentioned is an intention about what the
addressee is to believe about the speaker. In this case the objection
that too much sophistication is required is less pressing, since it
only concerns insincere assertions. However, Williams's idea (as
in Grice 1969) has the opposite defect
of not taking more sophistication into account. The idea that
the alternative to sincerity is the intention to make the addressee
believe that the speaker believes what he asserts, is not general
enough. An insincere speaker SSS who asserts
that ppp may know that the
addressee AAA knows
that SSS does not believe
that ppp, but may still intend to
make AAA believe
that SSS does not know
about AAA's knowledge, precisely by making
the assertion that ppp. There is no
definitive upper limit to the sophistication of the deceiving
speaker's calculations (cf. Pagin 2011: Section
7). In addition, the speaker may simply be stonewalling,
reiterating an assertion without any hope of convincing the addressee
of anything.
A more neutral way of trying to capture the relation between
assertion and believing was suggested both by Max Black
(1952) and by Davidson
(1984a: 268): in asserting
that p the speaker represents herself as believing
that p. This suggestion appears to avoid the difficulties
with the appeal to hearer-directed intentions.
A somewhat related approach is taken by
Mitchell Green (2007), who appeals to
“expressive conventions”. Grammatical moods can have such
conventions (2007: 150). According to
Green (2007: 160), an assertion
that ppp invokes a set of conventions
according to which the speaker “can be represented as bearing
the belief-relation to ppp”.
As one represent oneself as believing, one can also represent
oneself as knowing. Inspired by Davidson's proposal, Peter Unger
(1975: 253–70) and Michael Slote
(1979: 185) made the stronger claim that
in asserting that p the speaker represents herself as
knowing that p. To a small extent this idea had been anticipated
by G.E. Moore when claiming that the speaker implies that she
knows that p (1966: 63).
However, it is not so clear what representing oneself amounts
to. It must be a sense different from that in which one
represents the world as having certain features. The speaker
who asserts

(22)

There are black swans.

does not also claim that she believes that there are black
swans. It must apparently be some weaker sense of
‘represent’, since it is not just a matter of
being, as opposed to not being, fully explicit. By means of answering
the question what I believe with an utterance of (22) I do represent
myself as believing that there are black swans, equivalently with
asserting it. What I assert then is wrong if I don't have the belief,
despite the existence of black swans.
On the other hand, it must also be stronger than the sense of
‘represent’ by which an actor can be said to represent
himself as believing something on stage. The actor says

(23)

I’m in the biology department.

thereby representing himself as asserting that he is in the biology
department, since he represents himself as being a man who honestly
asserts that he is in the biology department. By means of that, he in
one sense represents himself as believing that he is in the biology
department. But the audience is no way invited to believe
that the speaker, that is, the actor, has that belief.
Apparently, the relevant sense of ‘represent’ is not
easy to specify. That it nevertheless tracks a real phenomenon is
often claimed to be shown by Moore's Paradox. This is the paradox that
assertoric utterances of sentences such as

(24)

It is raining but I don’t believe that it is raining.

(the omissive type of Moorean sentences) are distinctly odd, and
even prima facie self-defeating, despite the fact that they
may well be true. Among the different types of account of Moore's
Paradox, Moore's own emphasizes the connection between asserting and
believing. Moore's idea (1944:
175–6; 1966: 63) was that
the speaker in some sense implies that she believes what she
asserts. So by asserting (24) the speaker induces a contradiction
between what she asserts and what she implies. This contradiction is
then supposed to explain the oddity.
An analogous move has been made as regards knowledge-varieties of
Moorean sentences, such as

(25)

It is raining, but I don't know that it is raining.

Clearly, utterances of sentences like (25) are bad, and some think
that they are as bad as the paradigmatic Moorean sentences like
(24). It is then argued that their badness show that a speaker who
asserts that ppp also represents himself as
knowing that ppp
(cf. Unger 1975:
256–60; Slote 1979: 179,
and Williamson 2000: 253–5 with
application to the knowledge norm).
Linguistic arguments of this kind in general, explicitly or
implicitly, have the form of an inference to the best explanation. As
such, they are problematic, since there are competing explanations of
the badness of Moorean utterances. We return to this topic at end
of subsection 6.2.
A definition proposed by Dummett (1981:
300) may be seen as a way of cashing in the talk of
self-representation:

(D-A)

A man makes an assertion if he says something in such a manner as deliberately to convey the impression of saying it with the overriding intention of saying something true.

Dummett's proposal is presumably intended to give necessary as well
as sufficient conditions, but there are problems with both. With the
necessary conditions because of the possibility of direct expressions
of belief, as urged by Williams, and with sufficiency for reasons of
the same kind as discussed at the end of the previous section: a
speaker may try to convey the Dummett-type impression in deviant
ways.
5. Cognition
Communicative intentions accounts, commitment accounts, and
self-representation accounts are all descriptive: they say nothing
about what ought to be done, about the existence of norms, or
about the propriety/correctness of assertions. However, except for the
idea that a sincere assertion is the expression of a belief that a
speaker actually has, none of these types of account focuses on the
cognitive features of representing the world and judging the
representation to be true as a main characteristic. A few more
cognitively oriented accounts do that.
5.1 Relation to truth
As noted above, Frege held (1918a:
22) that an assertion is an outward sign of a judgment
(Urteil). A judgment in turn, in Frege's view, is a
step from a Thought, that is, a representational content, to the
acknowledgment of its truth (Frege 1892:
34; translation in Frege 1960:
64, with ‘admission’ instead
of ‘acknowledgment’
for ‘Anerkennung’). Since for Frege,
the truth value is the Reference (Bedeutung) of a sentence, a
judgment is an advance from Sense to Reference. In case the subject
makes a mistake, it is not the actual Reference, but anyway the
Reference the subject takes it to have.
We can transform Frege's view slightly, in the following way: in
judging that ppp, the subject advances from
the content that ppp to the
relevant point of evaluation, with respect to which this
content is either true or false. Frege countenanced exactly one point
of evaluation: the World. In a sense, judging is applying a
content to the World.
In this form, the idea generalizes. If contents are possible-worlds
propositions, the points of evaluation are possible worlds. All actual
judgments are then applications of propositions to the actual
world. If contents are temporal propositions, true or
false with respect to world-time pairs, then all actual judgments are
applications to the ordered pair of the actual world and a relevant
time, usually the time at which the judgment is made. This is the
point with respect to which a sentence, used in a context of
utterance, has its truth value (cf. Kaplan
1989: 522). Again, the relation is general: if the content of a
judgment is a function from indices of some type to truth
values, then a judgment is the very step of applying that content to
the relevantly actual index.
On this picture, what holds for judgment carries over to
assertion. It is in the force of an utterance that the step is taken
from the content to the actual point of evaluation. This view has been
stated by Recanati with respect to the actual world:

a content is not enough; we need to connect that content with the
actual world, via the assertive force of the utterance, in virtue of
which the content is presented as characterizing that
world. (Recanati 2007: 37)

Essentially, this is Frege's view: the speaker gives an outer sign
of taking the proposition to be true. The question is whether this
view can be given a non-metaphorical rendering that improves on the
idea of expressing a belief.
One phrase that is often used in this context that of
“presenting a proposition as true”
(cf. Wright 1992: 34). Prima
facie, it characterizes assertion well. However, there are two
problems with the idea. The first is that it should generalize to
other speech act types, but does not seem to do so. For instance,
presenting the proposition that Elsa is at home as a
proposition that the speaker would like to know the truth value of,
leaves it open whether the utterance is interrogative, optative, or
imperative:

(26)

a.
Is Elsa at home? 


b.
I would like to know whether Elsa is at home. 


c.
Inform me whether Elsa is at home!
Secondly, it is unclear what “presenting” amounts
to. It must be a sense of the word different from that in which the
word ‘heterological’ is presented as long
in

(27)

‘Heterological’ is a long word.

For if the word is presented as long in the sentence (27),
then also the proposition that snow is white is presented as
true in the sentence

(28)

The proposition that snow is white is true.

even if the sentence is not uttered assertorically. There
is therefore a weak sense of ‘present’, which
does not require that the presentation itself is made with assertoric
force (like an obsolete label on a bottle), and that sense is too
weak. It would be instantiated by conjectures, assumptions, and
perhaps also by forceless utterances. There is clearly also a stronger
sense of ‘present’ which does
require assertoric force (for cases when the label is taken to apply),
but that is just what we want to have (non-circularly)
explained. Simply using the phrase “present as true” does
not by itself help.
Another idea for characterizing assertion in terms of truth-related
attitudes is that assertion aims at truth. This is stated,
for instance, both by Bernard Williams (1966)
and by Michael Dummett (1981). It can be
understood in two rather different ways, the one intended by Williams
and the other by Dummett (for some ways of understanding what it could
be for belief to aim at truth,
see Engel
(2004), Glüer & Wikforss
(2013).
On Williams's view, the property of aiming at truth is what
characterizes fact-stating discourse, as opposed to, e.g.,
evaluative or directive discourse. It is natural to think of

(29)
The moon is about 384.000 km from the Earth

as stating a fact, and of

(30)
Bardot is good

as expressing an evaluation, not corresponding to any fact of the
matter. On Williams's view, to regard a sincere utterance of

(31)
It is wrong to steal

as a moral assertion, is to take a realistic
attitude to moral discourse: there are moral facts, making moral
statements objectively true or false. This view again comes in two
versions. On the first alternative, the existence of moral facts
renders the discourse fact-stating, whether the speaker thinks so or
not, and the non-existence renders it evaluative, again whether the
speaker thinks so or not. On the second alternative, an utterance of
(31) is an assertion if the speaker has a realistic attitude towards
moral discourse and otherwise not.
On these views, it is assumed that truth is a substantial property
(Williams 1966: 202), not a concept that
can be characterized in some deflationary way. As a consequence, the
sentence

(32)
‘Bardot is good’ is true.

is to be regarded as false, since (30) is objectively neither true
nor false; there is no fact of the matter.
Pointing to the difference between fact-stating and evaluative
discourse may help to distinguish assertions from evaluations, but
does not, again, help to distinguish assertion from other acts within
the fact-stating family, such as conjectures and assumptions. In fact,
unless we read a lot into “stating”, it is not enough even
to distinguish assertion from other acts that concern facts, or states
of affairs, such expressing a wish that a fact obtains.
In addition, recent years have seen a broadening of the use of the
terms ‘truth’
and ‘assertion’ that runs counter to
characterizing assertion by means of the fact-value dichotomy. In
various forms of relativism, expressions of judgments of
personal taste, such as

(33)
Licorice is tasty.

are characterized as assertions, and the semantic treatments use
truth as the basic sentence property. Common to varieties of
relativism with respect to predicates of personal taste is the idea
that there is an extra parameter of evaluation, a standard of
taste, over and above, say, possible world and time. Despite the
lack of objectivity in a more ordinary sense, such a semantics is
typically coupled with treating utterances of sentences such as as
assertions (cf. Kölbel 2004:
71; Lasersohn
2005; Egan
2012; MacFarlane 2014:
Chpt. 7). There is, of course, a further question whether such
a treatment is appropriate.
5.2 Models of communication
Perhaps the best way of capturing the cognitive nature of assertion
is to to give a theory of the cognitive features of normal
communication by means of assertion. A classic theory is Stalnaker's
(1974, 1978). Stalnaker provides a model
of a conversation in which assertion and presupposition dynamically
interact. On Stalnaker's model, propositions are presupposed in a
conversation if they are on record as belonging to the common ground
between the speakers. When an assertion is made and accepted in the
conversation, its content is added to the common ground, and the the
truth of the proposition in question will be presupposed in later
stages. What is presupposed at a given stage has an effect on the
interpretation of new utterances made at that stage. Stalnaker uses a
possible worlds framework, and characterizes the common ground as a
set of possible worlds (the worlds where all that is presupposed is
true), the context set.
In this framework Stalnaker (1978: 88–89) proposes three
rules for assertion:

(Stal)

i.
A proposition is always true in some but not in all of the possible worlds in the context set. 


ii.
Any assertive utterance should expresses a proposition, relative to each possible world in the context set, and that proposition should have truth value in each possible world in the context set.


iii.
The same proposition is expressed relative to each possible world in the context set.

Stalnaker comments on the first rule:
 To assert something incompatible with what is
presupposed is self-defeating […] And to assert something which
already presupposed is to attempt to do something that is already
done.
On such an approach, the satisfaction of a presupposition is
an admittance condition of an assertion (cf. Karttunen 1974;
Heim 1983). This idea connects with Austin's more general pragmatic
idea of felicity conditions of speech acts.
However, as was already pointed out by Stalnaker
(1974: 55), and later stressed
in Lewis (1979), an assertion that
intuitively presupposes the truth of another proposition need not
fail, but can instead have the effect of adjusting the common
ground. In so-called accommodation, the hearer adds
background assumptions that would be required for interpretation. For
instance, upon hearing Lewis utter

(34)

The cat has gone upstairs

the hearer who didn't know may accommodate by adding the assumption
that there is a unique, contextually salient cat. Accommodation is
further discussed in Stalnaker (2002),
where it is stressed, among other things, that it works, when it
works, because of what is already presupposed. For example (34), it is
presupposed that the speaker knows whether or not he has a cat.
Whatever the truth about presupposition accommodation, Stalnaker
offers a model of the cognitive features of communication and the role
of assertion therein. Does it thereby also offer an account of
assertion? The answer is no, for the role of assertion is shared by
other speech acts such as assuming
and conjecturing. What is added to the common ground is only
for the purpose of conversation, and need not be
actually believed by the participants. It is only required
that it be accepted (cf. Stalnaker
2002: 716).
Stalnaker has not (as far as I am aware) attempted to add a
distinguishing feature of assertion to the model. This has, however,
been attempted by Jonathan Schaffer
(2008) and by Max Kölbel (2011:
68–70). Schaffer proposes to add a topic-sensitive
knowledge norm (cf. subsection 6.2) to the
Stalnakerian picture. Kölbel focuses on commitments instead. According
to Kölbel, assumptions differ from assertion in two respects. Firstly,
they are temporary, which means that they can be revoked when they
have served their purpose. Secondly, they do not have the same
commitment properties. On Kölbel's view, an assertion
that ppp is made with the (Brandomian)
undertaking of the “obligation to justify
that ppp on request”. This
undertaking, according to Kölbel, also distinguishes assertion from
presupposition, although in a more subtle way. It is not, however,
clear why in Kölbel's view, Stalnaker's account would be needed in
addition to the obligation property.
Another cognitive account is offered by Pagin
(2011). The account is summarized by the
phrase: “an assertion is an utterance that is prima
facie informative”. For an utterance to be informative is
for it to be made in part “because it is true”. What this
amounts to is different, but complementary, for speaker and
hearer. For the speaker, part of the reason for using a
particular sentence is that it is true (in context); that is, the
speaker believes, with a sufficient strength, that the sentence
expresses a true proposition. For the hearer, taking the utterance as
informative, means, by default, to update his credence in the
proposition as a response to the utterance, both in the upwards
direction and to a level above 0.5.
The prima facie element of the account means that the
typical properties on the speaker and hearer side are
only default properties associated with surface features of
the utterance: the declarative sentence type, a typical intonation
pattern, etc. There are many possible reasons why a speaker my utter
such a sentence without believing the proposition, and why a hearer
may not adjust his credence in the typical manner. For example, the
speaker may be lying, the hearer may distrust the speaker, or may
already have given the proposition a very high credence before the
utterance. On Pagin's picture, it is the cognitive patterns associated
with surface features, on the production and comprehension sides, that
characterize assertion. This way of dividing the account between
speaker and hearer is somewhat controversial.
Yet another cognitive account is elaborated
in Jary (2010). Jary's account is
situated within Relevance Theory, a more general account of
cognition and communication. As a typical ingredient of this general
framework, when an assertion is made, the proposition expressed by the
utterance is presented as “relevant to the hearer”
(2010: 163),
where ‘relevant’ is a technical term
(Sperber & Wilson 1995: 265).
What distinguishes assertion from other speech act types is
something different:

Assertion cannot be defined thus, though. In order for an utterance
to have assertoric force, it must also be subject to the cognitive and
social safeguards that distinguish assertion. […] It is the
applicability of these safeguards that distinguishes assertion both
from other illocutionary acts and from other forms of information
transfer. (Jary 2010: 163–4)

Social safeguards consist in sanctions against misleading
assertions, while cognitive safeguards consist in the ability of the
hearer to not simply accept what is said but meta-represent the
speaker as expressing certain beliefs and intentions
(2010: 160). It is part of a full
account of assertion, according to Jary, that assertions are subject
to these safeguards. This also distinguishes assertions from promises
and commands, where the proposition is not presented as subject to the
hearer's safeguards; “rejection is not presented as an option
for the hearer” (2010: 73).
Although Jary's account no doubt captures some of the cognitive
ingredients in producing and comprehending assertions, it seems also
to be a fairly liberal mixture of social character accounts and
communicative intentions accounts. One wonders whether it is
impossible to make assertions without the existence of social
sanctions, and how plausible it is to suppose the average speaker
to intend his utterance to be subject to the hearer's ability
to meta-represent the speaker.
6. Norms
The idea that language use in general is governed by rules or norms
is old and widespread. That speech acts, as speech acts, are governed
by norms, is again a well established idea. It is also currently
(2014) a very popular idea: by far most of the literature on assertion
over the past fifteen years has concerned the question of the
so-called “norms of assertion”, often simply taking for
granted that there are such norms, and that they play a central and
fundamental role. The task is then to identify them.
In the literature, two very different types of norm have been
discussed. One type concerns the decision whether or not an assertion
has been made by means of an utterance. These norms are usually
characterized as conventions. The other type concerns
conditions of propriety, or correctness, of
assertion (in some cases actions following an assertion). These are
typically called “norms”, and are sometimes characterized
as “constitutive” of assertion as a speech act type. We
shall discuss these two types separately.
6.1 Conventions
Austin held that illocutionary acts as opposed to perlocutionary
acts are conventional, in the sense that they can be made
explicit by the so-called performative formula
(Austin 1962: 103). According to Austin,
one can say ‘I argue that’ or ‘I
warn you that’ but not ‘I convince you
that’ or ‘I alarm you
that’. Presumably, the idea was that a speech act type is
conventional just if there exists a convention by which an utterance
of a sentence of a certain kind ensures (if uptake is secured) that a
speech act of that type is performed. Austin probably thought that in
virtue of the performative formulas this condition is met by
illocutionary but not by perlocutionary act types.
The more general claim that illocutionary force is correlated by
convention with sentence type has been advocated by Michael Dummett
(1981: 302, 311). On this view, it is a
convention that declarative sentences are used for assertion,
interrogative for questions and imperative for commands and
requests. Similar views have been put forward by Searle
(1969) and Kotatko
(1998), and the idea has been more
recently defended by Kölbel
(2010). According to Searle (1969: 38,
40), illocutionary acts are conventional, and the conventions
in question govern the use of so-called force-indicating devices
(Searle 1969: 64) specific to each
language. Searle does not claim that the standard sentence types are
force indicating devices (but speculates that a representation of
illocutionary type would be part of the syntactic deep structure).
However, the view that illocutionary acts types are conventional in
this sense has met with much opposition. Strawson
(1964: 153–4) objected early on
that ordinary illocutionary acts can be performed without relying on
any convention to identify the force, for instance when using a declarative
sentence like ‘The ice over there is very
thin’ for a warning. This kind of criticism, now directed
against Dummett, has later been reinforced by Robert J. Stainton
(1997, 2006), stressing that in
appropriate contexts, sub-sentential phrases like ‘John's
father’ (pointing at a man) or ‘very
fast’ (looking at a car) can be used to make assertions,
and gives linguistic arguments why not all such uses can be treated as
cases of ellipsis, that is, as cases of leaving out parts of a
well-formed sentence that speaker and hearer tacitly aware of. If
Strawson and Stainton are right, convention isn't necessary for making
assertions.
Moreover, Donald Davidson
(1979, 1984a)
stressed that no conventional sign could work as a force indicator in
this sense, since any conventional sign could be used (and would be
used) in insincere utterances, where the corresponding force was
missing, including cases of deception, jokes, impersonation and other
theatrical performances. Basically the same point is made by Bach and
Harnish (1979: 122–7). If
Davidson, and Bach and Harnish are right, then conventions are also
not sufficient.
Kölbel (2010) argues against this
that in certain circumstances misuse is impossible. For instance,
according to Kölbel (2010: 125) in a
situation of contract signing, you cannot just pretend to be signing a
contract; if you write your name at the appropriate place, you have
thereby signed the contract, whatever went on in your mind. This is no
doubt correct, but if Davidson and Bach and Harnish are right, it is
possible to fake an entire contract signing situation, as a joke or as
part of a performance. Within a fake situation, you can also fake the
signing, by performing an action that looks just as the genuine
signing itself.
The situation is complicated by the fact that the general question
of when a convention, or rule of any kind, is in force for a
speaker, is substantial and complex (cf. Pagin
1987: Chpt. 1). For instance, it may be fully determined by
purely public features of a linguistic
context ccc whether according to a
convention RRR an assertion was made, but
yet not itself settled by purely public features whether
convention RRR was in force for the speaker
in ccc. This would still leave it a
non-public issue whether an assertion was made.
6.2 Norms of assertion
Most of the discussion of norms during the past fifteen years has
concerned the propriety, or correctness, of
assertions, not conventional means of recognizing them (Kölbel
(2010) is one of few to discuss
both).
In general, an account of assertion in terms of norms is an account
that invokes the existence, or the being in force,
of norms that uniquely govern assertions. This is not just a
sociological observation. I can note
that SSS has committed himself to
doing FFF, in the sense
of accepting such a commitment, without myself
thinking that SSS is obligated to do it,
just as well as I can think
that SSS is obligated although he
himself does not recognize it. By contrast, if I both say that
assertions are actions governed by such and such norms, and that
furthermore assertions are in fact made, I have myself taken a
normative stance, acknowledging the force of norms.
Does such an acknowledgment come already with classifying
assertions as correct or incorrect? Is correctness an
inherently normative notion, or is it just descriptive?
According to, for instance, (an earlier view of) Paul Boghossian
(1989: 513), the mere fact that we can
evaluate assertions as correct or incorrect shows that words are
governed by norms of use. According to Kathrin Glüer, Anandi
Hattiangadi, and Åsa Wikforss, and to a later view of Boghossian's, on
the other hand, there is no reason to see in the notions of
correctness and incorrectness anything more than a descriptive
classification, which may then be coupled with certain a preference
for correct assertions over incorrect ones, both in making and in
taking (cf. Glüer 2001:
60–5; Hattiangadi
2010; Wikforss
2001; Boghossian
2003; Glüer & Wikforss 2009a,
2009b). Those preferences may then be explained by wholly
external factors, for instance by appeal to social psychology, or the desire
for knowledge, but is not internal to the idea of assertion
itself. Moreover, even if we are using a genuinely normative notion of
correctness, it may well be that the norm in question is not unique to
assertion, but governs a broader range of actions, perhaps actions in
general, as in the case of moral norms. We shall return to this latter
point.
As has often been noted, an assertion can be correct in different
respects. For instance, a speaker can say something true but be
impolite in saying it, thereby making an assertion that is incorrect
with respect to norms of etiquette. It may also have been immoral, or
imprudent, tactically or strategically bad. Moreover, an assertion may
have, for instance an implicature that is incorrect, even though the
primary act considered in isolation is to be deemed correct.
Sometimes, a distinction is made between aspects of badness that
can be eliminated by means of retracting an assertion, and aspects
that can't be. I can take back a claim if I find I was wrong, but I
cannot eliminate for instance a breach of confidence. According to
Dummett (1976: 48), this distinction is
drawn between aspects that concern what is said and aspects
that concern the saying of it, respectively
(compare Kvanvig 2009: 148). The
relevant notion of correctness, according to Dummett, concerns only
what is said. He adds that
 an undifferentiated concept of the acceptability
of an utterance—of an utterance's not being open to criticism of
any kind—would be of little use for our
purposes.
Clearly, it is the epistemic aspects of assertions that
have been the concern in the literature when characterizing assertions
as “correct”, “justified”,
“proper”, “warranted”,
“assertible”, or “warrantedly
assertible”. Such a notion was taken on board in pragmatism, and
in later forms of anti-realism. John Dewey
(1938) seems to have been the first to
characterize truth in terms of assertoric correctness, with his notion
of warranted assertibility, even though this idea had a clear
affinity with the verifiability principle of Moritz Schlick
(1936). Dewey was later followed by,
notably, Dummett (1976) and Hilary
Putnam (1981). Common to them is the
position that there cannot be anything more to truth than being
supported by the best available evidence. Dewey, following Peirce,
regarded truth as the ideal limit of scientific inquiry
(Dewey 1938: 345), and a proposition
warrantedly asserted only when known in virtue of such an
inquiry. Warranted assertibility is the property of a proposition for
which such knowledge potentially exists
(1938: 9).
Putnam (1981: 54–6) operated
with an idea of assertibility under ideal epistemic conditions. Under
normal conditions, a speaker can be justified in making an assertion
even though what she asserts is false. The evidence is enough for
truth under normal circumstances, but because of abnormal interference
the evidence falls short. For instance, improbable changes, say
because of a fire, may have taken place after the speaker's
observation. However, in ideal epistemic conditions evidence
that is sufficient for justifying an assertion is also conclusive.
On Dummett's view, we do get a notion of truth distinct
from the notion of a correct assertion only because of the
semantics of compound sentences (1976:
50–2). In particular, the conditions of correctly
assertorically uttering a conditional ϕ → ψϕ → ψ\phi {\
\rightarrow\ }\psi may depend on the truth-conditions
of ϕϕ\phi rather than the conditions of
correct assertions by uttering ϕϕ\phi. This
is the case in particular in the future tense, as in ‘If
it will rain, the ceremony will take place indoors’. In
this case, whether it is correct or not, at the time of utterance, to
assert that it will rain, or that it will not rain, is irrelevant to
the correctness of an assertoric utterance of the conditional
itself.
In these early discussions, the strategy was that of getting a
handle on truth by means of an appeal to the notion of the
correctness of an assertion, which was taken as more fundamental. The
question of what the correctness of an assertion consists in was not
itself much discussed, although Dummett (1976:
77–8) is careful to distinguish between the case where a
speaker makes an assertion on the basis of adequate evidence, and the
case where adequate evidence is available, but the speaker
makes the assertion without being aware of it. In the latter case,
according to Dummett, the speaker was not correct, but the assertion
was.
In recent discussions, by contrast, the general strategy has been
to get a handle on knowledge, and most of the contributors
have been concerned with assertion in the context of investigations in
epistemology, often from different epistemological
standpoints. Nevertheless, the scope of the discussion of assertion
has increased, with more of a focus on the very question itself: under
what conditions is an assertion correct,
or proper.
The recent wave of discussion was started by Timothy Williamson
(1996, 2000), who proposed that
assertion is governed by a norm of assertion. Williamson
proposed what has come to be known as the knowledge norm,
or knowledge rule:

(K-A)
One must: assert p only if one knows p. (Williamson 2000:  243)

(K-A) is proposed as part of an account of
assertion. Other norms have been proposed, and some ideas about the
role and status of the norm proposed are usually shared. Let's
use NNN as schematic for a norm of
assertion.

(N1)
N applies specifically to assertion.

By (N1), the norm is a norm only for the making of assertions. As a
norm of assertion, the norm is in place to govern the making of
assertions in general, and to govern nothing else.

(N2)

The condition of N uniquely identifies assertion.

If (N2) holds of (K-A), then there is one unique speech act type,
or even one unique action type such that the agent is permitted in
general to perform actions of this type, with respect to a
proposition ppp, only of the agent knows
that ppp. Knowing what the condition of
permissibility is, we will also know what the action type is. This is
different from (N1), for (N1) leaves it open that another norm with
exactly the same condition (knowledge
that ppp) would hold for some other
action type than assertion. This is ruled out by (N2).

(N3)

Being subject to N is essential to assertion as an action type.

(N3) goes beyond (N2) insofar as (N2) leaves it open that assertion
is only actually individuated
by NNN, and that assertion could
have been governed by some other norm. It should be emphasized
here that on the norm view, it is being subject to the norm
that characterizes assertion, not conforming to the norm. An
assertion that violates the norm is still an assertion. Nothing but an
assertion could violate the norm, if the (N2) and (N3)
properties hold.

(N4)
Assertion is constituted by N.

This is a stronger property than (N3), but several of the theorists
do claim that their proposed norm has this property. We return below
to what constitutivity amounts to.

(N5) A particular
assertion can be subject also to other rules with different areas of
application, such that the all-thing-considered outcome is that an
assertion ought not to be done, even though not a violation of
N.  
As we shall see, although this is a property everyone agrees on, it
has been used in the debate over the intuitive support of some
candidate norms over others.

(N6)
Norms are related to evaluations of assertions. An assertion that violates N is incorrect/improper. An assertion that satisfies all relevant norms is correct/proper.

On some understandings of the matter, (N6) is simply
trivial. However, it is perfectly possible to see some candidate norms
as ideals, while the evaluations of individual assertions may
take into account various relations between the assertion and the norm
over and above conformity. In fact, this has been an issue in the
debate, as we shall also see.
The positive evaluation requires satisfaction of all relevant
norms. If there is only one, this norm cannot be only prohibitive,
that is, specify necessary conditions, as does (K-A), but should be
biconditional, and also give sufficient conditions as well. A
biconditional strengthening of (K-A) is

(K2-A)
It is permissible for S to assert that p iff S knows that p.

Williamson gives only the prohibitive version. The biconditional
version is discussed in Hawthorne 2004:
23 and Lackey 2011: 251–75,
as well as in Brown 2010
and 2011
(Brown (2010) argues against the
sufficiency part by means proposed counterexamples).
It may be noted that (K2-A) is prima facie inconsistent
with (N5): if the norm says that an assertion is permissible while
another norm says that it is not, we have a contradiction, unless we
specify a separate respect in which assertions are assessed
with respect to the norm of assertion. As long as the norm is couched
in neutral deontic terms, there is a problem. Merely prohibitive norms
do not have this problem, unless in relation to other norms that are
themselves biconditional.
For the most part, the literature on norms of assertion has
concerned the question which the norm of assertion is. That
is, it is in general not asked whether there are norms of assertion
(in some sense or other), what status such norms have, whether they
are constitutive, or what constitutivity amounts to. It is normally
taken for granted that there is a norm that holds for all assertions
and for assertions specifically (the property). The question is which,
and what the reasons are for favoring this or that answer.
Over and above Williamson himself, the knowledge norm (K-A) (or
(K2-A)) has been favored by Keith DeRose
(2002), Steven Reynolds
(2002),
Jonathan Adler (2002: 275), John
Hawthorne (2004), Jason Stanley
(2005), Pascal Engel
(2008), Jonathan Schaffer
(2008), and John Turri
(2010).
Some have proposed norms that are similar to (K-A), but instead
sets the condition in relation to the transmission of
knowledge to the hearer. An example is Manuel García-Carpintero
(2004: 156):

(TK-A)
One must (assert p only if one's audience comes thereby to be in a position to know that p)

Similar norms have also been proposed
by Pelling (2013) and
by Hinchman (2013). Carpintero suggests
that his version is preferable to Williamson's because it brings out
the social, communicative function of language
(2004: 157). He argues that only (TK-A)
could be expected to be a convention, and takes that to speak
in its favor.
Most alternatives to the knowledge norm that have been proposed are
weaker, in requiring less than knowledge. It has been proposed that
assertion goes just with truth, just with knowledge, or just with
justification. Matthew Weiner (2005)
proposed a truth norm:

(T-A)
Assert only what is true.

(this formulation is close to what Weiner says. Cf. also the survey
article Weiner (2007). MacFarlane
(2014: 103) also proposes a truth rule,
but requires it to be qualified as being reflective: this
means, in the context of MacFarlane's relativism, that the
proposition should be true in the context of utterance, as assessed
from the same context of
utterance.[8]
According to MacFarlane, the truth rule needs to be complemented by
a retraction rule (see below).
A corresponding statement of a belief norm would be

(B-A)
Assert only what you believe.

With ‘say’ instead of belief, this is close to a
reformulations of Grice's second submaxim of Quality (“Do not
say what you believe to be false.” Grice
1989: 27). The belief norm is explicitly stated
by Bach (2008: 77). Bach directly infers
that the norm of assertion is the belief norm from the fact that an
assertion is sincere if, and only if, the speaker believes what she
asserts.
A justifed belief norm requires more than (B-A):

(JB-A)
Assert only what you believe with justification.

Exactly what justification amounts to varies between authors. Igor
Douven
(2006, 2009)
argues for a norm of rational belief.
Several authors have argued that it is the justification
itself that is the key to evaluating assertions. A standard
formulation would be

(J-A)
Assert only that for which you have proper justification.

This view has been taken by Jonathan Kvanvig
(2009: 145; 2011:
249–50). Kvanvig proposes that the relevant concept of
justification is such that it is sufficient for knowledge, provided
the proposition is both believed and true (and the justification is
undefeated). Justification is also emphasized by Jennifer Lackey
(2007: 608), who proposes
a Reasonable to Believe norm, according to which belief is
not required; what is required is that it is reasonable to believe
that ppp, and that the speaker asserts
that ppp for this reason (even if in fact
not believing that ppp). Lackey backs this
idea up with thought experiments about so-called
“selfless” assertions, where speakers make assertion in
accordance with their evidence but against their beliefs. Also, Ishani
Maitra and Brian Weatherson (2010: 112)
propose what they call The Evidence Responsiveness Rule, that
one assert that p only if one's attitude
towards ppp is properly responsive to the
evidence (they also propose to complement it with an action
rule, that it is proper to assert
that ppp only if acting as
if ppp is “the thing for you to
do”.)
These alternatives to the knowledge norm all propose norms with
weaker requirements. But a stronger requirement has also been
suggested by Stanley (2008):

(EC-A)
Assert only what is epistemically certain.

Here one is epistemically certain of a
proposition ppp is
 if and only if one knows
that ppp (or is in a position to know
that ppp) on the basis of evidence that
gives one the highest degree of justification for one's belief
that ppp. (2008:
35)
Stanley also considers as an alternative a subjective
certainty norm, where it is the degree of confidence of the
speaker that matters, but in the end opts for regarding this norm as
derivable from the epistemic certainty norm.
Some authors have proposed norms for what to do after an
assertion. MacFarlane (2014: 108) holds
that a speaker is required to retract an assertion if it
turns out not be true, in a context of assessment:

(R-A)
Retract an (unretracted) assertion if it turns out not to be true.

Again, in MacFarlane's case, this rule is stated in the context of
his relativism, with respect to a context of use and a context of
assessment. In MacFarlane's theory, assertion is governed jointly by
the (reflective) truth norm and the retraction norm. According to
Michael Rescorla (2009), there is no
norm at all for proper making of assertions. There are only
norms that govern later reactions. He proposes three similar
alternatives, which share the idea that when a speaker is challenged
with respect to an assertion he has made, he must either defend the
assertion or else retract it (Rescorla 2009:
103–5).
Many authors have noted that standards for judging assertions vary
between contexts, and have proposed to work that into the account. The
first to do so was Keith DeRose
(2002). DeRose argued from the knowledge
norm and the varying standards for assertion as premises, to the
conclusion that epistemic contextualism is true
(2002: 182). Epistemic contextualism is
the view that ‘know’ is semantically context
dependent. The truth value of a knowledge attribution ‘X
knows that ppp’ depends on
standards of knowledge in the context of the
knowledge attributor.
DeRose's argument has been challenged by several authors. For
instance, Brown (2010) points out that
the argument depends on the biconditional version (K2-A) of the
knowledge norm, and argues that the sufficiency part is less well
supported. Stanley also criticizes DeRose, despite accepting that the
standards of proper assertion vary between contexts. According to
Stanley, the reason this does not lead to contextualism about
knowledge is that assertion is governed by the certainty norm
(2008: 55–6). According to
Stanley, the varying standards of proper assertion depends on the
context dependence of ‘certain’, not on any
context dependence of ‘know’ (which Stanley
rejects). According to Schaffer (2008),
on the other hand, knowledge itself is relative to a question
under discussion, which is reflected in his version of the
knowledge norm (Schaffer 2008: 10).
Some authors who note that standards of proper assertion appears to
vary between context suggest that there is not a single norm with a
contextual parameter, but rather that different norms apply in
different contexts, still governing one and the same speech act type,
assertion. This line has been taken by Jim Stone
(2007) and by Janet Levin
(2008). In some contexts knowledge is
required, in some contexts something less demanding, such as justified
belief. Patrick Greenough (2011) takes
this line even further by proposing norm-relativism: what
norm is relevant for an assertion in a context is relative to a
perspective.
One question that arises with respect to such views is this: if the
speech act type is individuated by the norm governing it, and norms of
utterances vary between contexts, is it then still the case that one
and the same (illocutionary) speech act type is performed across
contexts. One who has denied this is John Turri
(2010). Turri suggests a class of
“alethic” speech acts, including conjecturing, asserting,
and guaranteeing. The first is weaker and the third stronger than
assertion. They are ranked on a so-called “credibility
index” (2010: 85), depending on
what degree of credibility is required by the speech act type. In
contexts with different demands on credibility, different speech acts
are performed. For assertion itself, the standard is invariant, it is
simply knowledge. Turri uses this view to counter DeRose's argument
for epistemic contextualism. The view itself, however, seems not to
conform to the standard view concerning which utterances belong in the
extension of ‘assertion’.
A more radical conclusion from the assumed normative variation has
been drawn by Herman Cappelen
(2011). According to Cappelen, the
proper conclusion is that assertion as a speech act type doesn't
exist. In Cappelen's words, the
term ‘assertion’
 fails to pick out an act-type that we engage in
and it is not a category we need in order to explain any significant
component of our linguistic practice. (2011:
21)
The picture is complicated even further by the fact that many
accounts recognize more than one evaluation of assertions. This is
proposed by Williamson himself (2000:
256–7), who speaks of a case where it
is reasonable to assert that ppp if
one reasonable believes that one knows
that ppp. He goes on to say

There may be other evidential norms for assertion, if they can be
derived from the knowledge rule and considerations not specific to
assertion. The reasonableness of
asserting ppp when one reasonably believes
that one knows ppp has just been derived in
exactly that way (Williamson 2000:
257).

The same distinction between what the norm requires and what is
reasonable in its light has been drawn by DeRose. In the terminology
of DeRose (2002: 180), it is known as
the distinction between primary and secondary
propriety. It is primarily improper but secondarily proper to assert
what you reasonably believe that you know but you in fact
don't. Similarly, Adler (2002: 235, 275)
distinguishes between proper assertions, requiring knowledge,
and warranted assertions, requiring full belief. Equally,
Turri (2014) distinguishes
between good assertions, requiring knowledge,
and permissible assertions, requiring reasonable belief.
In these cases, a weaker secondary norm is derived from a stronger
primary norm. Others have proceeded in the opposite direction. Both
Bach (2008: 77) and Frank Hindriks
(2007: 403–4) derive a knowledge
norm from a belief norm by means of appealing to a knowledge norm
for belief: since you should assert only what you believe and
believe only what you know, you should also assert only what you
know. In a somewhat similar fashion, Weiner derives a reasonable
belief norm from the truth norm by appeal to Gricean cooperation:
the requirement that one's utterance have some point is part and
parcel of Grice's Cooperative Principle. An assertion does not satisfy
this requirement just by be being true (2005:
232–8) or by being based on facts equally available to
the hearer. The speaker must have additional reasons, and in some
cases knowledge.
Some authors reject this distinction between primary and secondary
propriety. Examples are Lackey (2007:
604), Engel (2004: 56), and
Kvanvig (2011: 242). They all think that
what we need is an unequivocal notion of when a speaker has acted
appropriately and when not: if one has acted in an inappropriate way,
then one is subject to legitimate criticism, and otherwise
not.[9]
Accepting the distinction between primary and secondary propriety
induces a problem for the intuitive support for the various
theories. A large part of the intuitions that serve to support one or
the other norm theory relies on raw intuitions about what one should
or shouldn't assert in some situation, or what is proper or improper
to assert there. If there are several ways an assertion can be proper
or improper, then it is not easy to see what concept of propriety is
being tracked by these intuitions.
Indeed, the distinction was introduced precisely in order deflect
counterintuitive consequences. Several authors have objected to the
knowledge norm that it is too demanding: many assertions seem not
improper even in case the speaker does not know what he asserts. As
noted above, Williamson discusses such cases. The idea is that a
particular intuition that seems to disconfirm a particular normative
theory can be explained away by saying that it does not in
fact track the primary propriety, but instead only some secondary
propriety. The problem with this move is that for the theory to be
supported by intuitions of correctness/propriety, the application of
the primary/secondary distinction should itself be based on
these very intuitions. Since intuitions don't come labeled as
“primary” and “secondary”, there is a risk of
a substantial underdetermination of theory by data: two theorists need
not agree about whether or not an intuition about a particular case
supports a certain theory. Hawthorne and Stanley
(2008: 585–6) remark that
 […] intuitions go a little hazy in any
situation that some candidate normative theory says is sufficient to
make it that one ought to FFF but where, in
the case described, one does not know that situation obtains.

The situation is not solved by rejecting the primary/secondary
distinction. As noted, everyone agrees that assertions are governed by
various norms: moral, prudential, conversational, rules of
etiquette. When does an intuition track the intended notion of a
proper assertion, and when something else altogether? Kvanvig
(2011: 235) and Engel
(2008: 52–4) have drawn attention
to this situation. According to Kvanvig, intuitions typically concern
whether assertions are all-things-considered appropriate. Kvanvig
points out that an assertion may be all-things-considered appropriate
without being appropriate from the epistemic point of
view. However, although this is an important distinction, the question
is how intuition does support the idea that the epistemic point of
view is what is relevant.
Virtually throughout the discussion, authors have simply appealed
to their own intuitions. However, this is an area where
experimental philosophy would be highly relevant, since the question
largely seems to concern what norms ordinary asserters accept. The
situation is about to change. Recently, John Turri
(2013) has published results from a
series of survey studies, where the aim was to determine whether
speakers accept a factive or a non-factive norm: the norm
is factive in case an assertion is proper only if what is
asserted is true, otherwise non-factive. Turri reports six studies,
where subjects are presented with written scenarios and are given
multiple choice questions in relation to them. Turri concludes that
they all showed that speakers apply a factive norm. A story character
Maria has strong evidence for a
proposition ppp, but knows that the evidence
is inconclusive (an inventory that is only almost complete). In one
particular case, the evidence is misleading, and subjects are asked
whether Maria “should” assert the false but well supported
proposition. A clear majority answer no. However, when given
a choice between alternatives of what to say in the same
evidential situation where it is false
that ppp (Experiment 4), almost as many
answer prefer “ppp” or
“probably ppp” as prefer
“probably not ppp”,
“not ppp”, or “definitely
not ppp”. Furthermore, when asked
to evaluate an assertion in a situation of blameless mistake,
where the speaker had every reason to expect the evidence not to be
misleading (Experiment 5), the outcome was also not
straightforward. With respect to the question “Is there a sense
in which it is incorrect for Robert to make the statement?”, a
little more than half answered no. These results indicate
that it is not so clear exactly what properties the subjects'
intuitions track, nor to what extent there is intersubjective
agreement. Further studies may help to clarify the picture.
In addition to direct intuitions about propriety, proponents of the
knowledge norm have adduced indirect evidence in the form of
intuitions about conversational patterns, claiming that these patterns
are best explained by the acceptance of the knowledge norm. Williamson
himself appeals to such patterns, two of which concern utterances of
like

(35)
It is raining, but I don't know that it is raining.

(36)
Your ticket did not win.


Concerning the first, it is claimed
(Williamson 2000: 253) that an utterance
of (35) is as odd as ordinary belief-related Moorean sentences such as
(24) above. The oddity is explained by appeal to the knowledge
norm. If the assertion is proper, the speaker knows that the
proposition expressed by (35) is true. Since knowledge distributes
over conjunction, she knows that it is raining and she knows that she
does not know that it is raining. As knowledge is factive, since she
knows that she does not know that it is raining, she does not know
that it is raining. So we have a contradiction. Hence, the assumption
that the assertion is proper leads, on the knowledge account, to a
contradiction. An assertion that cannot be proper is odd. Since the
oddity is explained by the knowledge account, it supports the
knowledge account.
(36) is imagined uttered by speaker A in the following
situation. The draw of a (fair) lottery with a large number of tickets
has been held. It is known that only one ticket wins. B has a
ticket, but neither A nor B knows the result. A
asserts (36) on merely probabilistic grounds. The probability that the
ticket has won is very low (and one can get it arbitrarily low, short
of zero, by increasing the number of tickets in the
lottery). According to the argument, an assertion of (36) in such a
case is intuitively incorrect. According to Williamson
(2000: 246–49), A is
criticizable, since A represented himself as having an
authority for the assertion which he lacked. The conclusion is that
only knowledge provides proper warrant, since no probability short of
1 escapes the criticism for lack of authority. Hence, the knowledge
account explains the unacceptability of A's utterance.
Both arguments have been criticized by a number of authors. The
most common line is that the data can be equally well or better
explained by other competing accounts, extraneous principles, or a
combination of these. For instance, Kvanvig
(2009: 149–50) presents a derivation to show that the
oddity of (35) can be explained by appeal to a justification
norm. Similarly, Douven (2009), with
respect to his rational belief account. According
to Stanley (2008), since the certainty
norm requires more than just knowledge, everything that can be
explained by appeal to the knowledge norm can also be explained by
appeal to the certainty norm. Others have pointed to the general
pragmatic/rhetorical infelicity of (35) as a fact extraneous to norms
of assertion, including Douven (2006:
474–5), Maitra & Weatherson
(2010: 110), and Cappelen (2011:
38–40). Maitra and Weatherson claim that there need be
nothing wrong with first asserting that ppp,
and later, in response to a question, deny that one knows
that ppp, but without retracting
the assertion. What is strange is just conjoining the two
statements. The opposite view on the matter was taken by
Paolo Casalegno (2009: 246).
Concerning the lottery example (36), Weiner
(2005: 236) explains the apparent unacceptability of the
utterance by appeal to Grice's maxim of Manner: putting it
categorically, as in (36), instead of in terms of high probability,
legitimizes the inference that A has more information than
what was known before the draw. Kvanvig (2009:
156) claims that the oddity is explained by the justification
account, since for a belief to be justified, in Kvanvig's sense,
requires that there is no need of further investigation. This is a
condition that is not met for the utterance of (36) in the lottery
scenario. In lotteries, you always have to wait for the draw in order
to close the inquiry.
Further conversational patterns have been adduced in favor of the
knowledge norm, by Williamson and others. For an overview,
see Turri (2014: 565–6). A general
problem with the appeal to conversational patterns is that they don't
seem to favor specifically normative views over corresponding
non-normative views. For instance, it appears that any linguistic
phenomenon that can be explained by appeal to a
knowledge norm can be equally well explained by appeal to the
view that asserters represent themselves as knowing what they
say (although there is no norm). Combine this with extraneous,
non-assertion-specific norms. That A's utterance of (36) is bad
can then be explained by appeal to self-representation of knowledge,
together with the general moral norm that it is wrong the
mislead hearers, for instance by representing oneself as having
knowledge.
Let's finally turn to the question of the normative status of the
proposed norms. In much of the literature, this question is not
touched upon, but when it is, authors tend to favor the idea that the
norm is constitutive of assertion. Williamson himself
(2000: 238–41) is an example, and
so are Stanley (2008:
52), Rescorla (2009:
99–101), Kölbel (2010:
109–11), and MacFarlane (2014:
101–2). Typically, norms of assertion are held to be
constitutive of assertion as a speech act type as rules of a game
define the game and are constitutive of game action types. Thus,
proponents take their preferred norms of assertion to have properties
(N1)–(N4) above (by contrast, Dummett's view
(1976: 89) was that convention
settles what warrants assertion in a community).
Against the constitutivity claim, Pagin
(2011) has argued that insofar as there are norms of assertion,
their status among speakers do not much resemble rules of
games. Firstly, players of a game rarely disagree about what the rules
of the game are. If there is a disagreement, it is settled either by
appeal to a generally recognized authority, such as a rule-book, or by
stipulation, if it concerns a new case to be covered by rules. We
don't find players appealing to intuition or the oddity of certain
conversational patterns to convince each other of claims about what
the rules are. By contrast, in the literature on norms of
assertion itself, (as is evident from the presentation above) authors
disagree widely about what the norm is, and they appeal to both
intuition and linguistic arguments to support their own view. It seems
that these authors, and perhaps speakers in general, find it easier to
agree about whether an utterance was an assertion than about whether
it was or was not proper.
Secondly, for a constituted game action type,
like castling in chess, to be performable at all, the rules
of chess must by some decision be in force; if the rules of
chess are not in force for a person at a particular time, her moving
two pieces of wood at that time does not constitute castling
(cf. Pagin 1987:
Chpt. 3; Glüer & Pagin
1999). But this again seems very unlike the relation of norms
to assertion. It does not seem that an utterance is recognizable as an
assertion in virtue of a decision to regard it as subject to
this or that norm. Rather, it seems that recognizing an utterance as
an assertion precedes seeing it as subject to evaluation.
Maitra (2011) also criticizes the
game analogy. Maitra claims that proposed norms fail to be properly
constitutive:

By contrast, neither the knowledge nor the truth norm tells us what
it is to assert something. Rather, they each assume that there is
something that counts as asserting, and tell us at what an asserter
ought to be aiming when performing the speech act
(Maitra 2011: 282).

According to Maitra, the reason for this failure on the part of the
truth and knowledge norms is that they don't tell us
what counts as asserting. They cannot be rewritten in that
format either, because that would leave them incomplete. If we try
“A speaker asserts ppp when he utters
a sentence appropriately related to ppp and
is criticizable for not knowing ppp”,
this leaves out a required specification of the kind
of criticizability at issue (2011:
282, note 12). We might add a specification of this as well,
but as I have understood Maitra, this information was supposed to be
provided by the norm itself, and if it doesn't, the game analogy is of
no help. A similar point, that we don't get the relevant specific
notion of correctness from the general concept of a rule, is argued
in Pagin (1987: Chpt. 2).
Finally, there is a fundamental question that is not discussed at
all: In virtue of what is a norm of assertion in force for a
speaker or a speech community, if it is in force? Is it because of a
collective acceptance? If so, it must be tacit, and, because of the
wide disagreement among theorists, usually not accessible to
introspection. Is it because of some metaphysical fact that assertions
are essentially governed by this or that norm whenever they are
performed, and whatever speakers think about it? That would indeed make
sense of the debate, since it can be construed as an investigation
into normative reality. But there remains a question of what influence
normative reality has on linguistic practice. Probably none, or at
best a pretty haphazard one, judging from the disagreement. Is it
perhaps something internal to each speaker, and not intersubjectively
shared? That can explain the differences among the participants in the
debate. But it is hard to square this with the assumption that we
share a practice of making and understanding assertions. If you and I
accept different norms, then I simply misapply my norm to
your utterances when interpreting them, and consequently
systematically misinterpret your utterances. But for all we can tell,
this does not generally seem to happen. All in all, the norm approach
to assertion seems to have rather many challenges.