Ayn Rand (1905–1982) was a novelist-philosopher who outlined a
comprehensive philosophy, including an epistemology and a theory of
art, in her novels and essays. Early in her career she also wrote
short stories, plays, and screenplays. Rand’s first and most
autobiographical novel, We the Living (1936), set in the
Soviet Union, was published only after many rejections, owing to
widespread sympathy for the Soviet “experiment” among the
intellectuals of the day. We the Living was quickly followed
by the dystopian novel, Anthem (1938), written as “a
kind of rest” from work on her next major novel, The
Fountainhead (1943). The Fountainhead, also published
after many rejections because of its individualism, and largely panned
by critics, soon became a best-seller by word of mouth. The
Fountainhead brought Rand international fame, and Atlas
Shrugged (1957) sealed this fame. By 1958, Rand’s novels,
increasingly philosophical, had won her ideas a sufficiently devoted
following for her to form, in association with psychologist Nathaniel
Branden (with whom she later broke), an official
“Objectivist” philosophical movement, complete with
journals and lecture courses. For all her popularity, however, only a
few professional philosophers have taken her work seriously. As a
result, most of the serious philosophical work on Rand has appeared in
non-academic, non-peer-reviewed journals, or in books, and the
bibliography reflects this fact. We discuss the main reasons for her
rejection by most professional philosophers in the first section. Our
discussion of Rand’s philosophical views, especially her
moral-political views, draws from both her non-fiction and her
fiction, since her views cannot be accurately interpreted or evaluated
without doing so.
 
1. Introduction
1.1 Ayn Rand and Philosophy

In Rand’s own words, her first and greatest love, her
“life purpose”, was “the creation of the kind of
world … that represents human perfection”, while her
interest in philosophical knowledge was “only” for the
sake of this purpose (Journal entry for 4 May 1946; in 1997:
 479).[1]
 Nevertheless, her interest in philosophical knowledge continued long
after she had created this world in her magnum opus, Atlas
Shrugged, her last work of fiction. In her non-fiction, Rand
developed a conception of metaphysical realism, rationality, ethical
egoism (rational self-interest), individual rights,
laissez-faire capitalism, and art, and applied her philosophy
to social issues. She wrote polemical, philosophical essays, often in
response to questions by fans of Atlas Shrugged and The
Fountainhead; lectured on college campuses; and gave radio and
television interviews. In her own words, her philosophy, 


in essence, is the concept of man as a heroic being, with his own
happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive
achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute.
(Rand 1957 [1992]: Afterword) 


Capitalism, “the unknown ideal”, is for her the only
political-economic system compatible with this philosophy because it
is the only system based on respect for human beings as ends in
themselves. The free-market libertarian political movement, though
largely disowned by Rand, drew—and draws—great inspiration
from her moral defense of the minimal state, that is, the state whose
only raison d’être is protection of individual
rights.

Whereas Rand’s ideas and mode of presentation make Rand popular
with many non-academics, they lead to the opposite outcome with
academics. She developed some of her views in response to questions
from her readers, but never took the time to defend them against
possible objections or to reconcile them with the views expressed in
her novels. Her philosophical essays lack the self-critical, detailed
style of analytic philosophy, or any serious attempt to consider
possible objections to her views. Her polemical style, often
contemptuous tone, and the dogmatism and cult-like behavior of many of
her fans also suggest that her work is not worth taking
 seriously.[2]
 Further, understanding her views requires reading her fiction, but
her fiction is not to everyone’s taste. It does not help that
she often dismisses other philosophers’ views on the basis of
cursory readings and conversations with a few philosophers and with
her young philosophy student acolytes. Some contemporary philosophers
return the compliment by dismissing her work contemptuously on the
basis of hearsay. Some who do read her work point out that her
arguments too often do not support her conclusions. This estimate is
shared even by many who find her conclusions and her criticisms of
contemporary culture, morality, and politics original and insightful.
It is not surprising, then, that she is either mentioned in passing,
or not mentioned at all, in the entries that discuss current
philosophical thought about
 virtue ethics,
 egoism,
 rights,
 libertarianism, or
 markets.
 (Readers may also find the entry on
 Nozick’s political philosophy
 to be of interest.) We present specific criticisms of her arguments
and claims below, in the relevant sections of this entry.
1.2 Life and Work

Ayn Rand was born Alissa Zinovievna Rosenbaum, to a bourgeois Jewish
family in St. Petersburg, Russia, on 2 February 1905. A witness to the
Russian Revolution and civil war, Rand opposed both the Communists and
the Tsarists. She majored in history, but the social science program
in which she was enrolled at Petrograd State University included
philosophy, law, and philology. Her teachers emphasized—as she
herself later did—the importance of developing systematic
connections among different areas of thought (Sciabarra 1995).
Rand’s formal philosophical education included ancient
philosophy (especially Plato and Aristotle), logic, philosophical
psychology, Marxism-Leninism, and non-Marxist political thought. But
she was evidently also exposed to Hegelian and Nietzschean ideas,
which blossomed during this period (known as the Russian Silver Age),
and read a great deal of Friedrich Nietzsche on her own. After
graduating from Petrograd State University in 1924, an interest in
screenwriting led her to enroll in the State Institute for
Cinematography. On the literary side, she studied the great Russian
novelists and poets, but fell in love with Victor Hugo, to whose
influence she owes the “Romantic Realism” of her
novels.

In 1925 Rand succeeded in obtaining permission to visit relatives in
the United States; hating the Soviet system, she left with no
intention of returning. After six months with relatives in Chicago,
she made her way to Hollywood where, on her second day, a fortuitous
encounter with Cecil B. DeMille led to a job as a script reader, and
later as a screenplay writer. The next week she had another fortuitous
encounter, this time with the actor Frank O’Connor, whom she
married in 1929. She was married to him till his death in 1979. She
adopted the pen name Ayn Rand to (it is thought) protect her family
back in Russia, although she also told the New York Evening
Post in 1936 that “Rand” was an abbreviation of her
Russian surname.

Rand and her husband moved permanently to New York City in 1951, where
she became involved with, and was influenced by, the circle of mostly
New-York-based intellectuals involved in the revival of classical
liberalism, such as the economic journalist Henry Hazlitt, the
Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises, and the Canadian-American
novelist, literary critic, and political philosopher Isabel Paterson.
Rand also studied, and was a great admirer of, the Lockean philosophy
of the American founding. Rand lived and worked in New York City until
her death in 1982.

Rand holds that philosophy, like all forms of knowledge and
achievement, is important only because it is necessary for living a
good human life and creating a world conducive to living such a life.
Philosophy supplies the most fundamental cognitive and normative
abstractions which, respectively, identify and evaluate what is.
Everyone, according to Rand, needs a philosophy and is guided by at
least an implicit one (1982a: ch. 1). Her novels express her belief
that if our philosophy is more or less correct, our lives will be more
or less successful, if our philosophy is wildly off the mark, our
lives will be disastrous. Philosophy thus has an urgent, practical
importance. But unlike Marx, her philosophical and political antipode,
Rand thinks that social change has to start with a moral revolution
within each individual and the spread of the right ideas and ideals
through rational discourse and the inspiration of art.

Rand’s ideal human being appears, in varying degrees of
development, in all her novels; her ideal world appears in Atlas
Shrugged. Her novels feature striking, complex plots with subtle
psychological explorations of her characters’ emotions and
thoughts, and philosophical reflections that rarely lose sight of the
dramatic context. Like many famous Russian novelists, especially
Dostoevsky, whom she recognized as a great psychologist, Rand also
uses long speeches to lay out her philosophy, a device that has both
its supporters and its detractors. She described Atlas
Shrugged as a “stunt novel” and a murder
mystery—the murder of the human soul by a collectivist culture.
By “soul”, however, she meant not an immortal substance
that survives the death of the body—she is not a dualist in any
aspect of her philosophy—but the mind, or the human spirit that
celebrates life on this earth. She took a familiar phenomenon and
literary trope—a workers’ strike—and turned it on
its head to show what happens when “the men of
mind”—scientists, philosophers, industrialists,
entrepreneurs, writers—the “prime movers” of a
society—go on strike. It also purports to show how the wrong
metaphysics can lead to the wrong ethics and thus to disastrous
personal choices and a disastrous political and economic system, and
how the right philosophy is needed for the rebirth of the soul and the
rebuilding of the world. Her protagonists are not knights on white
steeds rescuing damsels in distress, or swordsmen who can fight off a
dozen enemies single-handed, but men and women in the
mid-20th century industrial America of steel mills,
skyscrapers, and glimmering highways: women who run transcontinental
railroads and men who revolutionize architecture or (long before clean
energy became a cause célèbre) build a motor
powered by static electricity to produce limitless, clean energy. Her
novels show the importance of striving to be the best we can be:


Do not let your fire go out, spark by irreplaceable spark, in the
hopeless swamps of the approximate, the not-quite, the not-yet, the
not-at-all. Do not let the hero in your soul perish, in lonely
frustration for the life you deserved, but never have been able to
reach. Check your road and the nature of your battle. The world you
desired can be won, it exists, it is real, it is possible….
(Atlas Shrugged, 1957 [1992]: 983).


Her novels inspire readers because they present heroes of unbreached
integrity, heroes who lead colorful and remarkable lives and succeed
not in spite of, but because of, their uncompromising virtue. This
estimate of their virtue is not, of course, shared by all: many
readers find her characters wooden, her writing stilted, and her
ethical and political views misguided.

Rand paid tribute to Aristotle, whom she considered the greatest of
all philosophers, in the titles she gave to the three Parts of
Atlas Shrugged (Non-Contradiction, Either-Or, A is
A) and to one of the chapters (The Immovable Movers). While
she differed sharply from Nietzsche on many issues, including
rationality, free will, and individual rights, his influence is
evident in her provocative, often aphoristic, point-counterpoint
writing style, as well as in her “transvaluation” of
traditional values and her powerful affirmation of life and joy and
the spirit of youth. In the Introduction to the 25th
Anniversary edition of The Fountainhead, she stated that the
novel’s sense of life is best conveyed by a quotation from
Nietzsche’s Beyond Good and Evil: “The noble soul
has reverence for itself”. (For The
Fountainhead’s partly sympathetic and partly critical
engagement with Nietzsche’s ideas, see Hunt 2006.)
1.3 Metaphysics and Epistemology

Fundamental to Rand’s outlook—so fundamental that she
derives the name of her philosophical system,
“Objectivism”, from it—is a trichotomy among three
categories: the intrinsic, the subjective, and the
objective (ITOE: 52–54; Rand 1965: 13–23). An
intrinsic phenomenon is one whose nature depends wholly on factors
external to the mind; a subjective phenomenon is one whose nature
depends wholly on the mind; and an objective phenomenon is defined,
variously, as that which depends on the relation between a living
entity’s nature (including the nature of its mind) and its
environment, or as that which depends on the relation between a
properly functioning (rational) mind and extramental reality.
Commentators are divided over the best way to interpret Rand’s
views on this issue.

Rand holds that there is a widespread tendency to ignore the third
category or to assimilate it to the second, thus setting up a false
dichotomy between the intrinsic and the subjective. On Rand’s
view, many of the fundamental questions of philosophy, from the
existence of universals to the nature of value, involve fruitless
debates over the false alternative “intrinsic or
subjective?” in cases where the phenomenon in question is
neither intrinsic nor subjective, but rather objective.

If ethics is the branch of philosophy concerned with practice, then in
a sense all of Rand’s philosophy is ethics, for Rand stresses
“the supremacy of actual living over all other
considerations”, and insists that philosophy needs to be
“brought up to the realm of actual
living”—adding “I say intentionally brought
up to it, not down” (Journal entry for 15 May 1934, p.
72; in Rand 1997: 73). Consequently, Rand regularly concerns herself
with the practical implications and social relevance not only of moral
and political philosophy, but likewise of the seemingly more arcane
strata of metaphysics and epistemology—as when she identifies
errors in concept-formation as one of the roots of racism, or
mind-body dualism as a root of the dichotomy between economic and
personal freedom. This approach likewise reflects Rand’s
emphasis on integrating each piece of information into the total
context of one’s knowledge, and her consequent hostility to
compartmentalization.

Rand’s conviction of the vital practical importance of abstract
theory may help to explain the passionately polemical nature of her
philosophical writing, which some readers find inspiring and others
hyperbolic and off-putting—though Rand’s admiration for
Nietzsche, as well as her having been educated in a Marxist-Leninist
atmosphere, may also play a role. Rand also tended—perhaps owing
in part to the same two influences—to regard philosophical
errors as revelatory of the psychological flaws of their authors.

For a more in-depth presentation of Rand’s views on epistemology
and metaphysics, please see the
 supplement on Epistemology and Metaphysics

2. Ethics
2.1 What is Ethics, and Why do we need It?

Ethics 


is a code of values to guide man’s choices and actions—the
choices and actions that determine the purpose and the course of his
life. (1961b: 13) 


Before we can decide which code of values we should accept, we need to
ask why we need a code of values at all. Rand claims that no
philosopher before her has provided a scientific answer to
this question, and so none has provided a satisfactory ethics.

Rand starts by describing value or “the good”, in
classical fashion, as the object of pursuit: “that which one
acts to gain and/or keep” (1961b: 16). Thus, the concept of
value presupposes the concept of “an entity capable of acting to
achieve a goal in the face of an alternative”—and the
basic alternative facing any living entity is life or death (1961b:
16). It is the conditional nature of life that gives rise to values,
not just human values, but values as such. As she puts it: 


Metaphysically, life is the only phenomenon that is an end in
itself: a value gained and kept by a constant process of action.
(1961b: 18) 


Survival is the organism’s ultimate value, the “final goal
or end to which all [its] lesser goals are the means”, and the
standard of all its other values: “that which furthers its life
is the good, that which threatens it is the evil” (pp.
16–17). The same, suitably modified, applies to human beings.
Life is the standard and goal of all genuine human values, in the
sense that all of them—from food to philosophy to fine art to
ethics—must be explained and justified as requirements of human
survival. “Ethics is an objective, metaphysical necessity of
man’s survival” (p. 24). Thus, 


[t]he standard of value of the Objectivist ethics … is
man’s life, or: that which is required for man’s
survival qua man, (1961b: 25) 


that is, 


the terms, methods, conditions and goals required for the survival of
a rational being through the whole of his lifespan—in all those
aspects of existence which are open to his choice. (1961b: 27) 


To choose to live is to accept one’s “own
life” as one’s “ethical
purpose”.

Rand’s metaphysical arguments make two points central to her
axiology and ethics. (1) Values are not just a human phenomenon but a
phenomenon of life: life necessitates value. Thus, values are neither
intrinsic properties of things, nor subjective, neither free-floating
Platonic entities, nor mere matters of desire or preference, culture
or time. Rather, values are relational or objective,
dependent on the nature of the valuing entity and the nature of its
environment. (2) An entity’s values are determined by the
requirements of survival for entities of its kind, and ethics is a
requirement of human survival.

Rand seeks to bolster this claim by arguing that the concept of value
entails the concept of life: 


epistemologically, the concept of “value” is genetically
dependent upon and derived from the antecedent concept of
“life”. (1961b: 18) 


She supports it by asking us 


to imagine an immortal, indestructible robot, an entity which moves
and acts, but which cannot be affected by anything, which cannot be
changed in any respect, which cannot be damaged, injured or destroyed.
(1961b: 16) 


Such an entity, she concludes, cannot have values.

Critics raise two objections to this argument. (i) It begs the
question by assuming what is at issue, namely, that a non-living
entity cannot be harmed (Nozick 1971). Unlike the robot of this
example, real robots can be damaged or destroyed, not only by
external events, but also by a failure to perform their functions
well, that is, by their own actions or inactions. Hence they can,
quite straightforwardly, be said to have
 values.[3]
 (ii) Even if one were to accept that the concept of value entails the
concept of life, one could consistently regard one’s survival as
a means to a certain kind of life: a life of dedication to
the greater glory of God, the common good, the environment, and so on
(Mack 1984).

Rand’s naturalism, and her rejection of intrinsicism and
subjectivism in favor of objectivism, anticipate recent naturalisms
and echo Aristotle’s argument, against both the Platonist and
the subjectivist, that “the good” must always be
good-for-something. Her conception of the function of
morality is notable both for its affinity to, and its difference from,
Thomas Hobbes’ conception: like Hobbes, Rand sees morality as a
necessary means to long-term survival, but unlike Hobbes, she does not
see morality as requiring a contract or even as a fundamentally social
affair. The need for morality, according to Rand, is dictated by our
nature as creatures that must think and produce to survive; hence we
would need morality even on a desert island. There is, however, no
duty to survive; morality is based on a hypothetical imperative: if
you choose to live, then you must value your own long-term survival as
an ultimate end, and morality as a necessary means to it. (The
much-debated question of whether the choice to live is a moral choice
(Mack 1984, 2003; Long 2000; Rasmussen 2002, 2006) or a pre-moral one
(Peikoff 1991; Gotthelf 1999; Smith 2000, 2006), and the implications
of either position for the objectivity of Rand’s Objectivist
ethics must, unfortunately, be left undiscussed.) If asked why the
choice to live commits you to your own long-term survival rather than
some other ultimate end (such as, for example, the greatest happiness
of the greatest number (Nozick 1971), or becoming worthy of eternal
life in heaven), the answer is: because any other ultimate end, if
consistently adhered to, would lead to death.

Rand’s ethics is thus firmly teleological, this-worldly, and
foundationalist. Virtue is “the act by which one gains/and or
keeps” values in light of a recognition of certain facts (1961b:
27, 28); it “is not an end in itself … not its own
reward” (1957 [1992]: 939). A fact central to a
“scientific” ethics is that reason is the chief
indispensable human tool of survival, and we exercise reason by
choice. Hence rationality is the fundamental moral virtue, a virtue
implicated in all the other virtues, including productiveness
 (Section 2.4 below).

Rand is widely credited by Objectivists (Peikoff 1991; Binswanger
1990, 1992; Kelley & Thomas 1999—see Other Internet
Resources; Gotthelf 1999; Smith 2000, 2006) with having solved the
is-ought problem by showing that morality is essential for long-term
survival as a rational being, and so anyone who chooses to live ought
to be moral (1961b: 19). But if the choice to live is itself a moral
choice, in the sense that we ought to choose to live, then the
argument proceeds from an ought to an ought, not from an is to an
ought. On the other hand, if the choice to live is a non-moral choice
(an idea that’s hard to reconcile with Rand’s general view
that all significant choices are moral choices), then suicide can
never be wrong, even if it is done for cowardly, irresponsible, or
unjust reasons, a view that seems incoherent (King 1984 and Narveson
1998 criticize this and other aspects of Rand’s moral views).
Even more problematically, if morality is needed only for long-term
survival, and choosing suicide is not immoral, then a suicide-bomber
does no wrong in killing innocent people.

Relatedly, how should we understand the idea of survival as a rational
being—the life “proper to a rational being” (Rand
1961b: 27). Is a life proper to a rational being a necessary means,
and only a necessary means, to literal, long-term survival? Or is such
a life also, in part, the ultimate goal, something to be created and
preserved for its own sake? Again, what are we to make of the many
passages in which Rand states that the ultimate goal is one’s
own happiness?

Rand herself thought that she had only one, consistent metaethical
view: the ultimate goal is the individual’s own survival; the
only way to survive long-term, i.e., over a complete life-span, is to
live by the standard of man’s life as a rational being, which
means: to live morally; and happiness is the psychological
“result, reward and concomitant” (p. 32) of living thus.
Many of Rand’s commentators follow her in holding that there is
only one consistent view, while disagreeing on the right
interpretation of it (Den Uyl & Rasmussen 1978; Machan 1984, 2000;
Peikoff 1991; Bidinotto 1994—see Other Internet Resources; Hunt
1999; Kelley & Thomas 1999—see Other Internet Resources;
Gotthelf 1999; Smith 2000, 2006). Others (Mack 1984, 2003; Badhwar
1999, 2001; Long 2000) argue that Rand’s writings actually allow
of two, if not three, mutually incompatible views of the ultimate
goal, and our task is to see which of these is the dominant or most
plausible view. The three views are: survival, survival qua
rational being, and happiness in the ancient Aristotelian sense of
flourishing or eudaimonia. In the rest of Section 2, we will
present the textual evidence for each of these views of the final
goal, and the common objections to them, in turn.
2.2 Survival as the Ultimate Value

The survivalist view holds that just as literal survival is the
ultimate value for other living entities, so it is for human beings
(Kelley & Thomas 1999; Gotthelf 1999; Smith 2000). Survival is the
source and final goal of all the actions of an entity, that which
gives point to all its other values. For human beings, happiness,
intellectual and artistic pursuits and rationality/morality are all
means to survival. The vicious can “achieve their goals [only]
for the range of a moment”, as evidenced by “any criminal
or any dictatorship” (1961b: 26). Even those whose vice consists
of imitating others rather than looting them live a precarious
existence because they are likely to follow any destroyer who promises
to be their savior (1961b: 25).

“Non-survivalists” make the following objections:

The biological premise that survival is the ultimate goal of all
living things is mistaken. Animals of many species risk their own
death for the sake of reproduction, or for protecting their young or
even their group. But even if survival were the ultimate goal of other
species, it need not be ours.
Even if our own survival needs were the source of all our
values, it would not follow that survival must be the ultimate
psychological and moral goal to which all our other values
are merely necessary means. The genesis of x does not
logically determine the ultimate goal of x. For example, the
source of sexual desire is our reproductive capacity but, as Rand
would agree, it doesn’t follow that we ought to satisfy our
sexual desires only if we want to reproduce.
The survivalist view that turns happiness into a mere means to
survival entails, quite implausibly, that a long, unhappy life is
better than a somewhat shorter but happy life, and just as good as a
long and happy one.
Many dictators, including the Pharaohs of the past and the Stalins
and Maos of the 20th century, have survived by making
elaborate plans to preserve their lives and their power by using a
combination of terror, myth, and bribery. So have many common
criminals. So even if morality enhances our chances of
survival, it cannot be necessary for survival. Under some
circumstances, such as in a dictatorial system, acting morally
decreases our chances of survival, a point that Rand herself
convincingly dramatizes in We the Living and
Anthem.
 A survivalist ethics can support, at best, a bare-bones Hobbesian
morality, not a virtue ethics. If Rand’s virtues were necessary
for survival, the human species would have perished a long time ago,
instead of expanding exponentially. Her rich and challenging picture
of human life and virtue in her novels points to a richer and more
challenging conception of the final end than mere survival.
 Many of Rand’s heroes, from Kira (We the Living)
to Prometheus (Anthem) to John Galt (Atlas
Shrugged), risk their lives for the sake of the values that make
their lives worth living.


Like Hobbes, Rand rightly points out that if everyone or most people
were to start preying on each other, then no one would survive for
long—literally, and that generations of predators would
end up destroying or driving away the producers, and thus destroying
themselves (Anthem and Atlas Shrugged). But this
doesn’t show that a few predators in a society of producers
cannot survive by predation. Indeed, Rand herself sometimes
acknowledges that evil people can survive by free-riding
(“hitch-hiking”, as she calls it) on rational, productive
people:


If some men attempt to survive by means of brute force or fraud
… it still remains true that their survival is made possible
only by their victims, only by the men who choose to think and to
produce the goods which they, the looters, are seizing. (1961b:
25)

 Rand often says that the final end is survival proper to a human
being (1961b: 26), or that the final end is happiness (1961b: 27, 30).
Neither can be reduced to survival.


In “Man’s Rights”, Rand explains an
individual’s right to his own life as 


the freedom to take all the actions required by the nature of a
rational being for the support, the furtherance, the fulfillment and
the enjoyment of his own life. (1963b: 93 and 1967a: 321–22)



“Life” here is explicated in terms of not only continued
survival but also the enjoyment proper to a human being.


For all these reasons, a more plausible interpretation of Rand’s
view is that morality is required for surviving qua human being, that
is, for living a life proper to a human being.
2.3 Survival Qua Man as the Ultimate Value

Just as the standard of value is survival qua human
being, so the ultimate goal is one’s own survival
qua human being. To accept this standard and goal is to
accept (i) the three cardinal values of reason, purpose (or
purposiveness) and self-esteem as not only “the means to”
but also “the realization of one’s ultimate value,
one’s own life” (1961b: 27), and (ii) the three
“corresponding virtues” of rationality, productiveness,
and pride. These values are means to one’s life insofar as they
further one’s life as a rational being, and they realize it
insofar as they express the value we place on our lives.

What it means to value survival qua human being turns on the
relationship of the three cardinal values to the three virtues. Rand
often states that virtue is only a means to value. But when she
explains how the three cardinal values “correspond” to
their three virtues, she does not provide a means-end analysis
(Badhwar 1999, 2001). Thus, she says:


Productive work is the central purpose of a rational
man’s life, the central value that integrates and determines the
hierarchy of all his other values. Reason is the source, the
precondition of his productive work—pride is the result. (1961b:
27)


The virtue of productiveness becomes the central example of purpose
(one of the three cardinal values), reason (another cardinal value)
becomes its source, and the virtue of pride becomes its result. Rand
also defines rationality, which is “the basic virtue”, in
terms of 


the recognition and acceptance of reason as one’s only source of
knowledge … and one’s only guide to action. (1961b: 28)



By this definition, being rational means valuing reason in thought,
word, and deed, and realizing reason in one’s life means being
rational: the virtue and the value entail each other.

This point generalizes to all the virtues and values. Further, since
the (cardinal) values are both “the means to” and
“the realization of one’s ultimate value” (1961b:
27), it follows that the (cardinal) virtues are also both the means to
and the realization of one’s ultimate value: long-term survival
qua human being. On this interpretation, to survive
qua human being is none other than to lead a virtuous life in
which one has realized one’s potential.

Both survivalists and eudaimonists, however, point out that
this conception of the final end contradicts Rand’s oft-repeated
claim that “Virtue is not an end in itself.…” In
addition, eudaimonists make the following objections:

Since even a long, virtuous life need not be a happy one, positing
it as the final end contradicts Rand’s related claim that
“Life is the reward of virtue—and happiness is
the goal and reward of life” (1957 [1992]: 939).
It contradicts Rand’s conception of the final end in her
novels, where happiness is proclaimed as “the purpose, the
sanction and the meaning of life” (1957 [1992]: 674).


Eudaimonists hold that the dominant and/or more plausible
view expressed in Rand’s writings is that happiness—a
happy life—is the ultimate value, where a happy life is
understood as a life of emotional fulfillment in worthwhile goals and
activities. Happiness in this sense necessarily involves
virtue, but is not identical with virtue (Den Uyl &
Rasmussen 1978; Machan 1984, 2000; Mack 1984; Badhwar 1999, 2001; Hunt
1999; Long
 2000).[4]
2.4 Happiness as the Ultimate Value

Happiness is the existentially and psychologically “successful
state of life” (1961b: 27). As an emotion it is not simply a
positive subjective state, as on some contemporary views, but an
emotion that meets certain normative standards: “a state of
non-contradictory joy—a joy without penalty or guilt”,
achievable only by 


the man who desires nothing but rational goals, seeks nothing but
rational values and finds his joy in nothing but rational actions.
(1961b: 32) 


Happiness is also a form of life-affirmation: 


the feeling of one’s blessing upon the whole of the earth, the
feeling of being in love with the fact that one exists and in this
kind of world. (1957 [1992]: 105–6) 


Thus, happiness is an objectively worthwhile and emotionally positive
state of life.

Rand holds that the pursuit of happiness is inseparable from the
activity of maintaining one’s life through the rational pursuit
of rational goals (1961b: 29, 32). A virtuous life is, thus, essential
to happiness. It is also a shield against soul-wracking unhappiness.
Just as even great misfortunes don’t throw Aristotle’s
virtuous individual into misery, they don’t throw Rand’s
heroes into misery. Even at the worst of times, the virtuous
individual’s pain “only goes down to a certain
point” (1943: 344), never touching the core of her being: the
self-esteem that consists of the conviction that she is worthy and
capable of
 happiness.[5]

In keeping with their richer conception of the final end, Rand’s
novels also employ a richer conception of virtue as an integrated
intellectual-emotional character trait to think, feel, and act in
certain ways, rather than simply as an act in light of a recognition
of certain facts (Badhwar 1999, 2001). Her characters reveal their
souls not only in what they say or do, notice or fail to notice, focus
on or evade, on this or that occasion, but in their cognitive,
emotional, and action dispositions, their style of being in the world.
Their actions show not only an intellectual commitment to the right
but a wholehearted “love of rectitude” (1957 [1992]:
512).

This basically Aristotelian view of virtue goes hand-in-hand with a
basically Aristotelian view of emotions. Rand rejects the
reason-emotion dichotomy as stemming, ultimately, from a false
mind-body dichotomy. Emotions are neither raw feelings nor inherently
irrational but automatized value-judgments: 


estimates of that which furthers man’s values or threatens them
… lightning calculators giving him the sum of his profit or
loss. (1961b: 27) 


Emotions provide instant guidance when circumstances do not permit
reasoning everything out anew. But our emotions are only as good as
our reason, because they are “programmed” by our reason.
Hence they can only be corrected by conscious reasoning, and in a
conflict between reason and emotions, one must always side with the
 former.[6]

Eudaimonists argue that Rand’s vision of a virtuous and
happy life in her novels can be understood only as a form of
eudaimonism, even if she often makes statements inconsistent
with this vision. The chief objection to eudaimonism is that,
by defining a happy life partly in terms of virtue, it
employs an unconvincing conception of happiness. The philosophical
literature on happiness in this sense (usually called well-being)
makes and answers many such objections (Badhwar 2014).
2.5 Virtues, Vices, and Egoism

The chief Objectivist virtues are rationality, integrity, honesty
(with self and others), justice, independence, productiveness, and
pride. Rationality, 


one’s total commitment … to the maintenance of a full
mental focus in all issues, in all choices … to the fullest
perception of reality within one’s power, (1961b: 28) 


is the basic virtue of which the other virtues are aspects or
derivatives. The virtues are thus united or reciprocal. Each virtue is
defined partly in terms of a recognition and whole-hearted commitment
to some fact or facts, a commitment understood by the agent to be
indispensable for gaining, maintaining, or expressing her ultimate
value. For example, integrity is “the recognition of the fact
that you cannot fake your consciousness” (1957 [1992]: 936), a
recognition that is expressed in loyalty to one’s rational
values and convictions, especially in the face of social pressures to
surrender them (1961b: 28; 1964a: 52, 80); honesty is “the
recognition of the fact that you cannot fake existence”, a
recognition that is expressed in truthfulness in thought and speech
(1957 [1992]: 936–37); and justice is 


the recognition of the fact that you cannot fake the character of men
as you cannot fake the character of nature, … that every man
must be judged for what he is and treated
accordingly…. (1957 [1992]: 937)


Conspicuous by their absence from Rand’s list of the cardinal
virtues are the “virtues of benevolence”, such as
kindness, charity, generosity, and forgiveness. Rand states that
charity is not a major virtue or moral duty (1964b); likewise,
presumably, kindness, generosity, and forgiveness. Whether, and how
much, one should help others depends on their place in one’s
rationally defined hierarchy of values, and on the particular
circumstances (whether they are worthy of help, what the likely
consequences are of helping them, and so on). The greater their value
vis-à-vis one’s rational self-interest, the
greater the help that one should be willing to give, ceteris
paribus. What is never morally appropriate is making sacrifices,
that is, surrendering something of value to oneself for the sake of
something of less or no value to oneself. Thus, it can never be moral
to knowingly risk one’s life for a stranger (unless, of course,
one’s life is no longer worth living) or to court unhappiness
for the happiness of another, whether stranger or friend. It is
appropriate to help a stranger only in an emergency, and only when the
risk to our own life or well-being is minimal (1963c: 43–45).
This should not be taken to imply that helping a stranger is morally
optional, regardless of the stranger’s plight. Indeed, people
who are “totally indifferent to anything living and would not
lift a finger to help a man or a dog left mangled by a hit-and-run
driver” are “psychopaths” (1963c: 43–45) Rand
makes even more concessions to “common sense morality”
when she states that it’s good to help a neighbor going through
a hard time till he can get back on his own feet, if we can afford to
and if we have no reason to think that he is undeserving. Charity
understood thus is a virtue because it is an expression of the
generalized good will and respect that all normal people have towards
others as creatures who share with them the capacity to value (1963c:
46–47). Nathaniel Branden tries to reconcile charity with a
narrow act-egoism by declaring that the former stems from a
species-identification with another, such that, in revering others,
people “are revering their own life”. By acting
charitably, people actualize this sense of kinship, without
sacrificing their own well-being.

This last is true, but the desire to reduce all motivations to
act-egoistic motivations leads Branden (and Rand and many
Objectivists) to ignore the fact that charity is first and foremost
profoundly other-regarding, prompted by another’s plight rather
than concern for one’s own self-actualization. The same is true
of trying to rescue a dog mangled by a hit-and-run driver, where the
egoistic motivation is even weaker, since here there is no
species-identification, but rather only a
“genus-identification” with another sufferer.

At any rate, the argument from identification can also be used to
justify charity towards strangers in non-emergency situations, for
example, for those who are permanently disabled and unable to care for
themselves (Badhwar forthcoming-b). Rand concedes as much in
“What is Capitalism?” (1965) where she argues that people
who are unable to work must rely on voluntary charity, thus implying
that it is proper for those who can afford it to support strangers in
non-emergency situations. And indeed, as recent scholarship has
revealed, in her own life Rand was often extremely generous, not only
towards friends and acquaintances, but also 
 strangers.[7]

The question arises why Rand thinks that charity, kindness etc. are
not major virtues when they meet all the conditions of
appropriateness: the recipient is worthy of help, one can afford to
help, it is in one’s rational self-interest (or not contrary to
it) to help, and so on. Perhaps Rand thinks that they are
“minor” virtues because we are not obligated to act on
them at all times, the way we are obligated to act justly and honestly
at all times. A deeper reason, however, might be her conception of
people as essentially agents rather than patients, doers rather than
receivers, self-sufficient rather than dependent. Nevertheless,
Rand’s view of the unity of the virtues dictates that, even if
we are not obligated to act on charity, kindness etc. at all
times, they are just as important to possess as the other
virtues. Moreover, in keeping with her emphasis on the importance of
goodwill towards others and “the benevolent universe
premise”, Rand’s heroes are often extraordinarily (and
almost always appropriately) kind and generous, not only to those they
love but also to mere acquaintances, and even sometimes adversaries
(Badhwar 1993b—see Other Internet Resources). Striking examples
include, from The Fountainhead, Howard Roark’s
unsought-for attempt to give hope and courage to Steven Mallory, the
gifted young sculptor whose failure to get work has driven him to the
verge of a spiritual and physical collapse; Roark’s
unreproachful help to his erstwhile adversary, Peter Keating, when
Keating falls on hard times; and from Atlas Shrugged,
Dagny’s support to a heart-broken and despairing Cheryl Taggart
who, in the past, has treated Dagny with scorn; and Hank
Rearden’s generosity towards his exploitative family before he
realizes their
 exploitativeness.[8]
 By contrast, Rand’s villains lack genuine goodwill towards
others and, thus, lack true kindness or generosity.

Just as rationality, a focus on reality, is at the heart of every
virtue, so irrationality, evasion of reality (including
self-deception), is at the heart of every vice. Rand’s villains
are all master evaders motivated by a desire for power, social status,
fame, or unearned wealth, and resentment of the good. They are
“second-handers”—people whose primary relationship
is to other people rather than to reality. Between the virtuous and
the vicious are the “innocently wrong”, people who adopt
wrong moral principles or make wrong choices, not through evasion but
through an error of judgment (Rand does not explicitly recognize any
moral category other than virtue, vice, and moral error, although her
novels portray characters that do not easily fit into any of these
categories). Hank Rearden, in Atlas Shrugged, is the great
innocent living under a burden of unearned guilt because of his
mistaken sense of honor and his charity towards a family interested
only in manipulating and using him. Cheryl Taggart is killed by the
too-sudden revelation that the man she loved and admired as the
embodiment of her ideals is a fraud—and that the world is full
of such frauds.

As already indicated, Rand justifies virtue in both instrumental and
non-instrumental terms, though without distinguishing between them.
The instrumental arguments show the existential and psychological
rewards of virtue and costs of vice. Virtue creates a sense of inner
harmony and enables mutually beneficial interactions with others.
Evasiveness, by contrast, traps one in a “tangled web” of
rationalizations and pretenses. The evader who deceives others is
either eventually caught, or lives in fear of being caught, becoming
dependent on others’ unconsciousness. He is “a
fool”, says a character in Atlas Shrugged, “whose
source of values is the fools he succeeds in fooling” (1957
[1992]: 945). Further, like Sartre, Rand holds that no evasion is
completely successful, because the truth constantly threatens to
resurface. Hence, the evader’s “diseased soul” is in
a state of constant inner conflict and anxiety as he tries to suppress
his awareness of uncomfortable truths while maintaining his hold on
others. His lack of integrity and of esteem for reality results in a
lack of self-love or self-esteem and, indeed, of a solid self. (It is
noteworthy, however, that her portrayal of Gail Wynand in The
Fountainhead is closer to Aristotle’s portrayal of the
vicious man in Book III of the Nicomachean Ethics as someone
who is “unconscious of his vice”, than to her own stated
view of the evader.)

These views are familiar from the history of philosophy, but many
readers find their expression in Rand’s novels to be of unusual
psychological depth and conviction. Nevertheless, the views are
subject to the well-known objection that the complexity and
variability of human psychology and society allow only “for the
most part” generalizations about the existential and
psychological benefits of virtue or costs of vice. Thus, it is
possible for a small injustice to lead to great rewards, especially
since others are willing to shrug off or forgive occasional
transgressions. It is also possible for poor introspection,
forgetfulness, or self-acceptance to allow one to evade something
without any need for supporting evasions or damage to one’s
self-esteem. Again, even if every wrongdoing carries psychological
costs, these might sometimes be outweighed by the long-term costs of
doing the right thing (as Rand herself suggests in her portrayal of
the embittered Henry Cameron and Stephen Mallory in The
Fountainhead).

The non-instrumentalist justification of virtue in Rand’s novels
is largely immune to these objections (though subject to the
objections noted in
 2.4 above).
 To compromise morally is, necessarily, to compromise one’s own
(objectively conceived) happiness, because no existential loss can
compare to the loss of moral integrity. Rectitude is partly
constitutive of genuine happiness because it expresses the right
relationship to reality: to existence, to oneself, and to others. For
the same reason, it is partly constitutive of a self worth loving, an
ideally human or rational self. Like Plato and Aristotle, Rand argues
that virtue necessarily creates inner harmony and certitude. Any value
gained at the price of rectitude is only the simulacrum of genuine
value. In a variety of conceptually interconnected ways, then,
virtuous individuals are necessarily better off than those willing to
take moral short-cuts. In its structure and much of its content,
Rand’s ethical egoism is thus of a piece with the egoism of
ancient eudaimonistic theories.

An objection often levied against egoistic theories is that they give
the wrong reason for acting in other-regarding ways: justly, kindly,
etc. My act is not really just if I give you your due because it is
good for me rather than because you deserve it; it is not really
charitable if I help you for my own benefit rather than yours. A
common reply is that the egoist’s justification is
egoistic but not her motivation, a reply that itself invites
the charge of moral “schizophrenia”. Rand does not address
the “wrong-reason” objection, but it’s unlikely that
she would accept this dichotomy between justification and motivation.
So insofar as her view is instrumentalist and act-egoistic, the
problem remains. The non-instrumentalist strand in her theory,
however, implies that the objection itself is mistaken, because giving
you what you deserve/merit is partly constitutive of my
rational interests; there is no conflict between your rational
interests and mine (cf. 1964a: 57–65).
2.6 Altruism

Rand regards goodwill towards others, or a generalized benevolence, as
an offshoot of proper self-love, with no independent source in human
nature. There is only one alternative to being rationally
self-interested: sacrificing one’s proper interests, either for
the sake of other people (which she equates with altruism) or for the
sake of the supernatural (which she calls mysticism) (1982a: ch. 7).
Kant’s ethics is a secularized mysticism insofar as it rests on
categorical commands and duty for duty’s sake, which is to say:
regardless of any earthly desire or interest (1970). An altruistic
ethics equates right action with self-sacrifice for the sake of
others’ good and immorality with “selfishness”,
while saying nothing about the standard of the good
(“Introduction”, 1964a: iii; 1974). It thus fails to
answer the prior question of what code of values we should follow and
why, and provides no motivation to be moral other than guilt over
“selfishness”. When taken to its logical conclusion,
altruism does not simply tell us that it is “selfish” to
pursue our own desires, but also that it is “selfish to
uphold… [our own] convictions, … [that we] must
sacrifice them to the convictions of others” (Rand 1957 [1992]:
943; Galt’s Speech, Rand 1961a: 142). In foreign policy,
altruism is used to justify and gain support for America’s
intervention in other countries (1966a). Altruism is also the reason
why so many sympathize with, or even praise, bloody dictatorships that
proudly proclaim that the sacrifice of the individual is a necessary
and noble means to the goal of the collective good (Rand 1966a).

As a moral code, altruism is impractical, because its requirements are
contrary to the requirements of life and happiness, both the
agent’s and other people’s. As such, it is also profoundly
immoral. Altruism leaves us without any moral guidance in our everyday
lives and gives morality a bad name.

What, then, is the psychological explanation for the widespread
equation of altruism with morality? Rand suggests various explanations
reminiscent of Nietzsche’s analysis of the psychology of
altruism. The theorists and preachers of altruism are motivated
largely by a desire to control and manipulate others by playing on
their guilt. Those who accept their teachings typically do so either
because of guilt over their own superior achievements, or because,
lacking any “intellectual integrity, love of truth…or a
passionate dedication to an idea”, they have nothing much worth
saving, and so do not mind sacrificing themselves (“Selfishness
Without a Self”, 1973b; 1982a). Some altruists are altruists
because their mentalities are still frozen in a tribal past when
survival required the sacrifice of some for the sake of others
(1973b). Rand herself rejects a zero-sum picture of human
relationships, so long as everyone in the relationship acts
rationally.

Rand’s defense of “selfishness” and rejection of
altruism are part of the reason both for her popularity with the
general reader, and her unpopularity with philosophers and other
intellectuals, although some would no doubt agree with her rejection
of abject self-sacrifice and her recognition of proper concern with
the self as moral (Falk 1963; Gilligan 1982; Hampton 1993; Badhwar
1993a). The general reader who responds positively to Rand’s
work finds, for the first time, a moral justification for pursuing a
life of her or his own and a liberation from “unearned
guilt”. The philosopher who responds negatively to her work
finds many biased and simplistic interpretations of philosophers and
philosophical doctrines, including her claim that she is the first to
consistently defend a morality of rational self-interest, all other
philosophers having defended either altruism or mysticism (Pojman
1995). Her critics also challenge her equation of altruism with abject
self-sacrifice (Rachels 2000, Flew 1984), and her claim (explained
below) that there is no conflict between people’s
rational interests (Flew 1984). An adequate interpretation of
her views, however, requires attention both to the fact that, in the
absence of special obligations created by bonds of love, contract, or
family, she regards others’ needs as making no claim on us, and
to the fact that she is an uncompromising defender of justice,
honesty, and respect for others as ends in themselves.
3. Social-Political Philosophy
3.1 Rights, Capitalism, and the Trader Principle

Rand’s moral society is a society of independent individuals who
respect each other’s natural rights to life, liberty, and
property, and who trade value for value, materially and spiritually.
They live, in her words, by “the trader principle”.
Individual (natural) rights and the trader principle are both dictated
by the fact that, as rational, independent beings, we need to think
and act for our “proper survival” (1961b: 31). Both are
required by respect for individuals as ends in themselves, not mere
means to others’ ends. 


“Rights” are a moral concept—the concept that
provides a logical transition from the principles guiding an
individual’s actions to the principles guiding his relationship
with others—the concept that preserves and protects individual
morality in a social context—the link between the moral code of
a man and the legal code of a society, between ethics and politics.
Individual rights are the means of subordinating society to moral
law. (1963b: 92). 


These natural rights are basically rights to actions, not to things or
outcomes, and they can be violated only through the initiation of
force or fraud. Hence, all natural rights are negative, that is,
claims on others’ non-interference, and not claims on them to
provide one with certain goods or
 outcomes.[9]
 The fundamental right is the right to life: the right to take the
actions necessary for sustaining the life proper to a human being.



The right to life means…the freedom to take all the actions
required by the nature of a rational being for the support, the
furtherance, the fulfillment and the enjoyment of his own life. (Such
is the meaning of the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.). (1963b: 93) 


The right to liberty is the right to act (including to write and
speak) on one’s judgment; the right to the pursuit of happiness
is the right to pursue goals for one’s own fulfillment; the
right to property is “the right to gain, to keep, to use and to
dispose of material values” (1963b: 94). Like the mind-body
dichotomy, the common dichotomy between “human rights” and
the right to property is a false one, because to own one’s life
is to own one’s actions and their fruits (1962b:
 91).[10]
 Just as there is a causal and logical connection between the virtues,
so there is between these rights: a government that violates human
rights also violates property rights. Thus, for example, in violating
the right to freedom of expression by banning “obscene”
speech on TV, the government violates the property right of the owners
of the TV station to use their property as they see fit. Like other
libertarians, both right (market) and left (egalitarian), Rand opposes
state regulation of morality, as well as forced service to the state,
whether military or civilian. She criticizes both conservatives and
liberals (as these terms are understood in American politics) for
wanting government to control the realm they regard as important: the
spiritual or moral realm in the case of conservatives, and the
material or economic realm in the case of liberals (1981b). Both sides
thus betray a lack of understanding of the fact that human beings need
to be free in both realms to be free in either.

There is much that is of great value here, especially Rand’s
insight that we would not have rights if we did not need them for our
survival and happiness (Miller & Mossoff forthcoming; Badhwar
forthcoming-a). But critics point out that grounding all rights in the
right to take the actions necessary for “proper survival”
entails that one has no right to take actions that are
contrary to proper survival: blindly following a guru instead
of thinking for oneself, living off others because one prefers the
life of a couch potato to fending for oneself, wasting one’s
property instead of using it wisely, or, most obviously, committing
suicide (Mack 1984; Zwolinski forthcoming; Badhwar forthcoming-a). Yet
the freedom to do only that which is morally good or rational is not a
freedom at all. But this is not Rand’s consistent position. For
example, she also says that, as fallible creatures, human beings 


must be free to agree or disagree, to cooperate or to pursue their own
independent course, each according to his own rational judgment.
(1965: 17) 


Some commentators rely on this statement to argue that Rand is not
restricting rights to actions that are necessary for proper survival
(Miller & Mossoff forthcoming). But it would be more accurate to
say that, while this position is the one that is compatible with her
deep-seated commitment to liberty and a minimal government, she also
often makes statements that entail the opposite.

Rand argues that the only just social-political system, the only
system compatible with our rational nature and with the right of
individuals to live for their own sakes, is capitalism (1965, 1967b),
that is, 


laissez-faire capitalism—with a separation of state and
economics, in the same way and for the same reasons as the separation
of state and church. (1961b, 1964a) 


State regulation of the market, she argues, is responsible for
corrupting both state and market institutions, just as political
regulation of religion (or religious regulation of politics), wherever
it exists, corrupts both state and religious institutions. Regulation
creates the opportunity for the trading of favors between politicians
and religious leaders, and politicians and businesses. Atlas
Shrugged offers a complex and compelling depiction of the
economic, political, and moral corruption spawned by
“cronyism” between government and business.
Laissez-faire capitalism is “the only [social] system
that bans force from social relationships” domestically and
abroad, because the trader and the warrior are antagonists (Rand
1966a). Rand’s conception of capitalism is, thus, more radical
than the mainstream conception, and her defense of it significantly
different both from the utilitarian defenses given by most economists,
and the religious defenses given by many conservatives (see Den Uyl
& Rasmussen 1984b; Machan 1984). She does, of course, praise
capitalism (or semi-capitalism) for creating widespread prosperity,
but this feature is itself explained only by the fact that it leaves
individuals free to produce in peace. In Atlas Shrugged, Rand
distinguishes between the few business people who earn their money
through honest effort, without seeking favors from the government, and
the vast majority who are members of “the aristocracy of
pull” (“crony capitalists”, in contemporary
terminology) and get rich only through such favors, a situation that
she thinks prevails, and has always prevailed, in the real world (Rand
1964c). She holds that for a short period in the nineteenth-century
America came closer to a laissez-faire system than any other
society before or since, but that capitalism remains an unknown ideal.
Some critics complain, however, that in her non-fiction (1961c) Rand
does not always recognize the aristocrats of pull in the real
world—business leaders who lobby politicians for subsidies for
themselves and restrictions on their competitors (Rothbard 1968;
Johnson 2006).

Rand rejects the criticism that unregulated, laissez-faire
capitalism would lead to a concentration of power in a few hands and
undermine equality of opportunity because laissez-faire
capitalism requires the rule of law, a well-defined system of property
rights, freedom of contract, and, as a corollary, a government that
abstains from all favoritism.

Rand holds that there is no conflict between one person’s
rational interests and another’s, hence that respecting other
people’s rights is perfectly compatible with advancing or
preserving one’s own interests. Is it true, however, that
rational interests cannot conflict? It seems that whenever two people
have an interest in one good, for example, a job, and are equally
qualified to have it, their rational interests conflict, Perhaps what
Rand has in mind is that rational interests don’t
necessarily conflict, that is, that it is not in their nature
to conflict. Their conflict is due to external factors, such as only
one job for two qualified people. But is such conflict compatible with
rights in an egoistic framework? And can rights be defended within an
egoistic framework? Critics object that respect for others’
rights cannot be justified only as a means to one’s ultimate
value, whether this be survival or happiness (Mack 1984; Flew 1984).
For under perfectly realistic scenarios, one’s ultimate value
can require one to violate another’s right to life or property.
In her justification of rights we see the same unresolved tension
between the instrumentalist strand and the deontic strand that we do
in her justification of morality in general (Mack 1984, 2003). The
eudaimonist strand in Rand’s justification, however, allows her
to respond that respect for others’ rights expresses our
recognition of the fact that others are ends in themselves, a
recognition that is required by justice, and that justice, along with
the other virtues, is necessary for leading a happy life.

Rand defines government as 


an institution that holds the exclusive power to enforce
certain rules of social conduct in a given geographical area. (1963a:
125) 


A proper government is 


the means of placing the retaliatory use of physical force under
objective control—i.e., under objectively defined law.
(1963b: 128) 


Such a government is minimal, limited to protecting us from criminals
and foreign aggressors, and enforcing individual rights and contracts,
with the help of the armed forces, police, and objectively defined
civil and criminal laws and courts. Someone who violates his
contracts, or engages in fraud, is guilty of the
“indirect” use of force, in that he obtains a value from
another without that person’s consent (1963a: 111). Accordingly,
the government may use or threaten force only in retaliation against
those who initiate or threaten force directly or indirectly. A
government that tries to enforce the brother’s keeper
principle—“from each according to his ability, to each
according to his need”; or that drafts citizens into the armed
services or “public service”; or that tries to make them
more virtuous, educated, well-mannered, healthy, or wealthy, violates
rights. Statism in all its forms, from unlimited democracy to a mixed
economy to dictatorship, is at odds with our status as independent,
rational beings, as ends in ourselves. Statism also destroys ability
and fails to fulfill anyone’s needs for long, because
“[t]o deal with men by force is as impractical as to deal with
nature by persuasion” (1973a: 32). The fountainhead of all
progress is the human mind, and the mind does not function well when
forced.

In Atlas Shrugged Rand depicts her utopia, Galt’s
Gulch, as a “voluntary association of men held together by
nothing but every man’s self-interest”, without any formal
organization (1957 [1992]: 690). There is a judge to arbitrate
disagreements, but there has never been any need for arbitration.
Galt’s Gulch is, thus, an anarchist society, although Rand never
calls it that. In “The Nature of Government”, however,
Rand rejects anarchism as irrational and unworkable because, she says,
it is incompatible with a single, objective system of law and, thus,
with rights and peaceful cooperation (1963a). Anarchist critics, such
as Roy Childs (1969 [1994]) and Murray Rothbard (1978), have argued
that a territorial monopoly on law and force (government) is not
necessary, because people can establish a just and effective legal
system in a competitive market of security providers (see Long and
Machan 2009). The Law Merchant, a body of law established and enforced
in private courts by the merchants of various countries, illustrates
the possibility of an effective voluntary legal system. Further, a
government is incompatible with Rand’s own principle of the
non-initiation of force, a principle she regards as the linchpin of a
moral society (Long 2013; cf. Cox 2013a and 2013b).

The trader principle states that a voluntary, mutually beneficial
exchange between independent equals is the only basis for a mutually
respectful and rational relationship (1961b: 31). It is also the only
basis for a peaceful relationship among countries: “the trader
and the warrior have been fundamental antagonists throughout
history” (1966a: 38).

The trader principle applies to emotional relationships as well. To
love or admire someone is to “pay” him for the pleasure
one derives from his virtues (1961b: 31)—or, Rand might say in
the case of love for a small child, from his personality. It would
seem, however, that the trade between parent and child is unequal,
given that the child receives both pleasure and material support from
the parent. And it is unclear how the trader principle applies at all
when a severe disability renders a beloved child or spouse a source of
pain rather than pleasure.
3.2 Feminism

If feminism is the view that women are, and ought to be recognized as,
men’s intellectual, moral, sexual, and political equals, then
the Objectivist philosophy of human nature is inherently feminist,
since it applies equally to all human beings, regardless of gender (or
race) (N. Branden 1999). Decades before it was considered acceptable
for women to lack “maternal instincts” or pursue careers,
Rand created heroines who lack the first and pursue the second, free
of guilt or
 self-doubt.[11]
 Kira (We the Living) wants to be an engineer, and Dagny
(Atlas Shrugged) runs Taggart Transcontinental, the largest
and most successful transcontinental railroad in the country. None of
Rand’s heroines sacrifices her interests, intellect, or
principles for the man or men in her life. One literary critic argues
that Dagny is the first, and perhaps only, epic heroine in Western
literature because of the grandness of her vision, her courage and
integrity, her unusual abilities, and her national importance
(Michalson 1999). Rand’s depiction of her heroines’
enjoyment of sex and their freedom from all merely conventional norms
about sex anticipates the sexual liberation movement of the
20th century by at least 30 years. In all three novels, it
is the heroine who has the power to choose which of the men who love,
admire, and desire her (and only her) she will have. Rand was also an
ardent champion of a woman’s right to control her own
reproductive choices (1968a, 1981).

Her relationship to the feminist movement, however, was more complex.
Although she praised Betty Friedan’s The Feminine
Mystique, mainstream feminism’s collectivism and emphasis
on women as victims later led her to reject feminism as such. Many
theorists argue that Rand’s work, especially Atlas
Shrugged, upholds important feminist ideals, even as it succumbs
to some anti-feminist tendencies that contradict her individualistic
ethics (e.g., Gladstein 1978, 1999; B. Branden 1999; Presley 1999;
Sheaffer 1999; Taylor 1999). Many others regard her and her work as
plainly anti-feminist, with Susan Brownmiller even calling her
“a traitor to her own sex” (Brownmiller 1975). One
criticism takes aim at the individualism of Rand’s ethics and
politics, which rejects any special government help for women or
discrimination against men (e.g., Harrison 1978). Another objects that
Rand has internalized a masculine conception of human nature and
virtue, and then created her ideal woman in light of this conception
(Brownmiller 1975; Glennon 1979). This may be responsible for
Rand’s puzzling (and offensive) view that the essence of
femininity is to hero-worship (not men, but) masculinity, while
insisting (as her novels depict) that women and men are inherently
equal and that the ideal romantic relationship is between moral and
intellectual equals (1968b; cf. Brown 1999). At least as offensive to
many are the violent sex scenes in her novels, especially the infamous
scene in The Fountainhead that many regard as rape, where
Howard Roark has sex with Dominique in spite of her resistance.

Those who reject the charge of rape argue that in the 1940s and 50s,
when Rand wrote her novels, it would have been seen as rough sex
rather than non-consensual sex (McElroy 1999; Sheaffer 1999). That
Rand herself thought of this scene as consensual is shown a few pages
later, when she writes: “They had been united in an
understanding beyond the violence, beyond the deliberate obscenity of
his action” (1943: 218). And in letters to disturbed readers in
1946 and 1965, Rand denied that the scene is “actual rape”
which, she stated, is “a dreadful crime”, a “vicious
action and a violation of a woman’s rights” (Rand 1995a).
On the other hand, she also depicts Dominique exultantly telling
herself that she’s been raped. McElroy wonders if having her
heroine call it rape is just another instance of Rand’s desire
to provoke and shock the reader (McElroy 1999), as when she uses
“selfishness” to mean “rational
self-interest”.
4. Aesthetics

Rand holds that our actions need guidance by a vision of the
fundamental nature of the universe and of the efficacy of human
thought and activity—a vision that can be grasped directly
rather than requiring the conscious repetition of long chains of
abstract reasoning. The chief function of art is to meet this
psychological need by expressing abstract conceptual values and
metaphysical truths in concrete perceptible form. Art, according to
Rand, constitutes a selective, stylized re-creation of reality, with
the principle of selection being the artist’s “sense of
life”, a set of implicit “metaphysical
value-judgments”, i.e., judgments about what is fundamentally
significant about the world and our place in it. (There is controversy
among Rand scholars as to whether what is re-created in art is certain
elements of reality or reality as a whole, i.e., a
“microcosm”, as well as how and whether the concept of
re-creation applies to apparently non-representational forms of art:
Torres and Kamhi 2000; Bissell 2004.) Both the artist’s creative
work and the audience’s emotional responses to it are driven by
their senses of life, that is, the worldviews they have “formed
by a process of emotional generalization … a subconscious
counterpart of a process of abstraction” (1966b: 27). The role
of art in sustaining us psychologically by providing a concretization
of our most fundamental values is a frequent theme in Rand’s
fiction as well, especially The
 Fountainhead.[12]

While art can be used to convey information or to advocate a position,
such functions are secondary to its chief task: providing an object
whose mere contemplation brings spiritual fulfillment. Hence Rand does
not regard her own novels primarily as vehicles for her philosophy,
though of course they are that inter alia. Given her own
worldview, Rand favors literature with a strong plot as a way of
expressing purposeful human action in a world of causal regularity,
and stories involving value-conflicts as a way of expressing the
importance of free choice; hence her preference for romantic (as
opposed to, e.g., naturalistic) literature. But Rand holds that it is
possible to evaluate an artwork’s aesthetic value simply in
terms of its success in conveying a concretization of the
artist’s sense of life, whether or not one shares the values and
judgments so conveyed.