Sometimes also called retro-causation. A common feature of our world
seems to be that in all cases of causation, the cause and the effect
are placed in time so that the cause precedes its effect temporally.
Our normal understanding of causation assumes this feature to such a
degree that we intuitively have great difficulty imagining things
differently. The notion of backward causation, however, stands for the
idea that the temporal order of cause and effect is a mere contingent
feature and that there may be cases where the cause is causally prior
to its effect but where the temporal order of the cause and effect is
reversed with respect to normal causation, i.e., there may be cases
where the effect temporally, but not causally, precedes its cause.
The idea of backward causation should not be confused with that of
time travel. These two notions are related to the extent that both
agree that it is possible to causally affect the past. The difference,
however, is that time travel involves a causal loop whereas backward
causation does not. Causal loops for their part can only occur in a
universe in which one has closed time-like curves. In contrast,
backward causation may take place in a world where there are no such
closed time-like curves. In other words, an ordinary system SSS
taking part in time travel would preserve the temporal order of its
proper time during its travel, it would keep the same time sense during
its entire flight (a watch measuring SSS’s proper time would
keep moving clockwise); but if the same system SSS were to
become involved in a process of backward causation, the order of its
proper time would have to reverse in the sense that the time sense of
the system would become opposite of what it was before its back-in-time
travel (the watch will start to move counter-clockwise). So neither
backward causation nor time travel logically entails each other and
time travel is distinct from back-in-time travel.
 
1. History
The philosophical debate about backward causation is relatively new.
Only little consideration of the problem can be found in the
philosophical literature before Michael Dummett and Anthony Flew
initiated their discussion in the mid 1950s. The reason for this is
twofold. No empirical phenomena seem to demand a notion of backward
causation for our understanding of them. And for a long time it was
thought that such a notion involved either a contradiction in terms or
a conceptual impossibility. David Hume’s definition of the cause as the
one of two events that happens before the other thus rules out that the
cause can happen after its effect. Moreover, according to Kant’s idea
of synthetic a priori truth the claim that the cause temporally
precedes its effect was considered to state such a truth. In 1954
Michael Dummett and Anthony Flew had a discussion about whether an
effect can precede its cause. Dummett defended the idea whereas Flew
argued that it involved contradictions in terms.
Two years later, Max Black (1956) presented an argument against
backward causation, which became known as the bilking argument, and
later attempts to meet the argument seemed to generate all kinds of
paradoxes. Imagine BBB to be earlier than AAA, and let
BBB be the alleged effect of AAA. Thus we assume that
AAA causes BBB even though AAA is later than
BBB. The idea behind the bilking argument is that whenever
BBB has occurred, it is possible, in principle, to intervene in
the course of events and prohibit AAA from occurring. But if
this is the case, AAA cannot be the cause of BBB; hence,
we cannot have backward causation. Since then philosophers have debated
the effectiveness of the bilking argument in particular and, in
general, the validity and the soundness of the concept of backward
causation.
In the 1960s and 1970s, physicists began to discuss the
possibilities of particles travelling with a speed greater than light,
the so-called tachyons, and as a consequence a similar debate about
paradoxes involving backward causation arose among them. In case
superluminal particles, like tachyons, exist and could be used to
generate signals, it seemed possible to communicate with the past
because tachyons going forward in time with respect to one set of
reference frames would always be seen as travelling backwards in time
from another set of reference frames.
2. Philosophy
A general notion of backward causation raises two sets of questions:
those concerning conceptual problems and those that relate to empirical
or physical matters. Among the first sets of questions that require a
satisfactory answer are the following:
(i) Can metaphysics provide a notion of time that allows that
the effect precede its cause? A proper notion of backward
causation requires a static account of time in the sense that there is
no objective becoming, no coming into being such that future events
exist on the par with present and past events. It means that the future
is real, the future does not merely consist of unrealised possibilities
or even nothing at all. Ordinarily we may think of the past as a
nothing that once was a something. But when asked what makes sentences
about the past true or false, we would probably also say that it is the
facts of the past that make present sentences about the past either
true or false. The fact that I went to the cinema yesterday makes it
true today when I say that I went to the cinema yesterday. This view is
a realist one with respect to the past. If backward causation is to be
conceptually possible it forces us to be realists with respect to the
future. The future must contain facts, events with certain properties,
and these facts can make sentences about the future true or false. Such
a realist account is provided by static and tenseless theories of time.
A static theory holds that the participation of time into the past, the
present and the future depends on the perspective we human beings put
on the world. The attribution of pastness, presentness and futureness
to events is determined by what we take to exist at times earlier than
and times later than the time of our experience.
(ii) Does backward causation mean that a future cause is
changing something in the past? Even most protagonists consider it
an unwarranted consequence that the notion, if true, involves the idea
that the future is able to change the past. Their answer has therefore
usually been that if we have the power to bring something about in the
past, what came about really already existed when the past was present.
We have to make a distinction between changing the past so it becomes
different from what it was and influencing the past so it becomes what
it was. A coherent notion of backward causation only requires that the
future is able to have an influence on what happens in the past.
(iii) Can the cause be distinguished from its effect so that the
distinction does not depend on a temporal ordering of the events?
The adherents have usually tried to give an account of causation in
which the cause and the effect are not seen as regularities between
types of events. What is required is some account of the direction of
causation which does not rely on the direction of time. Various
alternative proposals refer to counterfactuals, probabilities, agents,
manipulation and intervention, common cause or causal forks. It is,
apparently, only a Humean notion of causation that needs the temporal
identification of the cause and the effect. But there are also problems
with some of the other accounts; for example, the Stalnaker-Lewis
theory of counterfactual has difficulties with backtracking
counterfactuals and backward causation because if ccc occurs
later than eee, the proposed method of truth evaluation assumes
that eee occurs in the relevant possible worlds in which
ccc does not occur. In general, the assessment of a
counterfactual conditional is carried out by assuming that the possible
world should be identical with the actual world up to ccc;
therefore, it is stipulated that the closest possible world is one in
which everything happens just as in the actual world up to the time of
ccc’s occurrence which means, given eee occurs
before ccc, that it will include the occurrence
of eee. But then it is necessarily true that there is never a
possible world closer to the actual world which includes ccc
but not eee. This creates a problem because we consider any
causal connection between ccc and eee as contingent.
(iv) Can the bilking argument be challenged in such a way that
the mere possibility of intervention does not generate any serious
paradoxes? The force of the bilking argument can, it seems, be
weakened in various ways. First, one may hold that it is not a problem
for our notion of backward causation that we can in principle intervene
in the course of the events. If we actually do so and prevent
AAA after BBB has occurred, then of course a particular
later AAA (which does not exist) cannot be the cause of a
particular earlier BBB (which exists). But in all those cases
where nobody actually intervenes, events of the same type as AAA
may be the cause of events of the same type as BBB. This is not
different from what can happen in some cases of forward causation.
Assume that PPP causes QQQ in the relevant circumstances.
We may still prevent a particular PPP from happening, but at the
same time a particular QQQ may nevertheless occur because in the
given circumstances it is caused by another event than PPP.
Second, if a later event AAA really causes an earlier one
BBB, then it would be impossible to intervene into the cause of
the event after BBB has happened and therefore impossible to
prevent AAA from happening. If someone tries, she will by all
means fail. It may intuitively sound strange as long as we think of
backward causation as consisting of something we can control directly
by our everyday actions. But if backward causation is a notion that is
applicable only to processes that human beings are unable to control in
any foreseeable way the notion would not provoke our intuitions so
much.
3. Paradoxes
Of all the philosophical problems to which backward causation (and
time travel) gives rise, the paradoxes are those that have generated
the most heat in both physics and philosophy because, if they are
valid, they exclude backward causation from being both metaphysically
and logically possible. The paradoxes can grossly be divided into three
kinds: (1) Bootstrap paradoxes involve a causal or information loop;
(2) Consistency paradoxes involve generating a possible inconsistency; and (3)Newcomb’s paradox seems to foreclose free will. So if backward causation (and time travel) should be logically possible, one has to show that the paradoxes can be resolved and that
therefore arguments based on them are invalid.
3.1 The Bootstrap Paradoxes
The bootstrap paradoxes arise in cases where you have a causal chain
consisting of particular events in which aaa causes b,bb,bb,
b causes ccc, and ccc causes aaa. The
problem here is that the occurrence of aaa presupposes the
occurrence of ccc; in other words, the cause presupposes its
effect. But how can something be required of what itself requires?
Indeed this seems paradoxical. Some philosophers therefore think that
this makes the idea of causal loops incoherent. Hugh Mellor even
believes that 
 
 the possibility of causal loops can be excluded a priori, and so therefore can the closed timelike paths entailed by
closed time, backward time-travel and all kinds of backward
 causation. (1991: 191).
 
His proof goes like this. Take four chains of events. Each of
them consists of three particular events a,ba,ba, b, and
ccc, all different tokens of the same kind of events A,BA,BA,
B and CCC. We then construct the chain such that

b⇒c⇒ab⇒c⇒ab \Rightarrow c \Rightarrow a
∼b⇒∼c⇒∼a∼b⇒∼c⇒∼a{\sim}b \Rightarrow{\sim}c \Rightarrow{\sim}a
b⇒c⇒∼ab⇒c⇒∼ab \Rightarrow c \Rightarrow{\sim}a
∼b⇒∼c⇒a∼b⇒∼c⇒a{\sim}b \Rightarrow{\sim}c \Rightarrow a

The first two sequences may be called G-chains and the other two
H-chains. Moreover, Mellor assumes that all tokens of A,BA,BA, B and
CCC are distributed among the four chains so that the number of
chains is exactly the same, namely one fourth of the sequences. Mellor
then defines a causal relation between two singular events aaa and
bbb in terms of a situation kkk which makes bbb more likely to
occur given aaa than without aaa, i.e., P(b∣a)>P(b∣∼a)P(b∣a)>P(b∣∼a)\rP(b\mid a) \gt
\rP(b\mid {\sim}a). But we can see that the number of chains in
which bbb is combined with aaa is equal to the number of chains in
which bbb is not combined with aaa. In fact we have that
P(b∣a)=P(b∣a)=\rP(b\mid a) = P(∼b∣∼a)=P(∼b∣∼a)=\rP({\sim}b\mid {\sim}a) = P(b∣∼a)=P(b∣∼a)=\rP(b\mid {\sim}a)
= P(∼b∣a)P(∼b∣a)\rP({\sim}b\mid a). From this it follows that a particular
bbb’s chance in kkk cannot increase with respect to aaa
compared to its chance without aaa. Hence aaa cannot affect bbb,
and therefore causal loops are impossible.
Some philosophers have not found this argument very convincing. Faye
(1994) has pointed to the following problematic issues. First, Mellor
measures the probability of singular events (propensities) instead of
the probability of certain kinds of events. Second, he does not
differentiate between circumstances in which a BBB is followed
by an AAA and those in which a BBB is not followed by an
AAA. The argument is valid only if it can be proved, and not be
stipulated, that (1) and (3) happen surrounded by the same facts. Many
people would say that in a world of (1) must be different from a world
of (3) in some other important respects than merely containing
aaa or ∼a∼a{\sim}a, especially since Mellor claims that the
argument is valid for deterministic situations as well. Third, the
equal distribution of the various chains seems quite selective. In
Mellor’s G&H world, in which the number of the four chains is
equal, and therefore in which the probabilities are equal, there cannot
be any causal relationship between the individual bbb and the
individual aaa due to the fact that the occurrence of aaa
or ∼a∼a{\sim}a happens under exactly the same circumstances given
bbb. Finally, fourth, it seems appropriate to claim that any
negative argument, like Mellor’s, should be able to show that what
holds true of one world can be proved to hold true of every other world
similar in all relevant respects, but in which G-chains and H-chains
are not equally distributed.
It is clear that any world which contains G-chains rather than
H-chains does not show the same inconsistency as Mellor’s
G&H-world does. If it can be proved that causal loops in such
worlds are consistent with the adopted definition, then causal loops
are possible.  In other words, if we set up a consistent model in
which AAA increases the probability of BBB, and BBB increases
the probability of AAA, we have then proven that causal loops are
possible and that Mellor’s argument is invalid. The claim is
therefore that both

P(A∣B)>P(A∣∼B)P(A∣B)>P(A∣∼B)\rP(A\mid B) \gt \rP(A\mid {\sim}B)
P(B∣A)>P(B∣∼A),P(B∣A)>P(B∣∼A),\rP(B\mid A) \gt \rP(B\mid {\sim}A),

 can be shown to be true with
respect to a world containing AAAs and BBBs. Assume the following
probabilities, which hold for the distributions among A,∼A,BA,∼A,BA, {\sim}A,
B, and ∼B∼B{\sim}B, are
P(A&B)P(A&∼B)P(∼A&B)P(∼A&∼B)=0.7=0.1=0.1=0.1.P(A&B)=0.7P(A&∼B)=0.1P(∼A&B)=0.1P(∼A&∼B)=0.1.\begin{align}
\rP(A \amp B) &amp;= 0.7 \\
\rP(A \amp{\sim}B) &amp;= 0.1 \\
\rP({\sim}A \amp B) &amp;= 0.1 \\
\rP({\sim}A \amp{\sim}B) &amp;= 0.1.
\end{align}

On the basis of the definition of the conditional probability,
we get
P(A∣B)=P(A&B)P(B)P(A∣∼B)=P(A&∼B)P(∼B)P(B∣A)=P(A&B)P(A)P(B∣∼A)=P(∼A&B)P(∼A)=7/8=1/2=7/8;=1/2.P(A∣B)=P(A&B)P(B)=7/8P(A∣∼B)=P(A&∼B)P(∼B)=1/2P(B∣A)=P(A&B)P(A)=7/8;P(B∣∼A)=P(∼A&B)P(∼A)=1/2.\begin{align}
\rP(A\mid B) = \frac{\rP(A \amp B)}{\rP(B)} &amp;= 7/8 \\
\rP(A\mid {\sim}B) = \frac{\rP(A \amp{\sim}B)}{\rP({\sim}B)} &amp;= 1/2 \\
\rP(B\mid A) = \frac{\rP(A \amp B)}{\rP(A)} &amp;= 7/8; \\
\rP(B\mid {\sim}A) = \frac{\rP({\sim}A \amp B)}{\rP({\sim}A)} &amp;= 1/2. 
\end{align}

Thus (i) and (ii) are both true with respect
to the stated world; hence we have proven, according to Mellor’s
own definition of causality, that it is consistent to talk about
causal loops. Mellor has not been able to establish any
satisfying a priori argument against causal loops or
backwards causation.
Moreover, even if one assumes that Mellor were correct in ruling out
causal loops a priori, he may be wrong in holding that this
impossibility entails the impossibility of time travel as well as
backward causation. Mellor’s argument presupposes that it is the same
kind of processes obeying the same kind of macroscopic physical laws
which enters into both the forward and backward part of the causal
loop. This assumption may hold for time travel but not for backward
causation.
3.2 The Consistency Paradoxes
The consistency paradoxes arise when you, for instance, try to kill
your younger self by a backward causal process but evidently have to
fail. The reason why you must fail is quite obvious. Your younger self
belongs to the past and therefore, since you cannot change the past,
you cannot commit retro-suicide. This answer tacitly assumes that
resurrection is impossible. You may, of course, kill your younger self
in the past without changing the past if you have come alive again
later on. This is not what is paradoxical. What is paradoxical is the
fact that you are assumed to be able to kill your younger self in the
sense that you are well-equipped to make these kinds of retro-killings,
you may even be targeting your younger self, but you must always miss.
The same holds, indeed, for all those people who stay alive into the
present. You cannot retro-kill somebody yesterday who is alive today.
There must be certain constraints which prohibit you from making
retro-suicide or retro-killing, and these constraints may be very
local, changing from case to case, or they may be universal in nature
depending on some physical laws. So, on the one hand, the assumption is
that it physically possible for you to kill somebody in the past; but,
on the other hand, it is physically impossible for you to do what is
physically possible. This is the paradox.
A way out of the paradox was suggested by David Lewis (1976) who
argued that the ability of killing somebody should be understood as a
possibility compossible with the relevant fact. As an opera singer,
for example, you are able to sing operas, since you have the physical
capacity and training to do so, but because of a temporary loss of
voice, you cannot hum a single tune. What you can do relative to one
set of facts, is something you cannot do relative to another set of
facts. This contextual solution explains why you are able to
retro-kill your younger self, given the fact that your gun is in
proper working-order, you have a good aim at your target, and no one
forces you to abstain from taking action. But it also explains why you
are unable to retro-kill anybody who is alive today because you cannot
change the past. The consistency paradox exists only in virtue of an
equivocation of a context-sensitive ‘can’, and if we
notice that, we see that the paradox vanishes like dew before the
sun.
Some may reply that we are still talking about different abilities.
In contrast to the case in which the opera singer sometimes cannot
sing, your attempt to carry out retro-suicide inevitably fails. The
opera singer is able to sing operas because he has shown it before and
can demonstrate it again, but the attempted retro-killer has not proved
and can never prove his ability. Therefore you are never in a situation
where you can kill your younger self. If we accept this objection, we
may reformulate the solution by saying that the contextual solution
explains why you should be able to retro-kill your younger self under
the appropriate circumstances. But, again, how can we talk about the
ability to make retro-suicide relative to certain facts at all, if
there are no possible worlds in which you carry out your deed. It seems
reasonable to say that you have the ability to do something if there is
a possible world in which you carry out this action. This is true of
the opera singer. He can sing operas because he does it in a possible
world in which he has not lost his voice. But you cannot make
retro-suicide because there is no possible world in which you kill your
younger self. You are unable, even in principle, to do so.
In sum, the consistency paradox is no paradox as long as you do not
insist on changing the past. You are unable to change the past, and
therefore you are unable to retro-kill anybody who is alive when you
try to kill them. The paradox seems to arise only because you wrongly
believe that you are able to do something you are unable to do.
Now if there is no paradox on the conceptual level, what then is it
that makes retro-suicide physically impossible? It could be either
local facts or global facts. Local facts that could constrain your
action of retro-killing are many. Your hand was shaking while firing
your gun, you got a fly in your eye, you were disturbed by a cat, you
just fainted, etc. These constraining facts seem reasonable by
themselves; they could have happened independently of your overall
capacity of killing somebody in the past, but also in the actual
situation interact with your ability and turn the action into an
unsuccessful event. The problem is merely that such an explanation
looks suspicious. It is a general fact that we cannot retro-kill
anybody who is alive after the time the death purportedly took place.
Likewise it is a general fact, assuming that backward causation (or
time travel) is physically possible, that we can retro-kill anybody who
is not alive after the time the purported death took place. But the
explanation of a general fact requires an appeal to a general fact or a
law of nature. Thus a reference to a singular contingent fact to
explain why you never succeed in killing your younger self seems not to
fulfil the requirement of being an explanation.
The problem may be better understood in following way: each time you
try to retro-kill somebody who is not alive after the time the
purported effect of killing took place, your assassination may still
fail because of your hand was shaking, etc. Such particular facts
explain why you actually missed the target which you in principle were
able to hit. But to say that you are in principle able to perform
retro-killing means that there are laws of nature that normally allow
you to perform such an action in the appropriate circumstances.
Similarly, each time you try to retro-kill somebody who is alive after
the purported death took place, you may fail for one reason or another.
But you must always fail to retro-kill somebody who is alive after you
did your action, i.e., you are in principle unable to retro-kill such a
person. In those cases it is physically impossible for you to kill,
say, your younger self. It seems, therefore, that there should be some
laws of nature, working on either a local level or a global level,
which violate such an action and makes it physically impossible.
A possible solution may be found in a recent result which shows that
the most basic features of quantum mechanics may ensure that we could
never alter the past, even if it should be possible to interact with
the past. The two physicists, Daniel Greenberger and Karl Svozil
(2005 in Other Internet Resources), imagine some form of quantum mechanical feedback by introducing
figurative beam splitters which are unitary, i.e., the splitters allow
the feedback loop to be reversed because they have the same number of
entry ports and exit ports. From quantum mechanics we know that an
object may behave like a wave and that some unitary operator describes
the propagation of a physical system. The system is represented by a
wave function, also referred to as a path, and the time evolution of
the system is calculated as a sum over all possible paths from the
initial state to the final state. This calculation is usually
restricted to the forward direction of time. Now, if we think of some
of the paths as unfolding backwards in time, Greenberger and Svozil are
able to prove that either the forward and the backward component paths
of the loop cancel out, or that the propagator, which establishes the
feedback in time, 
“wipes out the alternative possible futures, thus guaranteeing the future that has 
already happened”. Thus, if you could
aim at something in the past, the laws of nature prohibit you to act in
ways that are in conflict with what makes the future what it is (what
it already turned out to be). The authors’ conclusion is that if you go
back in time or effect 
“the past quantum mechanically, you would only see those alternatives 
consistent with the world you left behind you”.
3.3 The Newcomb Paradox
This thought experiment involves a player playing a game against a
fortune teller. In this game there are two boxes of which the player
may select one or both. One of the two boxes is transparent, let’s
call it AAA, the other is opaque, call it BBB. Before
the player makes her choice the fortune teller, based on her
prediction of the player’s choice, puts a certain amount of money in
one or both boxes. When the player makes her choice, the following
information is available to her: 1) Up to now the fortune teller has
been able to predict the future with absolute certainty and has
foreseen what other players have chosen. Moreover: 2) sometimes the
fortune teller puts 1,000,000 dollars in box BBB, but only if
the player selects box BBB and does not take both boxes,
whereas she puts 1,000 dollars in box AAA, regardless of
whether the player chooses box AAA or both boxes. So when the
player has to choose between the two boxes, it is already determined
whether box BBB contains 1,000,000 or nothing. If the fortune
teller is correct in her prediction, the player will get 1,000,000
dollars, only if she selects box BBB; however, if the player
wants to earn 1,001,000 dollars and selects both boxes, she will miss
most of the fortune and only receive 1,000 dollars, which she can
already see in box AAA.
This puzzle was originally proposed by William Newcomb but never
published. After its first publication by Robert Nozick (1969) it was
much discussed within decision theory. But it has also been debated in
the context of backward causation, because it gives a nice
illustration of some of the philosophical problems that arise in
relation to backward causation. In this debate it has been used to
demonstrate various claims: that backward causation is impossible or
that it implies fatalism or determinism. The earliest discussion of
some of the consequences for backward causation and free will can be
found in George Schlesinger (1974) and in an exchange between Don
Locke (1978, 1979) and André Gallois (1979). Here Schlesinger argued
that there are good arguments for taking both boxes, AAA and BBB, and
equally good arguments for taking only box B, whereas Locke held that
backward causation is irrelevant and the player ought to take both
boxes. However, Gallois believed that Locke’s arguments for taking
both boxes are misconceived.
Two opposite arguments for what the player should decide can be
given. Assuming the player has a free will it seems rational to say
that the fortune teller cannot in principle predict what the player is
going to do. When the player makes her choice, it is already
determinate whether box BBB contains 1,000,000 dollars or
nothing. Therefore her choice cannot be affected by the fortune
teller’s prediction, and she would be better off by selecting both
boxes, hoping that there already is 1,000,000 dollars in
box BBB. The other argument maintains that based on previous
experience—which tells us that the fortune teller has always
been correct about her predictions—it would be most rational
of the player to take only BBB. From here philosophers have
disagreed about the strength of the argument. One could insist that
fortune teller can predict the player’s choice only based on relevant
knowledge of that person’s past or present behavior or state of mind
(compatibilism). Alternatively one could argue that the fortune teller
could have such a perfect knowledge only from information about the
player’s choice in the future.

Nevertheless, it has been argued that the Newcomb paradox demonstrates
that backward causation is impossible. George Schlesinger (1980:75
ff.), for instance, imagines a perfect judge who is allowed to check
the two boxes after the fortune teller has placed the money in the
boxes, but before the player has made her choice. It is clear that if
the perfect judge then informs the player about the content of the two
boxes, we have a case where the fortune teller’s prediction causes the
player to select both boxes as she is informed about the 1,000,000
dollars in box BBB. Indeed this would be a clear example of
Black’s case of bilking. But Schlesinger also argues that the same
holds true, if the perfect judge merely knows it without informing the
player. However, it is difficult to understand why this should be the
conclusion. If we assume that the player has a free will and that the
fortune teller is able to predict the result of the player’s choice,
it seems most rational for the player to learn from experience and opt
for box BBB only rather than being greedy and take both
boxes. As long as the perfect judge is silent, his knowledge about the
content of the two boxes seems not to be able to influence the
player’s decision. Nor does the player’s possible knowledge of the
existence of a perfect judge seem to have any effect on her decision,
because this information does not add anything to the information she
already has; namely, that the fortune teller has placed the money in
the boxes before she makes her decision and that the fortune teller
has never failed to predict the outcome in advance.
Another problem is that the paradox seems to indicate that backward
causation implies fatalism and determinism. If backward causation is
possible we cannot have a free will. If the result of the player’s
action can be predicted, because it is already true today what the
player will choose tomorrow, she cannot be free to pick. If the
fortune teller already knows that the player will choose both boxes,
this has to be true, and the player cannot do otherwise. And if the
fortune teller already knows that the player will select only
box BBB, this has to be true, and the player cannot but do
it. However, this argument seems to be misguided.
The intuitive strength of the argument stems from the general
assumption that backward causation presupposes an ontologically closed
future—a metaphysical position about time usually
named eternalism. Hence it is not an argument only against
backward causation but against eternalism as well. Suppose it is now
already true or false what is going to happen tomorrow; then there
must be some future truth-makers that determine that it is now already
true or false what is going to happen. The consequence seems to be
that what the player is going to do tomorrow is already determined
today; hence the player cannot do otherwise tomorrow than what is true
today. Therefore the player cannot have a free choice, and it seems
futile of her to make any decision. 
However, it can be maintained that the player still has her free
choice. Nothing around the fortune teller causes the player to make a
particular decision. The player is as free as she would be with no
prediction. What the fortune teller is able to predict is the result
of the player’s choice. The choice itself may nevertheless be
free. Moreover, unless one replaces forward causation with backward
causation, one cannot argue that it is the outcome of the player’s
choice that causes her decision. The statement about the outcome of
her decision is true, according to the fortune teller, because of the
particular decision the player makes; a statement about the player’s
decision is not true because of the outcome of her
decision. Consequently, even with respect to the fortune teller, the
player’s decision may be regarded as free in the sense that nothing in
its past nor in its future determines what the decision actually
becomes. The reason why the fortune teller is able to make her
prediction could be that the player’s choice instigates an information
channel backwards in time.

Philosophers who reject eternalism may not leave the discussion
here. They could argue that it may very well be the case that the
player’s choice is neither causally determined by past events nor by
future events. Yet, eternalism implies that the player’s decision is
ontologically determinate before it is made, since it is true today
what she will decide tomorrow. Therefore she is not as free as she
would be if the future is ontologically open, i.e., it is not yet
ontologically determinate what the future is going to be, including
the player’s choice. The eternalist may attempt to rebut these critics
by arguing that as long as the player’s decision is not causally
determined, it is free in any possible sense. 
4. Physics
The notion of backward causation raises a very different set of
questions that need to be answered before a physically adequate notion
has been developed.

 What, if anything, would in physical terms characterize
backward causation? 

 One has to remember that causality as such is
an everyday notion that has no natural application in physics. How we
could physically identify backward causal processes depends very much
on which feature we take our ordinary notion of causation to apply to a
physical process. In physics we may be tempted to associate it with
different physical notions of processes. Four suggestions have been put
forward: (a) the causal link can be identified with the transference of
energy; (b) it can be identified with the conservation of physical
quantities like charge, linear and angular momentum; (c) it can be
identified with interaction of forces; or (d) it can be identified with
the microscopic notion of interaction. It appears with respect to all
four suggestions, however, that the involved descriptions are invariant
under the time reversal operation.
The most fundamental laws of nature are time reversal invariant in
the sense that our physical theories allow description of the
fundamental reactions and processes in terms of the time reversed
order. Such processes are said to be reversible in time. Maxwell’s
theory of electromagnetism, for instance, admits two kinds of
mathematical solutions for the equations describing the radiation of
energy in an electromagnetic field. One is called the retarded
solution where radiation appears as outgoing concentric waves, the
other is named the advanced solution according to which
radiation appears as incoming concentric waves.   Apparently the
advanced solution describes the temporal inverse phenomena of the
retarded solution so that these two solutions are usually regarded as
the time reverse solution of the other. Nevertheless, retarded waves,
like the increase of entropy in quasi-closed systems, appear to be
de facto irreversible although they are described in terms of
time invariant laws. Nature seems to prefer certain processes rather
than their temporally inversed counterparts in spite of the fact that
the laws of nature do not show such a preference. Light, radiation and
ripples on a pond always spread outwards from their source rather than
inwards just like entropy of a quasi-closed system is always moving
from lower to higher states.
4.1 The Wheeler-Feynman Absorber Theory
Why do we not see any advanced waves in nature? Wheeler and Feynman
(1945) came up with an answer. If we assume, they said, that radiation
from an isolated accelerated charged particle is equally retarded and
advanced, that is half retarded and half advanced to be exact, we can
explain why it appears to be fully retarded in terms of the influence
distant absorbers make on the source. The absorber consists of charged
material that reacts with the source field by radiating with half
retarded and half advanced waves. It is this half advanced field of the
charged particles of the absorber which is added to the half retarded
field of the source. The advanced waves of the absorber interfere
constructively with the retarded waves of the source, whereas the same
waves cancel out the advanced waves of the source in a destructive
interference. Thus one of the consequences of Wheeler and Feynman
Absorber Theory is the idea that emitters are intrinsically symmetric,
another is that there is no intrinsic difference between so-called
emitters and so-called absorbers. In other words, if this theory is
true we have to conclude that radiation from a source is a time
symmetric process but the presence of an absorber makes it
asymmetric.
The Wheeler-Feynman theory takes for granted that outgoing,
expanding waves are identical with retarded radiation and incoming,
contracting waves with advanced radiation. But is such identification
without any problems? Not quite. An example with retarded and advanced
emitters illustrates clearly why. Think of a stone being thrown
directly into the middle of a circular pond. The ripples move outwards
from the point where the stone hits the water (the source) in a
coherent, organized wave front and eventually reach the edges (the
absorber). Moreover, the source acts earlier than the absorber. 
What will the inverse process look like? It depends on how we
understand such a process, whether or not we consider a case that
includes a reversed source and a reversed absorber. (A) If they are
included, the edges of the pond will now act as the source and the
converging waves will eventually reach the middle of the pond. We may
create something like this if we dropped a big ring horizontally into
the pond. Inside the ring the waves would move inwards in an organized
wave front towards the centre.   In this case the source (the drop
of the ring) would still act earlier than the absorber (the ripples
meeting at the middle of the pond from all sides). (B) But if our
understanding of the inverse process does not include an exchange of
the source with the absorber and vice versa, then the ripples
reach the edges of the pond (the absorber) earlier than the stone
plunges into the water (the source). This is definitely not a state of
affairs we could bring about. Furthermore, if we were to observe such a
process, the ripples would seem to move inwards as contracting waves.
The problem is that both kinds of inverse processes would seem to
appear to us as organized incoming waves but one would be a case of
retarded radiation and the other of advanced radiation.
This may not be the only problematic assumption of the Wheeler and
Feynman theory. Huw Price (1996) has singled out other problems. Among
them is the question of how we may experience the difference between
retarded and advanced waves. When Wheeler and Feynman attributed to the
source a field of half retarded and half advanced waves, they assumed
that the field actually consists of retarded as well as an advanced
component. Price objects, however, that there is no measurable
difference between the two kinds of waves, and we cannot justify such a
distinction by an appeal to the nature of the source because both
emitters and absorbers can be associated with retarded as well as
advanced waves. Instead he believes that these components are
fictitious and that Wheeler and Feynman’s formalism merely offer two
different descriptions of the same wave. The problem of the asymmetry,
as he sees it, has nothing to do with the fact that transmitters are
associated with outgoing radiation rather than incoming radiation but
that transmitters are centered on organized outgoing wave fronts
whereas receivers are not centered on similar organized incoming wave
fronts.
4.2 Tachyons
When the discussion of tachyons began to appear in physics in the
1960s, it was soon noticed that such particles according to some frames
of reference were associated with negative energies going backwards in
time. To understand how, consider the trajectory of the same tachyon in
relation of three different reference frames, S,S∗S,S∗S, S^*,
and S∗∗S∗∗S^{**} in the Minkowski-space. Now assume that AAA is,
in relation to SSS, the emission of a tachyon at
t1t1t_{1} and BBB is the absorption of the tachyon
at t2t2t_{2}. According to an observer in S,AS,AS,
A will be earlier than BBB and the tachyon will carry
positive energy forward in time. Nevertheless it is always possible to
select a reference frame S∗S∗S^* in relation to which an observer
will see AAA happen simultaneously with BBB and yet
another reference frame S∗∗S∗∗S^{**} in relation to which an observer
sees AAA happens at t∗∗2t2∗∗t_{2}^{**} whereas BBB
happens at t∗∗1t1∗∗t_{1}^{**}. According to the observer in
S∗S∗S^{*}, AAA will take place later than BBB and the
tachyon carries negative energy backwards in time (See Figure 1).


Figure 1: Spacetime diagram of tachyon

In Figure 1 the planes represent the hypersurfaces of simultaneity.
In relation to frame SSS the tachyon source is at rest, and a
tachyon is emitted at event AAA, with a superluminal but finite
velocity. The absorption of the tachyon, event BBB, will
accordingly occur later than AAA in relation to the observer in
SSS, and the arrow of trajectory is for that reason pointing
into the future above the hypersurface passing through AAA and
standing perpendicular to the world-line of the source. But neither
with respect to the frame S∗S∗S^* nor S∗∗S∗∗S^{**} is the tachyon
source at rest and the hypersurfaces are therefore tilted in relation
to the arrow of trajectory. An observer in S∗S∗S^* observes the
tachyon to have infinite speed, and therefore the hypersurface is
tilted so much that it coincides with the arrow. The observer in
S∗∗S∗∗S^{**} is moving so fast with respect to the tachyon source that
the hypersurface becomes titled so much that the arrow points into the
past below the hypersurface.
E. Recami (1978) tried to avoid the idea that tachyons could move
backwards in time by introducing the so-called reinterpretation
principle according to which all negative energy tachyons should be
interpreted as if they have positive energy and move forward in time.
This would mean that the causal order of tachyons should not be
regarded objective since both AAA and BBB sometimes
denoted the emission and sometimes the absorption depending on the
frame of reference. There are, however, good reasons to believe that
this suggestion does not solve the problems it was intended to (Faye
1981/1989).
4.3 Quantum Mechanics
Other physical candidates for backward causation can be founded in
the physics literature. Richard Feynman once came up with the idea that
the electron could go backwards in time as a possible interpretation of
the positron (Feynman 1949). In fact he imagined the possibility that
perhaps there were only one electron in the world zig-zaging back and
forth in time. An electron moving backwards in time would carry
negative energy whereas it would with respect to our ordinary time
sense have positive charge and positive energy. But few consider this
as a viable interpretation today (Earman 1967, 1976).
More recently, the Bell type experiments have been interpreted by some
as if quantum events could be connected in such a way that the past
light cone might be accessible under non-local interaction; not only
in the sense of action at a distance but as backward causation. One of
the most enticing experiments of this kind is the Delayed Choice
Quantum Eraser designed by Yoon-Ho Kim et al. (2000). It is a
rather complicated construction. It is set up to measure correlated
pairs of photons, which are in an entangled state, so that one of the
two photons is detected 8 nanoseconds before its partner. The results
of the experiment are quite amazing. They seem to indicate that the
behavior of the photons detected these 8 nanoseconds before their
partners is determined by how the partners will be detected. Indeed it
might be tempting to interpret these results as an example of the
future causing the past. The result is, however, in accordance with
the predictions of quantum mechanics.
If we consider the notion of the entangled state in quantum mechanics,
we find that it is characterized as a unified, non-separable state due
to the help of the notion of superposition of possible states
represented by one common wave function for the correlated pair. Such
a superposition is neither distance-dependent nor
time-dependent. Therefore it is not surprising that based on the
correct predictions of quantum mechanics it is impossible to find
support of the violation of normal causation within this kind of
experiment. With reference to the philosophical discussion about
quantum mechanical entanglement, we can conclude that the experimental
results of this sort violate the principle of separability rather than
the principle of locality.
Phillippe Eberhard and Ronald R. Roos (1989) have established a theorem
which says that if quantum mechanics is correct, it is impossible to
use quantum effects to generate a break in the chain of normal
causation. Quantum field theory does not allow any superluminal
communication between different observers. Indeed,this is not so
strange, since quantum field theory is relativistically invariant
whereas superluminal frames of reference are not. But Eberhard and
Roos’ theorem does not rule out all forms of backward causation. Two
possible scenarios are still open: (1) entangled pairs exchange some
form of superluminal information (and energy) below the limits of
Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations; or (2) causation may be symmetrical
so that the direction of causation in a physical system is determined
by its boundary conditions.
Costa de Beauregard (1977, 1979), for instance, has
suggested that when a system of two photons in a singlet state is
measured by two observers in two regions separated by a space-like
distance, then it is precisely the act of observation that produces the
past of the measuring process in the sense that it influences the
source that emitted the two photons. de Beauregard’s idea is that the
element of reality being revealed in the formulation of the EPR paradox
is real only because it was created by actually performed acts of
observation that was propagated backwards in time with one of the two
correlated quantum objects from the measuring device to the source of
the photons. Several other philosophers and physicists have come
forward with similar ideas. The basic assumption behind all of them is
that in the micro-world we find only causal symmetry and this fact
together with proper boundary conditions can be used to give an
explanation of outcomes that seem otherwise paradoxical. Such quantum
correlation experiments can, however, be interpreted in many other
ways.
4.4 Two alternatives
These alleged examples of backward causation have one thing in
common. They are all based on the idea that fundamental physical
processes are by themselves symmetric in nature. Our ordinary notion of
causation does not track any nomological feature of the world. What
counts as the cause and the effect depends on the observer’s projection
of his or her temporal sense onto the world. So it is still an open
question how a coherent notion of backward causation can fit into this
general understanding of nature. The question we therefore have to
answer is the following:

 How can we distinguish between forward causation and
backward causation if all basic physical processes are time symmetric
according to our description of nature? 

Two very different reactions to this problem seem possible.
4.4.1 Boundary Conditions
One proposal is to say that if we came across reversed cases of
de facto irreversible processes, such as running a film
backwards in which the cream converged in a coffee cup, such cases
should be interpreted as examples of backward causation (Price 1996).
The point is here to argue that it is the absence of the right initial
or boundary conditions that makes backward causation so rare or nearly
empirically impossible. This interpretation is based on three basic
assumptions: (i) there is no objective asymmetry in the world, causal
processes are intrinsically symmetric in nature, or causation is
bidirectional, and therefore the fundamental processes of the
micro-world are temporally symmetric; (ii) causal asymmetry is
subjective in the sense that any attribution of an asymmetry between
cause and effect depends on our use of counterfactuals and our own
temporal orientation; (iii) backward causation, or advanced action, is
nonetheless possible because sometimes the correlation of certain past
events depends on the existence of causally symmetric processes and
some future boundary conditions. For instance, advanced actions in
electrodynamics require that the existence of transmitters in the
future are centered on organized incoming wave fronts; and advanced
actions in quantum mechanics require that their present states are in
part determined by the future conditions (measurements) they are to
encounter. This feature is then taken to explain Bell’s results in
quantum mechanics.
A simple consideration seems to support this interpretation. Think
of a particle travelling between two boxes. The normal observer and the
counter-observer who has an inverse time sense will describe the
exchange in conflicting terms. To the normal observer Box 1, say, will
be considered as the emitter because it loses energy before anything in
Box 2 happens. Therefore, Box 2 will be considered as the receiver
since it gains energy at a later time. So in relation to the normal
observer, the particle travels from Box 1 to Box 2. The
counter-observer, however, sees the situation with opposite eyes. In
relation to him, Box 2 loses energy and not until thereafter does Box 1
gain a similar amount of energy. Accordingly, in relation to the
counter-observer, the particle moves from Box 2 to Box 1. In other
words whether a box is considered to be an emitter or a receiver
depends on the observer’s time sense.
4.4.2 Nomic conditions
The other proposal denies that basic physical processes are time
symmetric and argues, in contrast, that the causal asymmetry is
objective and therefore that there exists an intrinsic difference
between the cause and the effect of all physical processes. Hence
backward causation should not be considered as a notion about boundary
conditions but as a notion concerned with processes that nomically
distinguish themselves from forward causal processes. Thus, if there
are processes in the world that might be seen as a manifestation of
backward causation, these are not to be depicted by a description that
leaves them to be time reversed cases of ordinary forward causal
processes (Faye 1981/1989, 1997, 2002). This alternative
interpretation rests on a basic claim and four assumptions.
The fundamental claim is that for any observer it is possible to
identify experimentally the cause and the effect so that these remain
the same even in relation to counter-observers, i.e., observers having
the opposite time sense of ours. In support of this claim consider the
following thought experiment. Two boxes, each having a shutter, are
facing each other. Assume, ex hypothesis, that Box 1 is the particle
source and Box 2 is the particle receiver. The question is how a normal
observer and a counter-observer can come to agreement that particles
move from Box 1 to Box 2. The answer can be found through a series of
manipulations with the shutters, I would say. There are four possible
combinations of the two shutters: open-open, close-close, open-close,
close-open. Let us call any change of energy in Box 1, regardless of
whether it emits or receives a particle, AAA and, similarly, any
change of energy in Box 2B2B2 B. Whether AAA or BBB
stand for a gain or a loss of energy can be determined by weighing the
two boxes. (i) In case both boxes are closed, no particle will leave
Box 1 and no particle is received by Box 2, thus no gain or loss of
energy occurs, and both the normal observer and the counter-observer
see a situation of not-AAA, not-BBB. (ii) In case both
boxes are open a particle leaves Box 1 and is received by Box 2. Again
this can be observed by measuring the change of energy in the two
boxes. Thus the observers will see a situation of both AAA and
BBB. (iii) In case Box 1 is closed and Box 2 is open, they will
observe no change of energy in Box 1 (because it is closed) and, since
no particle is leaving Box 1, no particle will reach Box 2 although its
shutter is open. Hence the observers measure no energy change in this
box. Thus they see not-AAA and not-BBB. (iv) Finally, if
Box 1 is open and Box 2 is closed, a particle leaves Box 1, but none is
received by Box 2. In other words, there is a loss or a gain of energy
in Box 1, but no loss or gain of energy in Box 2. So the observers see
AAA and not-BBB. The upshot of this toy experiment is
that the normal observer as well as the counter-observer experience two
AAAs but only one BBB, and one not-AAA but two
not-BBBs; therefore both will agree that the particles move from
Box 1 to Box 2.
This means that what a normal observer identifies as a forward
causal process will be regarded as a backward causal process in
relation to the counter-observer in the sense that the very same event
acting as a past cause for the normal observer will act as a future
cause for the counter-observer. This indicates, too, that in relation
to a normal observer forward causation and backward causation cannot be
regarded as two different manifestations of nomologically reversible
(but de facto irreversible) processes since both
manifestations—the common process and the very improbable reversed
process—would develop forward in time. If this claim is true, it
implies that the description of physical processes should reflect such
an intrinsic asymmetry in a way that the nomic description varies
according to whether the process in question goes forward or backwards
in time. Moreover, we must also be able to distinguish theoretically
(and not only experimentally) between the normal observer’s report and
the counter-observer’s report of the same process by a separate
convention in respect to whether the process is forward moving or
backward moving. What we want is a characterization of every physical
process so that the invariance of cause and effect corresponds to
nomological irreversibility.
In order to establish a nomic, intrinsic distinction between forward
causal processes and backward causal processes one has to take
departure in four assumptions. (i) Process tokens and process
types are distinct in the sense that only process types are
reversible, process tokens are not. (ii) A normal observer will
describe causal processes propagating forward in time in terms of
positive mass and positive energy states pointing into her future
whereas she will describe the same tokens in terms of negative mass
and energy states pointing into her past. This reflects two
possible solutions of the four-momentum vector in the theory of
relativity. (iii)Thus, one must distinguish between a passive
time reversal operation and an active time reversal operation.
The passive transformation is applied to the same process token by
describing it in terms of opposite coordinates and opposite
energy states. The active transformation, in contrast, brings about
another token of the same process type in virtue of some physical
translation or rotation of the system itself, both tokens having the
same energy sign pointing in the same direction of time. (iv) The
description in terms of positive mass and the possitive energy flow
corresponds to the intrinsic order of the propagation.
Now, let us try to apply the nomic interpretation to the above
consideration concerning the exchange of a particle between two boxes.
In relation to the normal observer who describes the particle in terms
of its positive energy component, it travels from Box 1 to Box
2 because Box 1 looses energy at an earlier time and Box 2 gains energy
at a later time. The same situation is by the counter-observer
described in terms of the particle’s negative energy component
as a situation where something happens in Box 2 before it happens in
Box 1. In relation to the counter-observer, Box 2 would not, as the
boundary interpretation suggests, loose energy. On the contrary, Box 2
would seem to gain energy, but the counter-observer would describe the
particle as a series of negative energy states reaching into his future
supposing the particle to be moving from Box 2 to Box 1 carrying
negative energy. But, as we have just argued, the particle really moves
from Box 1 to Box 2, from the counter-observer’s future into his past
carrying positive energy.
Consequently, the nomic interpretation holds that in relation to our
normal time sense the causal direction of ordinary processes is
identical with that of their reversed processes. In other words, take
two tokens of a nomologically reversible process type, say AAA
and BBB, and let BBB be the actively time reversed
process of AAA, then this interpretation claims that AAA
and BBB causally develop in the same direction of time. So,
according to this view, neither incoming, contracting electromagnetic
waves nor the decrease of entropy would count as examples of backward
causation as long as such processes involve ordinary types of matter,
i.e., matter that possesses positive mass and/or energy pointing, in
relation to our normal time sense, towards the future. The notion of
backward causation should instead be applied to matter of a different
type, particles that appear to have, according to usual conventions,
negative mass and/or energy pointing, in relation to our normal
time sense, towards the future but positive mass and/or energy pointing
towards the past. Such advanced matter, if it exists, should be
distinguished from both ordinary retarded matter as well as tachyons by
always being described with respect to our time sense in terms of
negative mass and energy stretching forward in time. A consequence is
that a world in which advanced matter exists together with retarded
matter, and where advanced matter is able to interact directly with the
same amount of retarded matter, both would, in case they actually did
interact, annihilate without leaving any trace of energy.
How and whether the notion of backward causation has a role to play
in physics has yet to be seen. But as long as no common agreement
exists among philosophers and physicists about what in the physical
description of the world corresponds to our everyday notion of
causation, it would still be a matter of theoretical dispute what
counts as empirical examples of backward causation.