What is time, and is it real? If it is, does time flow or lapse or
pass? Are the future or the past as real as the present? These
metaphysical questions have been debated for more than two millennia,
with no resolution in sight. Modern physics provides us, however, with
tools that enable us to sharpen these old questions and generate new
arguments. Does the special theory of relativity, for example, show
that there is no temporal passage or that the future is as real as the
present? The focus of this entry will be on these new insights into
those old questions. 
 
1. Introduction

Around 500 B. C. Heraclitus wrote the following: 

Everything flows and nothing abides; everything gives way and nothing
stays fixed.


You cannot step twice into the same river, for other waters and yet
others, go flowing on.

Time is a child, moving counters in a game; the royal power is a
 child’s.[1]


Transience is basic, and the present is primary. Those things which
exist now do not abide. They slip into the past and non-existence,
devoured by time, as all experience attests. 

A generation or so later we have a classic statement of the opposing
view by Parmenides:

There remains, then, but one word by which to express the [true] road:
Is. And on this road there are many signs that What Is has no
beginning and never will be destroyed: it is whole, still, and without
end. It neither was nor will be, it simply is—now, altogether,
one, continuous…


Permanence is basic. No things come to be or, slipping into the past,
cease to be. Past, present, and future are distinctions not marked in
the static Is. Time and becoming are at best secondary, at worst
illusory, as our understanding of the world confirms. 

Turn now to modern times and to a paragraph in Rudolf Carnap’s
intellectual autobiography (Carnap 1963, pp. 37–38):

Once Einstein said that the problem of the Now worried him seriously.
He explained that the experience of the Now means something special
for man, something essentially different from the past and the future,
but that this important difference does not and cannot occur within
physics. That this experience cannot be grasped by science seemed to
him a matter of painful but inevitable resignation. I remarked that
all that occurs objectively can be described in science; on the one
hand the temporal sequence of events is described in physics; and, on
the other hand, the peculiarities of man’s experiences with
respect to time, including his different attitude towards past,
present, and future, can be described and (in principle) explained in
psychology. But Einstein thought that these scientific descriptions
cannot possibly satisfy our human needs; that there is something
essential about the Now which is just outside the realm of science. We
both agreed that this was not a question of a defect for which science
could be blamed, as Bergson thought. I did not wish to press the
point, because I wanted primarily to understand his personal attitude
to the problem rather than to clarify the theoretical situation. But I
definitely had the impression that Einstein’s thinking on this
point involved a lack of distinction between experience and knowledge.
Since science in principle can say all that can be said, there is no
unanswerable question left. But though there is no theoretical
question left, there is still the common human emotional experience,
which is sometimes disturbing for special psychological reasons.


This difference as expressed here between Einstein and Carnap (that
is, between the Heraclitean and Parmenidean attitude towards time and
change) is the subject of this article, which will use modern 
physics—especially modern spacetime theory—as a set of lenses
through which it is hoped the riddles of time will come into sharper
focus. There are many ways, however, to approach these questions.
Early in the twentieth century, Anglo-American philosophy turned to
consideration of language as a way to clarify philosophical disputes.
Philosophers of time debated the relative primacy of tensed language
(concerning the notions of present, past, and future) or tenseless
language (concerning the relations of simultaneity and temporal
precedence). Our considerations of physics will generally, though not
completely, skirt linguistic disputes. The reader interested in
following these debates can find a useful introduction in the entry on
 time,
 a classic presentation in Gale (1968), and a review and discussion in
Tooley (1999). 

Other philosophers have been influenced by analogies between time and
modality. The reader interested in this way of thinking about time
should consult the article on
 temporal logic.
 The present article will focus on time in physics and the relations
between time and space. Other philosophical approaches focus on the
primacy of experience in our understanding of time. The reader
interested in these approaches may wish to consult the entry
 the experience and perception of time.
2. Newtonian Spacetime

Modern physical theories are often formulated in a language that
permits one to express a variety of different views with respect to
time and its relation to space. One can, for example, formulate the
basic ideas of classical (that is, Newtonian) physics, the special
theory of relativity, and the general theory of relativity in this
language. For a brief introduction to manifolds and the spacetime
view, see the section on
 modern spacetime theories
 in the entry on
 the hole argument
 in this Encyclopedia. For more detail with minimal technical demands
the reader should see the first four chapters of Geroch (1978) or the
more demanding chapter 2 of Friedman (1983). 

For our purposes, the defining feature of a manifold that is a
Newtonian spacetime is that the temporal interval between any two
points or events in the spacetime, ppp and qqq, is a
well-defined quantity. This quantity is well-defined in that it does
not depend upon point of view, reference frame, coordinate system or
“observer”. This quantity, then, is absolute in
the sense of being frame- or observer-independent. (In the special
theory of relativity the temporal interval between two distinct
spacetime points fails to be absolute in this sense.)

If the temporal interval between two events is 0, then we say that the
two events are simultaneous. This relation of (absolute)
simultaneity is an equivalence relation (That is, it is reflexive,
symmetric, and transitive.) that slices (partitions or foliates) the
spacetime or manifold into mutually exclusive and exhaustive planes of
simultaneity. These planes of simultaneity can then be completely
ordered by the relation ‘is earlier than’ or its converse
‘is later than’.
2.1 Presentism, Possibilism, Eternalism

The geometrical structure of Newtonian spacetime reflects the way we
ordinarily think about time and is the proper backdrop for introducing
the three major rival metaphysical views of time, as illustrated
below:


Figure 1. Three Metaphysics of Time


The first view, represented on the left, is the ontologically austere
view called presentism, the view that only the present
exists. The past has been but is no longer, while the future will come
to be but is not yet. Note that it is the convention of these diagrams
that one spatial dimension is suppressed. The present is actually a
three dimensional global slice of the spacetime. Moreover, the
illustration necessarily represents the spatial extent of the present
as finite and may suggest that time also has a beginning and/or end.
These views are, however, merely artifacts of the representation and
not integral to presentism, possibilism, or eternalism. The diagram
illustrating presentism also has four arrows pointing towards the top
of the page (conventionally taken to represent the future direction)
attached to the plane representing the present. These arrows are meant
to indicate something that is integral to presentism, the idea that
the present (and hence the existent) constantly shifts or changes.
These arrows represent, then, the dynamic aspect of time called
temporal becoming or passage. It is widely thought
that the deepest problems in the metaphysics of time concern the
understanding of passage or temporal becoming and its relation to
existence.

In contrast to the radical Heraclitean view of presentism, the
Parmenidean eternalist picture on the far right lacks these arrows and
indicates that there is no more special about the temporal present
(the now) than the spatial present (the here).
Future and past events at a place, on this view, are no more or less
real than distant events at a time. The now like the
here is a function of one’s perspective, one’s
position in the spacetime, and these positions are indicated by the
line in the spacetime representing the history of spacetime locations
of a particular object or person. Such a line is often called a
world line.

The middle view, possibilism, is indeed an intermediate view. It is a
passage view, but it is less ontologically sparse than presentism.
While on this view the future is still merely possible rather than
actual (hence its name), the past has become and is fully actual. If
one thinks of the future as a branching structure of alternative
possibilities (as the result, for instance, of free human choices or
indeterministic quantum measurements), then one can think of the past
and present as the trunk of that tree, growing as possibilities become
actual in the present. This view is also known as the growing
block view.

Possibilism seems to capture much of the way we think about time and
being. While the sparse symmetry of presentism is attractive, there
are many deep asymmetries concerning past and future that it fails to
reflect. I can easily ascertain, for instance, yesterday’s
closing number for the Dow Jones Industrial Average, but by no
efforts, however great, can I now ascertain tomorrow’s close.
And it seems as if my future actions (or certain sorts of quantum
measurements) can actualize some future possibilities as opposed to
others, whereas past actions (or the results of past quantum
measurements) seem no longer to admit of past alternatives. Even if
one allows for the possibility of retrocausation, that is, for the
possibility of an effect preceding its cause in time, it is generally
held that a present cause can not change or alter the past. It would
merely make the past what it was. (See the entry on
 backwards causation
 for further consideration of this topic.)

Eternalism too, prima facie, would seem to have trouble
accounting for the asymmetries built into possibilism, while also
apparently bearing the burden of an implausible denial of passage. But
the first topic to which we shall turn is an argument, prominent in
twentieth century philosophy of time, that passage or becoming is a
self-contradictory idea. If the argument is correct, then neither
presentism nor possibilism can be correct metaphysical views of time
and being.
2.2 McTaggart’s Argument

At the beginning of the 20th century, J. M. E. McTaggart (1908)
presented an argument which purported to prove that time is unreal.
According to McTaggart (1927, pp. 9–10):

Positions in time, as time appears to us prima facie, are
distinguished in two ways. Each position is Earlier than some and
Later than some of the other positions… . In the second place,
each position is either Past, Present, or Future. The distinctions of
the former class are permanent, while those of the latter are not. If
MMM is ever earlier than NNN, it is always earlier, But
an event, which is now present, was future, and will be past.


The first structure of “positions in time,” McTaggart
called the B-series. I will assume that McTaggart intended
the B-series to coincide with the Newtonian spacetime structure
described above. McTaggart noted that there was something static or
“permanent” about the B-series. If, for example, event
e1e1e_1 is earlier than event e2e2e_2 at
some time or other, then one may truly assert that
e1e1e_1 is earlier than e2e2e_2 at all
times.

The dynamic element of time must be represented, in McTaggart’s
view, by the series of properties of pastness, presentness, and
futurity, which (in contrast to the static B-series) are constantly
changing. A given event becomes less future, becomes present, and then
becomes increasingly past. This latter ever-shifting series McTaggart
called the A-series.

While there are many obscurities in McTaggart’s writing, it
seems clear that his argument that time is unreal runs along the
following lines:

(1)

there can be no time unless it has a dynamic element (that is,
on his view, unless there is an A-series),
(2)

there can be no A-series, because the supposition that there is
an A-series leads to contradiction.


The contradiction alleged by McTaggart is that:

(A1)

every event must have many, if not all, the A-properties (or
A-determinations, as they are sometimes called) whereas,
(A2)

since the A-properties are mutually exclusive, no event can have
more than one of them.


Near the end of a career in which he spent much time and effort in
thinking about McTaggart’s argument, C. D. Broad (1959, p. 765)
wrote:

I felt from the first, and still feel, that the difficulty which
arises is (a) embarrassing enough prima facie to demand the serious
attention of anyone who philosophises about time, and (b) almost
certainly due to some purely linguistic source (common, and perhaps
peculiar, to the Indo-European verb-system), which it ought to be
possible to indicate and make harmless.


Broad’s claim (a) was vindicated by the fact that
McTaggart’s argument has received serious attention from most
subsequent philosophers who pondered the metaphysics of time. Much of
this debate concerns the relative relations of the two series. Is the
A-series fundamental and the B-series derived from it, or vice versa;
or does, perhaps, one series supervene upon the other? In the formal
mode, the questions become whether the B-series may somehow be reduced
to, may be defined in terms of, the A-series (or vice versa). These
debates concern mainly language rather than physics and will not be
considered
 here.[2]

What emerges from the McTaggart literature is, first of all, a
tendency to identify the existence of passage or temporal becoming
with the existence of the A-series (that is, to think of becoming as
events changing their properties of pastness, presentness or nowness,
and futurity) and hence the tendency for debates about the existence
of passage to focus on the merits or incoherence of the A-series
rather than examining alternative accounts of becoming. (But Cf.
Fitzgerald, 1985)

There is a contrary tendency amongst those philosophers who take
modern physics seriously to be sceptical of entities like constantly
shifting temporal properties of events, since such properties play no
role in modern physical theory. One view, defended by Paul Horwich
(1987, Chapter 2) and Huw Mellor (1981, 1998), is that even though
McTaggart showed that the A-series is impossible, the B-series (that
is, static classical spacetime structure) suffices for time.

Before we expand on this theme, though, first a few words about
Broad’s (b), his suspicion that there is some peculiarity of our
language(s) that creates or at least reinforces the credibility of
McTaggart’s anti-passage argument. Broad suspected that there
was a subtle ambiguity in the copula ‘is’ between tensed
and tenseless uses, between the uses in, for instance:

It is raining


and 

Seven is prime,


the former sentence containing a tensed and the latter sentence a
non-tensed or tenseless copula. It has been further suggested (Sellars
1962) that one might understand a non-tensed copula (indicated by
‘be’ rather than ‘is’) after the following
fashion 

SSS be FFF at ttt iff (S(S(S was FFF
at ttt or SSS is FFF at ttt or SSS
will be FFF at t)t)t),


where the verbs to the right of the ‘iff’ (a
logician’s abbreviation for ‘if and only if’) are
usual tensed verbs. 

Alternatively, one might think of a tenseless copula as the usual
copula stripped of temporal information (Quine, 1960, p. 170, Mellor
1981, 1998, Chapter 7), just as the usual copula carries no spatial
information. If we indicate this tenseless copula by writing
‘BE’ instead of ‘is,’ we can say that
‘It BE windy in Chicago’ carries information about the
place but not the time of the wind, just as ‘It BE windy at
t’ tells us about its time but not its place.

These distinctions will prove helpful in the subsequent discussion of
becoming in modern physics. For the moment, one might note that Broad
could argue that McTaggart’s (A1) seems plausible if
the copula is understood in some tenseless fashion, whereas
(A2) is plausible if the copula is tensed. If, however, the
copula is not univocal in (A1) and (A2), then
there is no contradiction involved in accepting both (Savitt,
2001).

The claim that the copula is ambiguous (or more precisely, polysemous)
has also been thought to have some implications for the metaphysical
dispute between presentism and the two non-presentist views sketched
above. A number of authors (Meyer (2005), Savitt (2006), Dorato
(2006), Lombard (2010). See Dolev (2007) for a different
anti-ontological argument.) have argued that in order for there to be
a genuine difference between these allegedly distinct metaphysical
views, in addition to the suggestive pictures displayed above there
must be some univocal statement or proposition concerning temporal
ontology that one side asserts and the other side denies. When the
polysemy of the copula (or of the verb ‘to exist’) is
taken into account, it has proven very difficult to find a clear
example of such a statement or proposition. (Putnam (2008), by the
way, has recently joined these critics: “[T]he question whether
the past and future are ‘real’ is a
pseudo-question.”)

According to one author (Sider, 2006), there seems to be disagreement
concerning the following assertion: dinosaurs exist. Presentists are
understood to deny this claim, while eternalists are supposed to
affirm it. If those who endorse the claim understand the verb
‘exist’ to be tenseless and those who deny it take
‘exist’ to be a present tense verb, then both sides seem
to endorse correct claims. There is in this instance, however, no
univocal statement that is being disputed, since ‘exist’
is understood differently by the two sides. This observation has led
many to try to state a version of presentism that is neither trivial
nor obviously false and to locate precisely the point at which it
differs from non-presentist views. (See Crisp (2004a,b), Ludlow
(2005), Wüthrich (2012), Golosz (2013). Tallant (2013) reviews
several such efforts negatively and adds one of his own.)

The few authors that have approached this debate from a linguistic
perspective differ on the behaviour of the verb ‘exist’.
Ludlow (2005) considers both a tensed and a tenseless verb; Stoneham
(2009) is sceptical with regard to tenseless predication; and Moltmann
(2013) considers ‘exist’ only as a present tense verb. It
is worth noting that he claims that ‘exist’ functions
quite differently from ‘there are’ in that the latter can
be used to quantify over past, merely possible, and intensional
entities whereas the former can not. If his claim is correct, then a
common test sentence for the difference between eternalists and
presentists introduced in Sider (2006)--There exist dinosaurs--seems
almost purpose-built to breed confusion.
2.3 How (and How Not) To Think About Passage

If McTaggart’s argument that passage is conceptually absurd or
self-contradictory fails, philosophers mindful of modern physics are
still left with Einstein’s concern that passage and the now,
while deeply embedded in human experience, seem to find no place in
physics. One may agree with Carnap above that “all that occurs
objectively can be described in science” and then argue that
passage reflects something perspectival or subjective and so is
rightly omitted by physics.

The most popular version of this view holds that now is a
token-reflexive or indexical term, like here (Smart 1963,
chapter VII; Mellor 1981, 1998). Physics is not felt to be incomplete
because it fails to treat hereness. Why should its
indifference to nowness be of any greater concern?

Early proponents of this view often claimed that ‘SSS is
now FFF’ meant ‘SSS’s being FFF
is simultaneous with this utterance,’ a quite implausible claim.
A more sophisticated version of the view is that the truth-conditions
of sentences like ‘SSS is now FFF’ can be
given solely in terms of the (tenseless) facts that exist or events
that occur at the time of the utterance or inscription of the given
sentence. One can treat past and future in a similar
fashion.

Smart claimed that excessive attention to the tensed notions of
now, past, and future serve to project a “sort
of anthropocentric idea on the universe at large.”(1963, 132)
But even if the tensed temporal locutions are anthropocentric and do
locate us in the universe, it may still be asked whether
these temporal locations are in a static structure, “a
four-dimensional continuum of spacetime entities,” (132) or in
an unfolding or dynamic universe. Smart dismisses this latter view
because, in his view, it involves the obscure or mistaken idea that
events “become” or “come into existence.”
Becoming and passage are mistakes, in his view, and harmful ones at
that. Smart writes: “Our notion of time as flowing, the
transitory aspect of time as Broad has called it, is an illusion which
prevents us seeing the world as it really is” (132).

It will be useful to untangle a couple of ideas that are confounded in
these quotes from Smart, with the help of some arguments of (mostly)
Broad’s (1938, section 1.22 of Chapter 35). First is the idea
that time “flows” or, more generally, that passage is
somehow to be thought of as like motion. Perhaps time itself somehow
moves. Or perhaps, as Broad wrote in a famous passage (1923, 59):

We are naturally tempted to regard the history of the world as
existing eternally in a certain order of events. Along this, and in a
fixed direction, we imagine the characteristic of presentness moving,
somewhat like the spot of light from a policeman’s
bull’s-eye traversing the fronts of the houses in a street. What
is illuminated is the present, what has been illuminated is the past,
and what has not yet been illuminated is the future.


This picture of passage has come to be called the moving
spotlight view, or just the moving
 NOW.[3]

Motion is one sort of change, change of spatial position with respect
to time. The motion of time, then, must be change of time with respect
to … What? If the answer, by analogy with motion, is
“time”, one might be rightly puzzled as to how time (or
anything else, for that matter) can change with respect to
itself. Furthermore, if it is just time again, then the ratio of
these two quantities expressing the rate of change is a pure or
dimensionless number if the dimensions of the quantities in this ratio
cancel. (See Price 1996, p. 13.) A pure number is not a rate of
change, although it may represent various rates of change (for
instance, 30 meters/second or 30 miles/hour). As Price remarks,
“We might just as well say that the ratio of the circumference
of a circle to its diameter flows at ππ\pi seconds per
second!”

Tim Maudlin (2007) has replied to Price that the rate of one second
per second is a perfectly fine rate. Consider, he says, a fair
exchange rate (based, say, on purchasing power parity) for currencies.
The fair exchange rate for the British pound might, at some time, be
1.52 US dollars per pound. Similarly, Maudlin observes that the fair
exchange rate for the US dollar with respect to itself must be 1 US
dollar per US dollar. “If you think that this answer is
meaningless,” Maudlin writes, “imagine your reaction to an
offer of exchange at any other rate” (2007, 112).

Price (2011) has replied to Maudlin by abandoning the claim that the
units in “one second per second” cancel, leaving a pure
number. He now insists, rather, that a ratio of a quantity to itself
can not be a rate at all. Maudlin’s example only seems to evade
this point by supposing a ratio of dollars offered to dollars
returned. That ratio differs, as he sees it, in an essential way from
the ratio of one second to one second or, for that matter, from the
ratio of one mile to one mile, which are both ratios of quantities to
themselves. Neither in his view can be a rate, and the former ratio is
no more characteristic of time than the latter ratio is of space. (See
also Markosian (1993), Olson (2009), Raven (2010), and Skow
(2012).)

If (in order to avoid the apparent collapse of a ratio or rate into a
pure number) the time in the denominator of the ratio expressing the
rate of time’s motion is held to be a different temporal
dimension from the one in the numerator, then for it to be a genuine
time there will have to be passage in it, requiring yet a third
temporal dimension. One can see that we are at the beginning of an
infinite regress, unless the third temporal dimension is identified
with the first (as in Schlesinger 1980, Chapter II), leaving us in the
uncomfortable position of having two temporal dimensions. It seems at
best heroic, at worst hopeless, to try to understand passage as a kind
of motion.

Broad also thought that trying to explain or represent passage in
terms of qualitative change was “doomed to failure.” A
thing or substance, SSS, can change in terms of a quality or
property if property P1P1P_1 and property P2P2P_2 are determinates
under a given determinable and SSS is P1P1P_1 at t1t1t_1 but P2P2P_2
at t2t2t_2. The passage of time, then, is to be thought of as an
event’s having (say) the property of presentness and then
immediately losing that property but gaining (and losing in turn) a
long and possibly endless series of properties of the increasing
degrees of pastness.

In order for a thing to change from having P1P1P_1 at t1t1t_1 to
having P2P2P_2 at t2t2t_2 it must evidently persist at least from
t1t1t_1 to t2t2t_2, but the events usually supposed in discussions of
passage are instantaneous events, which have no duration at all. They
can not undergo qualitative change. It is sometimes argued that the
properties that make up the A-series (and so change of which
represents passage) are special properties, which even instantaneous
events can gain and lose, but this is special pleading. As noted
above, physics has so far no need of such special properties and such
special change and so is unlikely to be sympathetic to this special
pleading.

Finally, Broad notes that (assuming one wishes to think of passage as
like qualitative change) the acquisition and loss of (say) presentness
by an event would itself be an event, a second-order event, in the
history of a first-order event. Since the first-order events are, by
hypothesis, durationless, it is tempting to suppose that this history
takes place in a second temporal dimension. We find ourselves again
launched on what looks to be an infinite regress of temporal
dimensions.

These are strong arguments against two perennially tempting ways to
construe temporal becoming—as like motion or qualitative
change. They are strong arguments against the existence of temporal
becoming if there is no other way to understand it. Broad thought,
however, that he had a third way. Having pointed out the superficial
grammatical similarity between ‘EEE became louder’
and ‘EEE became present’, Broad said that our
understanding of these two kinds of assertions need not be dictated by
it. He wrote (1938, p. 280–1):

Again, any subject of which we can significantly say that it
“became louder” must be a more or less prolonged
noise-process, which divides into an earlier phase of less loudness
adjoined to a later phase of greater loudness. But a literally
instantaneous event-particle can significantly be said to
“become present”; and, indeed, in the strict sense of
“present” only instantaneous event-particles can
be said to “become present”. To “become
present” is, in fact, just to “become”, in an
absolute sense; i.e., to “come to pass” in the Biblical
phraseology, or, most simply, to “happen”. Sentences like
“This water became hot” or “This noise became
louder” record facts of qualitative change. Sentences
like “This event became present” record facts of
absolute becoming.


The terminology may be pretentious, but the idea is simple. Absolute
becoming is just the happening of events. The raison
d’être, the very being or existence of events, is in
their happening (at some place and time). If one is willing to embrace
this category of entity at all, then one has the tools for a
minimalist understanding of passage. Given the geometric richness of
Newtonian spacetime, we can say that some events occur at the same
time and so form a class of simultaneous events. These classes can be
ordered by their times, so we can say that some events occur before or
after others. The passage of time is then just the successive
happening of (simultaneity sets of)
 events.[4]
 It may be this picture of passage that the great logician Kurt
Gödel had in mind when he wrote (1949, p. 558): “The
existence of an objective lapse of time … means (or, at least,
is equivalent to the fact) that reality consists of an infinity of
layers of ‘now’ which come into existence
successively.”

There is an ambiguity in this last quote, however, that we must note.
Did Gödel think that the layers of now come into existence (as
what is to be becomes what is now) and then immediately cease to exist
(as what is now becomes what once was), which is the presentist
metaphysics of time? Or did he think that the layers of now come into
existence and forever stay in existence, as the possibilist picture
maintains? If one’s basic ontology consists of the sort of
events characterized above and often invoked in discussions of time,
(idealized) instantaneous happenings, then the presentist picture
seems inevitable.

The metaphysics of time is, however, one of the cross-roads of
philosophy where issues intersect. If one thinks of a basic ontology
consisting not of events but of substances or continuants, then one is
apt to wonder what it is that makes sentences marking episodes in the
histories of such substances—sentences like ‘SSS
is ΦΦ\Phi at ttt’—true. One frequent suggestion is
that the “truth-makers” of such sentences are facts, the
fact that at ttt, SSS is ΦΦ\Phi. Then one might
further note that in the current year, 2001, we can say:

It is a fact that Mount St. Helens erupted in Washington in
1980.
It is a fact that Jean Chretien is now Prime Minister of
Canada.
It is a fact that there will be a total eclipse of the sun in the
United States in 2017.


These facts, when compared to evanescent events, seem to have great
stability, the first one lasting (since it is a fact
…) at least from 1980 till the present. The third one is,
however, a special sort of fact, clearly not dependent on human will
or choice and almost certainly not dependent upon any quantum
measurements either. Future facts that do depend upon human choice or
quantum measurement, should they be facts now, would seem to constrain
human choice or quantum measurement in ways that many philosophers
find undesirable. It is easy to convince oneself, then, that future
facts of those two sorts can not really be part of the existing.
Perhaps, then, facts like fact 3 above can be argued away as well. The
result of this (lightly sketched) train of thought is, of course, the
possibilist picture of time.

It seems unlikely that a simple argument will decide between these two
metaphysical pictures of time, presentism and possiblism. Showing that
McTaggart’s argument is flawed, because it relies on an
ambiguity in the copula ‘is’, and that there is a way to
construe passage that side-steps the traditional objections, moreover,
does not show that eternalism is false but only that it is optional.
In Newtonian spacetime it may appear implausible, but it may fare
better when we turn to Minkowski spacetime.
3. The Special Theory of Relativity

The Special Theory of Relativity (Einstein, 1905) was presented as a
geometric theory of spacetime in Minkowski
 (1908).[5]
 For our purposes, the key change from Newtonian spacetime to
Minkowski spacetime is that in the latter it is no longer the case
that the temporal interval between any two points or events in the
spacetime, ppp and qqq, is a well-defined quantity. In
fact, the temporal interval between two points in the spacetime (and
hence the simultaneity of two points in the spacetime) is not defined
at all until a coordinate system or frame of reference (with some
arbitrarily chosen spacetime point as origin of the frame) is chosen.
A peculiar feature of special relativity (as opposed Newtonian
physics) is that each inertial frame defined by an
“observer” passing through the chosen origin and moving
with some constant non-zero velocity that is less than the speed of
light (the only coordinate systems or frames of reference that will be
considered in our discussion of the special theory) picks out a
distinct set of points as simultaneous with the origin. This
feature of special relativity is called the relativity of
simultaneity.

The relativity of simultaneity is a consequence of two startling
assumptions. First, each of these “observers”, no matter
at what (subluminal) speed or in which direction they or the source of
the light are moving (as long as neither the speed nor the directions
change), must come to the same result (conventionally indicated as
c)c)c) when they measure the speed of light. We will not attempt
to justify the assumption of the constancy of the speed of light here,
though many standard texts present the empirical and theoretical
background that led to it. Nor is it obvious that this assumption
leads to the relativity of simultaneity, though one of the joys of
even elementary presentations of the subject is that this prima
facie astonishing connection can be convincingly demonstrated to
persistent non-specialists.

The second assumption typically made in presentations of the special
theory is the Principle of Relativity: All inertial frames
are completely equivalent for the formulation of the laws of
 physics.[6]

A glance back at Figure 1 reminds us that presentism and possibilism
suppose that one plane of simultaneity is uniquely metaphysically
important. In the former view, it represents all that exists. In the
latter view, it is the locus of becoming, the dividing line between
the merely possible future and the actual past-plus-present. The
special theory of relativity tells us that there is an infinity of
planes of simultaneity passing through any given spacetime point and
that no physical test can distinguish one from amongst the lot. What
was metaphysically distinguished is now physically indistinguishable.
Assuming that we humans are complex physical systems, then we have no
way to distinguish the present from amongst the multitude of
presents.

An enthusiast could make much of this fact. For instance, the
mathematician (and science fiction writer) Rudy Rucker wrote (1984, p.
149):

As it turns out, it is actually impossible to find any
objective and universally acceptable definition of “all of
space, taken at this instant.” This follows … from
Einstein’s special theory of relativity. The idea of the block
universe is, thus, more than an attractive metaphysical theory. It is
a well-established scientific fact.


On the other hand, the distinguished philosopher and logician Arthur
Prior thought that the above conclusion showed that special relativity
is an incomplete view of reality (Prior,
 1970):[7]

One possible reaction to this situation, which to my mind is perfectly
respectable though it isn’t very fashionable, is to insist that
all that physics has shown to be true or likely is that in some cases
we can never know, we can never physically find out,
whether something is actually happening or merely has happened or will
happen.


We shall look at more nuanced reactions to the relativity of
simultaneity below, but first it will be useful to introduce an
argument that plays somewhat the same role in Minkowski spacetime as
McTaggart’s argument did in Newtonian spacetime. Versions of the
argument are endorsed in papers by the physicist Wim Rietdijk (1966,
1976) and the philosopher Hilary Putnam (1967), but the presentation
here will be based on an example found in Roger Penrose’s book,
The Emperor’s New Mind. 

Imagine that the Andromeda galaxy, which is about two million light
years or 2×10192×10192\times 10^{19} kilometers from Earth, is at rest
with respect to Earth. On Earth two friends walk past each other,
Alice walking along the Earth-Andromeda line towards Andromeda, Bob
walking along that line but away from Andromeda. Each is walking at a
comfortable pace, say 4 km/hour. One can calculate that their planes
(or spaces) of simultaneity at the instant at which they pass each
other on Earth (Call the event of their meeting O)O)\mathbf{O})
intersect the history or world line of Andromeda about 5
¾ days apart. (Call these two events AA\mathbf{A} and
BB\mathbf{B}, respectively. We are idealizing Andromeda as a
point, for the purpose of this example.) Imagine, finally, that during
this 5 ¾ day period between BB\mathbf{B} and
AA\mathbf{A} a momentous thing happens. The Andromedeans launch
a space fleet aimed at invading Earth.


Figure 2. The Andromedean Invasion


The launch of the invading fleet is prior to AA\mathbf{A} and so
in some sense in Alice’s past. But since the launch is
after BB\mathbf{B}, it is in that same sense in Bob’s
future. Penrose comments:

Two people pass each other on the street; and according to one of the
two people, an Andromedean space fleet has already set off on its
journey, while to the other, the decision as to whether or not the
journey will actually take place has not yet been made. How can there
still be some uncertainty as to the outcome of that decision? If to
either person the decision has already been made, then surely
there cannot be any uncertainty. The launching of the space
fleet is an inevitability. (p. 303)


This is an odd situation indeed. An event in Bob’s future seems
in some way to become fixed or inevitable by being in Alice’s
past. But that is not the end of the oddness here. Imagine that at
point AA\mathbf{A} (where Alice’s plane of simultaneity
intersects the world line of Andromeda) there is an Andromedean,
Carol, who is walking directly towards Earth at about 4 km/hour. Then
Carol’s plane of simultaneity intersects Earth at some point
CC\mathbf{C} which is about 11 ½ days after
OO\mathbf{O}, the meeting of Alice and Bob. If all events (like
A)A)\mathbf{A}) in Alice’s past or present at
OO\mathbf{O} have happened, are fixed, or are real, then the
principle of relativity (the second assumption of the special theory
introduced above) suggests that we must also extend the same courtesy
to Carol; and so simultaneous with the fixed and real event
AA\mathbf{A} (Carol’s walking towards Earth at exactly the
point at which Alice’s plane of simultaneity intersects the
history of Andromeda) is the event CC\mathbf{C} (and so fixed
and real), the intersection of Carol’s plane of simultaneity
with Earth, which is in the future of both Alice and Bob. It
is easy to see that, by adjusting the speeds of Alice and Carol, any
event to the future of OO\mathbf{O} can be shown to be fixed or
real or inevitable. But OO\mathbf{O} itself was just an
arbitrarily chosen point in the spacetime. “It begins to seem
that if anything is definite at all,” we might echo Penrose,
“then the entire space-time must indeed be definite! There can
be no ‘uncertain’ future.” (p. 304) 

Roberto Torretti (1983, p. 249) calls the resulting view of the
definiteness or fixity of all events in the spacetime
chronogeometrical determinism. A slightly better name might
be chronogeometrical fatalism, as we will see below. In order
to see more clearly, however, what has gone wrong in the argument
above, it will be useful first to look more closely at the problems
attendant upon trying to import our commonsense or classical
intuitions about time into the understanding of Minkowski spacetime
and then to describe briefly the structures peculiar to that spacetime
itself. To begin with the first task, one of the most notable attempts
to bring our time into Minkowski spacetime is to be found in Sellars
(1962), a determined attempt by one of the most profound systematic
metaphysicians of the latter half of the 20th century.
3.1 Relativizing the Present

Wilfrid Sellars
 believed that the various invariant or observer-independent
elements of Minkowski spacetime (like the light cone structure to be
described below) that are typically given primary consideration in
treatments of relativity from a spacetime perspective are abstractions
from and secondary to the ‘perspectival’ pictures or
perspectives, the myriad of inertial systems or reference
frames. When it comes to time, however, he believed that there is
something even more fundamental than these perspectives:

…we must distinguish between a moment, t, and the event of the
moment’s being present with respect to a given perspective and,
above all, between the event of the moment’s being present with
respect to a given perspective and the event of the moment’s
being present. The latter, of course, is the essential
feature of a temporal picture of the world. (577)


While there is in Sellars’ paper a lengthy and illuminating
series of reflections on the relation between events, facts, and
substances, there is no guidance offered on the relation between a
moment’s being present with respect to a given perspective and a
moment’s simply being present, a concept which is ill-defined
from a relativistic point of view. If this latter is indeed an
essential feature of a temporal picture of the world, then it would
seem that special relativity does not provide us with a temporal
picture of the world. If on the other hand the world is
fundamentally temporal in the way that Sellars insists it must be,
then (at least as far a special relativity as a representation of that
world is concerned), Sellars’ famous scientific realism is
compromised. 

There are some useful lessons to learn from the failure of this
attempt to import pre-relativistic temporal categories into Minkowski
spacetime. First, Sellars is careful to distinguish between events as
things that happen or occur or take place and the ‘events’
(the use of single quotes is Sellars’) that are basic in
relativity. The latter are just spacetime points. They do not take
place or occur, and they are not the relata in causal relations,
whereas events are. (But cf. Tooley (1997, Chapter 9)) 

Sellars also presents a distinction between what he calls (p. 586)
categorial existence statements and what, for lack of a
better term, I will call non-categorial existence statements.
The former invoke frameworks, like the framework of substances or the
framework of ‘events’, the frameworks that Sellars takes
great pains to compare in his essay. He is inclined towards a view he
attributes to Carnap (1950) that to say that, for instance,
‘Things exist’ is to make the categorial, metalinguistic
claim that there are thing words in our language L now. This use of
‘exist,’ claims Sellars, has no (future or past) tensed
contrast.

Non-categorial existence statements, on the other hand, assert the
existence of individuals or less general kinds in a fully tensed
fashion. Sellars would construe them in the following way (p.
592):

aaa be existent {{\{ before now, now, after
now }≡}≡\} \equiv

∃x(x∃x(x\exists x(x be {{\{ before now, now,
after now }}\} and xxx be
Φ1,…,ΦnΦ1,…,Φn\Phi_1 ,\ldots ,\Phi_n
and

 
‘Φ1Φ1\Phi_1’, …, ‘ΦnΦn\Phi_n’
be our criteria now for [being] ‘aaa’)


Leaving aside Sellars’ idiosyncratic way of construing existence
statements, if a distinction between categorial and non-categorial
existence claims can be made, then it would be perfectly coherent to
indicate that one is adopting or working in the framework of
‘events’ by asserting that ‘events exist’
(tenselessly, in the categorial sense) without being committed to the
“tenseless existence” of particular events which may be
past, present, or future (in the non-categorial sense). 

It has sometimes been thought that commitment to a spacetime
framework, as is often explicit in treatments of special (and general)
relativity, is tantamount to commitment to eternalism, since to say
that spacetime points exist seems inconsistent with saying that some
spacetime points are future and so do not exist yet or are past and so
exist no longer. If some distinction of the type just
sketched can be made between categorial and non-categorial existence
statements, then eternalism is not a straightforward consequence of
adopting the spacetime
 viewpoint.[8]

Granting Sellars all the distinctions that he wishes, however, does
not give him the tools to avoid the central problem sketched above.
Since the problem is, in one form or another, the problem that any
view that tries to define a notion of temporal becoming in Minkowski
spacetime must address, it is worth examining it a bit more closely.
Sellars wrote (p. 591):

… in the case of an ‘event’ framework, a primary
temporal picture is a picture with a now. And even if one
observer’s now is another observer’s
then, or one observer’s simultaneous cross sections of
the world are another observer’s sets of differently dated
‘events’,… each of their now-pictures is a
primary picture, and the purely topological picture (which includes
the measurements performed by SSS and S′S′S' as
topological facts) which is common to them is not the primary
picture of the world construed as a system of
‘events,’ but merely a topological abstraction common to
the various primary pictures; and the topologically formulated
location of individual events in the topological picture is merely the
topologically invariant features of the criteria which identify these
‘events’ in a primary picture.


In this quote Sellars is using the term ‘topological’
where one would now normally use the term ‘geometric’, and
he is forcefully reiterating his view that the spacetime manifold of
‘events’ is merely an abstraction from the infinity of
distinct primary now-pictures of individual observers. 

The first question one will surely want to ask about this view is: how
can an infinity of distinct “now-pictures” each
be primary? No answer is forthcoming. The second, and more troubling
question, is: how can this infinity of distinct
“now-pictures” be related to the traditional metaphysical
views under discussion? What, in short, is the connection (if any)
between the temporal notions implicit in each of the pictures and
existence of the past, present, and future? The striking fact about
Sellars’ schema above for ‘a be existent
now’ is that it is not relativized to a
reference frame, inertial system or “perspective” and so
is not meaningful relativistically. The definition gives us no
guidance as to how to parcel out existence to elements in the infinity
of inertial frames that are admissible at a spacetime point.

If the definition or schema above were relativized to inertial frames
F,F′F,F′F, F', etc., so as to connect existence to
relativistically acceptable “primary now-pictures”, its
interpretation would be either unhelpful or mysterious. Consider the
following modification of Sellars’ schema above:

aaa be existent now in F≡F≡F \equiv

∃x(x∃x(x \exists x(x be now in FFF
and xxx be
Φ1,…ΦnΦ1,…Φn\Phi_1 ,\ldots \Phi_n
and

 
‘Φ1Φ1\Phi_1’,…,‘ΦnΦn\Phi_n’
be our criteria now for ‘aaa’)


Suppose it is not the case that aaa be existent now in
some other frame F′F′F'. It seems as if this difference
must result from aaa’s being simultaneous with some
spacetime point OO\mathbf{O}, say, in FFF while not being
simultaneous with the same point OO\mathbf{O} in
F′F′F'. But on this reading Sellars’ schema is just a
round-about way to indicate that simultaneity is relative—the
point of departure for our metaphysical questions rather than the
answer to any. 

The schema looks as if it is meant to do something more, to connect
temporal notions to existence. But if so, how is existence relative to
a frame to be understood? Classical presentism, for instance, wishes
to identify existence with present existence or existence
now. Since the present is relativized to frames in special
relativity, may not existence be relativized to frames as well? This
is a difficult notion to understand or accept. Kurt Gödel (1949,
p. 558) said flatly, “The concept of existence … cannot
be relativized without destroying its meaning completely.” Is
the concept of existence, then, like the concept of truth, which, when
relativized (as true-for-me, true-for-you), comes to something more
like belief than truth? Or is it like simultaneity, about which
thoughtful persons a century or so ago might have made pronouncements
much like Gödel’s? This difficult and fundamental question
has by no means been resolved.

Were this question resolved in favor of the relativization of
existence, what would be the import of a relativized version of
presentism? It would have to hold that what existed changed radically
with one’s state of motion. Certain events (say on Mars or a
planet orbiting a distant star) may be existent for you now, sitting
at your computer screen or reading a printout, but other events will
replace those as existent should you decide to walk one way or
another. This seems (once again) less like an interesting metaphysical
insight than a restatement of the relativity of simultaneity.
Possibilism is not better off in this regard, for it relies on a
metaphysically distinguished present to separate the real from the
potential. (See the symposium “The Prospects for the Present in
Spacetime Theories” in Howard (2000) for further arguments and
references.)

To sum up, then, Sellars’ attempt to tie existence to temporal
notions, when properly relativized, is either a bland re-statement of
what special relativity tells us already about simultaneity or an
opaque statement about relativized existence. This dilemma confronts
any attempt to import pre-relativistic temporal notions into Minkowski
spacetime, such as that in §5.7 of Dolev (2007), though Dolev
explicitly eschews ontologizing temporal relations. Let us, then, turn
to efforts to understand Minkowski spacetime in a different way,
efforts that will help clarify the puzzling argument about the
Andromedean invasion presented above.
3.2 Chronogeometrical Fatalism Again

We have said much about the relativity of simultaneity but little
about the invariance of the speed of light. We now rectify that
situation.

Imagine that at some point OO\mathbf{O} of the spacetime an
idealized point-sized flashbulb flashes for (literally) an instant. It
follows from the invariance of the speed of light in all directions
that Alice, passing through OO\mathbf{O} as above, will find
herself at the center of an expanding sphere of photons. The radius of
the sphere expands with speed ccc. (It follows that Bob, also
passing through OO\mathbf{O} but moving with some constant
velocity with respect to Alice, must find himself also at the center
of such a sphere, even though he and Alice are moving away from each
other. Such is relativistic life!) If we try to diagram this
situation, it is helpful to suppress one spatial dimension, as we have
in all the figures above, and so the two-dimensional cut through the
expanding sphere looks like an expanding circle, which becomes a cone
when that growth is plotted vertically up the diagram (and so is
called the light cone.) More precisely, this figure is just
half the light cone. If two photons (restricting ourselves to two
dimensions now) converged on point OO\mathbf{O} from opposite
directions, the lines indicating their histories would mark the other
half, the past lobe, of the light
 cone.[9]

Light cones exist at each point of the spacetime and are invariant
structures. Since the speed of light is an invariant quantity, all
“observers” agree as to which points of the spacetime are
illuminated by the popping of the flashbulb at OO\mathbf{O}.
Furthermore, as special relativity is standardly understood, the speed
of light is a limiting speed. No material particle can be accelerated
from a speed less than ccc to a speed equal to or greater than
ccc. Electromagnetic radiation (including light) always
propagates in a vacuum at speed ccc. (To see why ccc is
held to be limiting speed, see Mermin (1968, Chapter 15) and Nahin
(1999, pp. 342–353 and Tech Note 7.) Given these suppositions,
the light cone structure divides all spacetime into three distinct
sorts of regions relative to each spacetime point OO\mathbf{O}.
(See chapters 5 and 6 of Geroch (1978) for a thorough discussion.)


Figure 3. The Light Cone 


First, there are the points from which a photon (travelling at speed
ccc, of course) may reach OO\mathbf{O} or which (like
A)A)\mathbf{A}) may be reached by a photon from
OO\mathbf{O}. We say that these points are lightlike
separated from OO\mathbf{O}.

Second, there are the points inside (rather than on) the future or
past light cone of OO\mathbf{O}. We say that these points are
timelike separated from OO\mathbf{O}. If
BB\mathbf{B} is a point in the spacetime timelike separated from
OO\mathbf{O} and future to it (that is, inside
OO\mathbf{O}’s future light cone), then a material
particle travelling at some relativistically acceptable speed (that
is, less than c)c)c) can travel from OO\mathbf{O} to
BB\mathbf{B}. Similarly, a material particle at a point like
CC\mathbf{C} inside the past light cone of OO\mathbf{O},
can travel at some speed less than ccc from CC\mathbf{C}
to OO\mathbf{O}. 

Finally, there are the points of the spacetime that are neither in nor
on the light cone of OO\mathbf{O}. We say that such points are
spacelike separated from OO\mathbf{O}. If
DD\mathbf{D} is spacelike separated from OO\mathbf{O},
then neither a light signal nor a material body can travel from
OO\mathbf{O} to DD\mathbf{D} or vice versa,
because such travel would require superluminal speed. If one makes the
natural assumption that information and causal influence are
propagated by electromagnetic signals and material particles, then if
DD\mathbf{D} is spacelike separated from OO\mathbf{O},
events or occurrences at OO\mathbf{O} can have no causal
influence at all on events at DD\mathbf{D}, and vice
versa.

We have reached this last conclusion by means of quite straightforward
reasoning from the invariance of the speed of light. But consider the
following observation of Torretti (1983, p. 247):

Before Einstein … nobody appears to have seriously disputed
that any two events might be causally related to each other,
regardless of their spatial and temporal distance. The denial of this
seemingly modest statement is perhaps the deepest innovation in
natural philosophy brought about by Relativity. It has completely
upset our traditional views of time, space, and causality …


As one illustration of how our traditional views of time and causality
are upset by restricting the propagation of causal influence to the
light cone structure, let us revisit the reasoning of the example of
the Andromedean invasion that we used to illustrate and motivate
chronogeometrical fatalism. We may be able to see now that this
reasoning is not so compelling as it first seemed, and we may be able
to see why some philosophers have proposed that we look at becoming in
Minkowski spacetime in a way quite different from the traditional way.


To make the exposition easier, let us add to the story of the
Andromedean invasion a fourth “observer”, Ted, who is at
rest with respect to Earth (and so also Andromeda) at the spot where
Alice and Bob meet. Ted too defines an inertial frame, and there is a
point at Andromeda (We can call it D)D)\mathbf{D}) that (in
Ted’s frame) is simultaneous with the meeting of Alice and Bob
and Ted. To make our exposition easier still, let us suppose that
Alice and Bob and Ted set their clocks to read 0 at the instant at
which they all
 meet.[10]
 Let us focus on DD\mathbf{D}.

Ted (at the meeting of Alice and Bob) assigns to DD\mathbf{D}
the time 0, since it is simultaneous (in his frame) with his time 0.
Alice assigns DD\mathbf{D} (roughly) the time −3−3-3 days,
whereas Bob assigns it time (roughly) +3+3+3 days. DD\mathbf{D} is,
of course, spacelike separated from OO\mathbf{O}, and we have
been at pains to explain that from a special relativistic standpoint
this spacelike separation precludes the (physical) possibility that
there is any causal influence upon DD\mathbf{D} of the events at
OO\mathbf{O}, or vice versa. Once the labelling of
spacetime points like DD\mathbf{D} with coordinates is complete,
what further content is there, what further could be meant, by adding
that for Alice and Ted DD\mathbf{D} is real or fixed? Or that
for Alice it is past whereas for Bob it is future? If there is indeed
no further content, then what possible implications with regard to
‘reality’ or ‘fixity’ or
‘determinateness’ or ‘tense’ can be drawn from
the fact that Bob labels this point with a positive number, Alice
labels it with a negative number, and Ted labels it with
 0?[11]

Any good text in special relativity will sooner or later prove that
for any pair of spacelike separated points (but let us
continue to call them OO\mathbf{O} and D)D)\mathbf{D}) there
is precisely one admissible inertial frame (with OO\mathbf{O} as
origin) in which OO\mathbf{O} and DD\mathbf{D} are
simultaneous, an infinity of admissible inertial frames in which
DD\mathbf{D} is assigned a positive number (that is, in which
OO\mathbf{O} occurs before D)D)\mathbf{D}), and an infinity
of other admissible inertial frames in which DD\mathbf{D} is
assigned a negative number (that is, in which DD\mathbf{D}
occurs before O)O)\mathbf{O}). What metaphysical significance
could be gleaned from the fact that some “observers” (the
usual anthropomorphized way to refer to admissible inertial frames) at
OO\mathbf{O} must assign positive times, some negative times,
and one time 0 to the distant event DD\mathbf{D}, which, again,
can not be influenced by and can not itself influence the events at
OO\mathbf{O}, according to special relativity at least?

Inability to provide any positive answer to this question can motivate
a different approach to conceptualizing becoming in Minkowski
spacetime, an approach presented by the philosopher Howard Stein
(1968, 1991). The basic idea of this approach is to begin from or to
define concepts in terms of the geometric structure intrinsic to the
spacetime rather than in terms of coordinates. In the present case,
this approach leads one to try to define ‘becoming’ in
terms of spacetime points and light cones. Pre-relativistically,
‘has become’ is defined relative to a plane of
simultaneity. We have seen the limitations of the notion of a plane of
simultaneity in special relativity. Stein begins, then, by proposing
that one define the relation of ‘having become’ or
‘already definite’ with respect to spacetime points. A
two-place relation schematically written as RxyRxyRxy will be
intended to capture the idea that point yyy has already become
or is definite with respect to point xxx.

There are two other formal features that this relation RRR
should possess. It should be transitive—that is, if
zzz has already become with respect to yyy and
yyy has already become with respect to xxx, then it
seems reasonable to require that zzz has already become with
respect to xxx. It should also be reflexive—that 
is, is seems reasonable to require that xxx has become
with respect to xxx itself. (We can indicate these
conditions briefly as (1) RzyRzyRzy and RxzRxzRxz entail
RxyRxyRxy, for all x,y,zx,y,zx, y, z and (2) RxxRxxRxx, for all
xxx.)

Finally, Stein proposes that the relation RRR not hold between
every two points in the spacetime. That is, he proposes that given
some choice of spacetime point xxx, there is at least one
distinct point yyy that has not become, that is not already
definite, with respect to xxx. But is there any such relation,
any relation that has all these intuitively desirable characteristics?
The answer is yes. The relation is that between a point
xxx and each point in or on its past light
 cone.[12]
 If one can accept that the relation RxyRxyRxy represents in
special relativity the notion of becoming (or, having become), then
the existence of the relation specified and found by Stein is a formal
refutation of the Rietdijk-Putnam-Penrose argument for chronogeometric
fatalism.

It is this last issue, of course, that is controversial. Stein, who
wishes to tie his definitions of temporal concepts to intrinsic
geometric structure, holds that “in Einstein-Minkowski
space-time an event’s present is constituted by itself
alone.” (1968, p. 15) If one wishes to include even
one other event in an event’s present—that is,
if one specifies that for each point xxx there must be one
other distinct point yyy such that not only RxyRxyRxy but
also RyxRyxRyx—then the only relation that satisfies this
desideratum and the other conditions specified by Stein is
the universal
 relation.[13]

Callender (2000, S592) remarks that requiring that an event‘s
present must contain at least one event distinct from it, which he
calls the non-uniqueness condition, “seems the thinnest
requirement one might put on becoming.” He would then not accept
Stein’s relation RRR as representing a genuine relation
of becoming since it fails to meet this condition, but then he also
must accept the conclusion of the Rietdijk-Putnam-Penrose argument,
since the only alternative to RRR is the universal relation. If
one wishes to evade chronogeometric fatalism, as far as the special
theory of relativity is concerned, then it seems there is no
alternative to accepting Stein’s relation RRR as
representing a genuine relation of becoming and to considering that an
event’s present is constituted by itself alone. It is a truism
that the relativistic revolution in physics has profound implications
for our concepts of space and time. This last dilemma shows why that
truism is true.

There may seem to be an insuperable obstacle to accepting
Stein’s relation RRR as representing a genuine relation
of becoming. RRR is supposed to represent becoming, but the
light cone structure of Minkowski spacetime, in terms of which it is
defined, is inert. This reaction was voiced, for instance, by Palle
Yourgrau, who wrote that “Stein’s mistake is to adduce a
structural property as what ‘justifies the use of our
notion of ”becoming“ in relativistic
spacetime.”’ (1999, p. 77) If Yourgrau has put his finger
on a “mistake”, then it is a “mistake” at the
very heart of Stein’s effort. There are, however, a few remarks
to be made on this score.

First, there have been attempts to articulate positions like
Stein’s that try to account for passage in terms of geometric
structure and that seem to incorporate more dynamic elements,
exploiting the fact that persistent objects or substances (including
“observers”) are represented by timelike world lines,
rather than by points. The mathematician G. J. Whitrow (1980, p. 348)
wrote:

At a given instant EEE on the world line of an observer
AAA (who need not be regarded as anything more than a recording
instrument), all the events from which AAA can have received
signals lie within the backwards-directed light cone with its vertex
at E…E…E\ldots . Signals from events [outside the light cone at
EEE] can only reach AAA after the event EEE, and
when they do reach AAA they will then lie within
AAA’s backward-directed light cone at that instant. The
passage of time corresponds to the continual advance of this light
cone.


The physicist-philosopher Abner Shimony, in responding to the claim
that special relativity shows that becoming is subjective or
“mind-dependent,” wrote (1993, p. 284): 

Something fleeting does indeed traverse the world line, but that
something is not subjective; it is the transient now, which
as a matter of objective fact is momentarily present and thereafter is
past.


In the felicitous phrase of Park (1971), we have here two different
sorts of animated Minkowski diagrams. Each seems to involve a
kind of motion, of the light cone or of the transient now
advancing along a world line. Our initial restrictions on accounts of
transience inspired by Broad’s arguments above, however, should
make us wary of invoking motion to account for passage. Park,
moreover, sees no benefit to adding the animation. 

I want now to make the vital point that the animated diagram may be
more intuitive, or more picturesque, or make better cinema than the
atemporal one, but that it contains no more specific, verifiable
information. All of the science of dynamics, that is, all we know
about how complex systems (including ourselves) behave and interact,
is already represented on the atemporal Minkowski diagram.


The non-animated Minkowski diagram may be “static”, but,
as Park points out, the static diagram represents the
evolution in (proper) time of systems along their world lines. The
diagram, if Park is correct, need not itself be animated to represent
dynamical phenomena. If Park is correct, then what Yourgrau called a
“mistake” is in fact a virtue of Stein’s account, a
feature and not a bug. Stein makes no attempt to animate his geometric
picture but leaves whatever transience there may be in that
which it depicts. 
3.3 Localizing the Present

Let us now turn to two variants of Stein’s approach—two
closely related ways to understand the present and temporal becoming
in terms of structure intrinsic to Minkowski spacetime. One might see
these two views as attempts to capture Shimony’s transience
without animating the Minkowski diagram.

Two sources of the view are Arthur (2006) and Dieks (2006). The latter
paper begins by presenting a series of arguments that hyperplanes of
simultaneity or global nows are not the proper relativistic
successors to the common sense now.

In §1 Dieks presents the following argument:

(P1)

The experiences of observers are of such short duration and
occupy such a small amount of space that they can, without loss, be
idealized as point-like.

(P2)

Amongst these experiences are those that convince observers that
time flows or passes.

(P3)

Given the upper limit of speed of propagation of causal signals,
no event that is spacelike separated from a given event can influence
it causally. Therefore,

(C)

The human experiences that suggest at any given event eee
in the history of an observer that time flows or passes are invariant
under different choices of global hypersurface containing
eee.



Even if it has no relevance to human experience, can we nevertheless
choose our hyperplane of simultaneity (the one orthogonal to
our world line) as the hyperplane of simultaneity that marks
the passage of time? No, Dieks argues in §2 of his paper, for two
reasons.

First, there are too many. Were we inertial observers, then there
would be a hyperplane of simultaneity orthogonal to our world line
(and uniquely definable from our world line using the Minkowski
metric). But every inertial world line defines such a hyperplane.
Choosing a particular one, according to Dieks, “is tantamount to
augmenting the structure of Minkowski spacetime” (Dieks, p.
5).

But, second, there really aren’t any. We are not inertial
observers. We are (very nearly) rotating observers, and, as Dieks
points out, “local Einstein synchrony (ε=1/2)(ε=1/2)(\varepsilon =1/2) in a
rotating system does not extend to a consistent global definition of
simultaneity” (Dieks, p. 6).

Partisans of a global now in Minkowski spacetime face, according to
Dieks, a dilemma. “If we are not going to refer to the actual
material worldlines in the universe, but only to the spacetime
structure itself, we have insufficient resources to fix a unique set
of global nows. If we do attempt to rely on the actual material
worldlines, however, we will not succeed in defining global nows at
all” (Dieks, p. 7).

Although we are jumping ahead of our story, it is worth remarking here
that the situation does not improve in the general theory of
relativity, as Dieks notes in §3. It has been proposed that the
mean motion of matter could be used to define a preferred frame that,
in turn, could be foliated (or sliced) into spacelike hypersurfaces
that define a preferred global time. But this procedure would work
only at a large scale, wherein there would be an arbitrary element in
both determining the scale and the averaging procedure. Should one
retreat to the use of actual world lines, the rotation problem
reasserts itself. As Nelson Goodman remarked in another context, we
have either none or too many.

Time, in the special theory of relativity, appears in two
guises—coordinate time, which has held center stage thus far,
and proper time. The histories of material objects, always moving with
speeds less than that of light, are represented in Minkowski spacetime
by timelike world lines (curves in Minkowski spacetime such that the
tangent vector at each point is timelike). Timelike world lines can be
parameterized by a quantity, proper time, which is measured
by ideal clocks following such world lines.

Having found it impossible to relate the passage of time to global
hypersurfaces, which are defined in terms of coordinate time, Dieks
suggests (in §§4–5) that becoming in Minkowski
spacetime is best thought of locally, as the advance of proper time
along a timelike world line, or, even more basically, as the
successive happening of events along such a world line. The passage of
time or temporal becoming (along a given timelike world line, of
course) will be directly indicated by a clock. On this view the
present for a point particle on a timelike world line coincides
precisely with the particle, and a succession of presents is just the
successive occurence of events along that world line.

A variant of this idea is to permit the present to be temporally
extended, as it is in human consciousness, rather than point like. If
we then imagine a present (still along a given timelike world line) as
beginning at some event e0e0e_0 and ending at a slightly later
event e1e1e_1, then this variant view takes the present for the
interval from e0e0e_0 to e1e1e_1 (along the given timelike
world line) to be the events in the interior of the intersection of
the future light cone of e0e0e_0 with the past light cone of
 e1e1e_1.[14]

If the speed of light is set equal to 1, which is a common convention
in discussions of relativity, then these sets are (in a 1+11+11+1
dimensional spacetime) diamond-shaped. If their temporal extent is
scaled to the human psychological present, they will typically be very
short (say, one second) temporally, whereas their spatial extent will
be rather large by human standards. The succession of these
“presents” along a timelike world line constitutes the
(local) passage of time on this view. It is worth noting that on this
view if two events are in a given present, it does not follow that
either has become with respect to the other in the sense of Stein
discussed above.

These two “variants” may vary, not by being distinct
views, but by being two different degrees of idealization of one core
view, local succession. If one is thinking on the scale of cosmology,
for instance, with galaxies represented by points, then idealization
of presents to points seems appropriate. Galaxy-wide causal diamonds
would represent unreasonably long presents. But at the everyday human
scale, points are too small and too brief. Diamonds, appropriately
scaled, may be just about right.