“Biodiversity” is often defined as the variety of all 
forms of life, from genes to species, through to the broad scale of 
ecosystems (for a list of variants on this simple definition see
Gaston 1996). “Biodiversity” was coined as a contraction of 
“biological diversity” in 1985, but the new term arguably has taken 
on a meaning and import all its own. A symposium in 1986, and the 
follow-up book BioDiversity (Wilson 1988), edited by 
biologist E. O. Wilson, heralded the popularity of this concept. Ten 
years later, Takacs (1996, p.39) described its ascent this way: “in 
1988, biodiversity did not appear as a keyword in Biological 
Abstracts, and biological diversity appeared once. In 1993, 
biodiversity appeared seventy-two times, and biological diversity 
nineteen times”. Fifteen years further on, it would be hard to count 
how many times “biodiversity” is used every day by scientists, 
policy-makers, and others. The global importance of biodiversity now 
is reflected in the widely accepted target to achieve a significant 
reduction in the rate of loss of biodiversity by the year 2010 [see 
 2010 Biodiversity Target in Other Internet Resources].
 


While the history of this term is relatively short (compare it to 
other terms covered in this encyclopedia), it already has raised 
important, distinctive, philosophical issues. Some of these are 
entangled in the very definition of “biodiversity”, an issue treated 
in the first sections below. A challenge is the reconciliation of 
process-based and elements-based perspectives on biodiversity. 
Overall, the major issue for biodiversity is how its conservation may
be integrated with other needs of society. 
 
1. Concepts of Biodiversity


The sequel to that first biodiversity book, naturally titled
Biodiversity II (Reaka-Kudla et al. 1997), documents the rapid
rise of the term “biodiversity” in importance and influence. But it
also traces the study of aspects of biodiversity back as far as
Aristotle. To some extent, biodiversity merely offers a new, emotive,
term for some older ideas and programs. In fact, “biodiversity” is now
used sometimes to mean “life” or “wilderness” or other conservation
values. “Biodiversity” also has served on occasion as a catch-all for
“conservation” itself. 


The scientific literature illustrates how most any conservation 
activity might use the label “biodiversity”. On the one hand, workers
taking advantage of the acknowledged importance of the term have 
expanded its meaning to capture concerns at a fine scale, such as 
that focussing on a favourite single species. This focus might be 
referred to more accurately as one of “biospecifics”. At the coarser 
scale, one important interpretation, discussed below, advocates a 
primary linkage of biodiversity to the maintenance of ecosystem 
processes — what might be called the “bio-processes” approach.


The nub of the problem of defining biodiversity is that it is hard to
exclude anything from a concept that is taken so easily to mean 
“everything”. Sarkar (2005) has argued that interpreting biodiversity
across all biological levels, from genes to ecosystems, amounts to 
considering all biological entities, so that biodiversity absurdly 
“becomes all of biology”.


Callicott et al. (1999) examined “biodiversity” as one of the current
normative concepts in conservation. They concluded that it remains
ill-defined, and that distinctions can be made between “functional”
and “compositional” perspectives in approaching biodiversity.
“Functional” refers to a primary concern with ecosystem and
evolutionary processes, while “compositional” sees organisms as
aggregated into populations, species, higher taxa, communities, and
other categories. Callicott et al. call for a better integration of
these different perspectives, an issue discussed below in the section
on
 Integrating Process and Elements Perspectives.
 


Norton (1994) has argued that there will never be a single “objective
scientific definition” of biodiversity, in the sense of a 
prescription for how to measure it. In fact, Norton claims that any 
increase in our understanding of biodiversity will make it 
less likely that there will be a single objective measure. 
This biodiversity pluralism is based on an argument that inevitably 
there are many different “theory bound” versions of biodiversity and 
many different ways to value it. This perspective is in accord with 
recognition of functional-compositional perspectives on biodiversity.
For example, Norton (1994; 2001) points to recent emphasis on 
structure and process regarding ecological “health” or “integrity” 
that is seen as going beyond a conventional elements-oriented 
perspective for biodiversity. One cannot aggregate all these 
different versions of biodiversity. Instead, we are to “describe in 
ways appropriate given certain purposes” and the choice among these 
different biodiversity “models” will depend on what values are 
important to the decision-maker.


This perspective is characterized as “post-positivist” because it 
recognizes biodiversity as inevitably value-laden — there is no one, 
correct, measure of biodiversity to be discovered but many, each 
having different values. Roebuck and Phifer (1999) lament what they 
perceive as current “positivism” in biodiversity conservation, 
described by them as based variously on processes of verificationism 
and falsificationism in seeking facts. They argue that biodiversity 
conservation is rooted primarily in ethics and we must not continue 
to back away from values and advocacy.


The idea that the choice of a measure of biodiversity depends on 
values finds support in Sarkar (2005). He argues that biodiversity 
operationally amounts to whatever is the valued target of 
conservation priority setting for different localities.


Biodiversity may be a catch-all for various aspects of conservation, 
but the fresh perspectives arising from recognition of “biodiversity”
suggest possible unifying concepts. E. O. Wilson (1988) sees 
“biodiversity” as corresponding to a dramatic transformation for 
biologists from a “bits and pieces” approach to a much more holistic 
approach. Wilson describes this change in perspective as a 
realization that biological diversity is disappearing, and, unlike 
other threatened things, it is irreversible. Ehrenfeld (1988) 
similarly reinforces this idea of the value of diversity in the 
aggregate. He argues that diversity previously was never regarded in 
itself to be in danger, but that biodiversity now is recognised as 
endangered in its own right. Wrapped up in the term therefore is the 
idea of a “biodiversity crisis”. While the case for such a crisis 
itself raises debates about measures and definitions (see Sarkar, 
2005), the definition of “biodiversity” sometimes explicitly reflects
these links to an extinction crisis. Takacs (1996) reviews cases 
where the definition of biodiversity is wrapped up in the idea of 
strategies needed to preserve variation. In accord with this 
perspective is a shift to a focus on valuing ecosystem processes. 
This focus arguably will ensure maintenance and ongoing evolution of 
these systems, and therefore all of biodiversity.


Holistic perspectives on biodiversity have emerged also through 
another important focus. For Wilson (1988), biodiversity captures the
idea of a “frontier of the future”, presenting a dazzling prospect of
largely unknown variety, with unanticipated uses. Biodiversity is 
seen by many as a symbol for our lack of knowledge about the
components of life's variation, and their importance to humankind 
(see Takacs 1996). These arguments suggest that core biodiversity 
values might be based more on what we do not know than what we do 
know. Biodiversity can be viewed as primarily capturing the two-fold 
challenge of unknown variety, having unknown value.


Anticipated future uses and values of the unknown are captured in the
idea of “option values” (for definitions, see World Conservation 
Union 1980). A species, or other element of biodiversity, has option 
value when its continued existence retains the possibility of future 
uses and benefits. Option value corresponds not just to unknown 
future values of known species, but also to the unknown values of 
unknown species (or other components of variation). This concept is 
at the core of biodiversity because it links “variation” and “value”.
Estimating and quantifying the largely unknown variation that makes 
up biodiversity is one and the same as quantifying corresponding 
option values of biodiversity. According to this emphasis, a basic 
definition of biodiversity might be expanded as: the variety of all 
forms of life, from the scale of genes through to species and 
ecosystems …so forming a “calculus” — a means for measurement 
and comparison — of option values.


Focussing on this important aspect of biodiversity does not throw 
away the other possible “biodiversity” values that might be listed 
(process-based “resilience” of ecosystems, current commodity values 
of species, etc.), but facilitates integration of biodiversity's 
option values with those other values. These possibilities are 
discussed further in the section on
 Integrating Process and Elements Perspectives.
 


Given that holistic approaches may integrate functional and 
compositional aspects, the following sections address these different
biodiversity perspectives. The next section addresses the early 
attempts to address values of biodiversity as a whole that emerged 
from dissatisfaction with the “bits and pieces” focus on individual 
species. A later section, 
 Alternatives to Unit-species,
 presents attempts to address some weaknesses of this initial 
approach.
2. From Species Values to Biodiversity Values
2.1 Species Values and Triage


In developing ideas about the overall value of biodiversity it has been
natural to draw on existing arguments about values of individual
species (for review, see World Conservation Union 1980; Norton 1988).
Commodity value and other direct use values have intuitive appeal
because they reflect known values. But a key problem is that species
need to be preserved for reasons other than any known value as
resources for human use (Sober 1986). Callicott (1986) discusses
philosophical arguments regarding non-utilitarian value and concludes
that there is no easy argument to be made except a moral one. Species
have some “intrinsic value” — reflecting the idea that a species has a
value “in and for itself” (Callicott 1986, p.140) — and there is an
ethical obligation to protect biodiversity. 


A philosophical issue is whether such species values depend on a 
human-centered perspective. The 
 environmental ethics entry
 notes that assessments of issues concerned with biodiversity allow 
for “commitment either to a purely anthropocentric or purely 
non-anthropocentric ethic”. Regan (1986) argues that we need “duties 
that are independent of out changeable needs and preferences.” 
Callicott (1986) sees the intrinsic value of species as not 
independent of human values, because such values can be linked to 
Hume's theory of moral values. Norton (1986) sees all species as 
collectively embraced by an environmental ethic that is 
anthropocentric.


Randall (1988, p. 218) has argued that preference is the basis for 
value and that it is possible to treat all species values as 
preferences of humans. Preferences-based approaches to valuation can 
provide economic (dollar) estimates of value. This valuation process 
may include methods for assessing and quantifying option values. A 
claimed advantage of such approaches is that the only good way to 
protect species is to place an economic value on them. Randall argues
that such quantification is advantageous because the species 
preservation option will fare well when the full range of values is 
included in conservation priority setting.


The context for many of these arguments has been a consideration of 
various criteria for placing priorities among species for 
conservation efforts. These considerations have led to debates about 
the role of “triage” based on species prioritization. Triage recalls 
the medical context in which priorities are set for investments in 
saving patients. Applied to conservation, individual species are 
differentially valued and assessed relative to differential 
opportunity costs. The best conservation package is to be found 
through a process of calculating costs and benefits of protection of 
individual species.
2.2 Species as Equal Units and SMS


Many biologists have rejected the idea of triage and argue that we must
try to save all species (Takacs 1996). Philosophical issues
arise in the debate as to whether biodiversity should be approached
through the process of differentially valuing species, so that choices
could be made in the face of a budget, or regarding species as the
fundamental unit and trying to protect them all. The latter option is
arguably more holistic and in accord with a focus on all of
biodiversity (the individual species focus is sometimes viewed as the
first of three phases of growth in biological resources assessment;
 see the section on
 The Shift from Elements to Processes).


If one nominated a “prequel” to Biodiversity (1988) it might
be The Preservation of Species (Norton 1986). The title 
suggests a species focus, but the book's subtitle refers to 
biological diversity. This book documents an attempt to move from 
values of species to some overall value of biodiversity, rejecting 
typical triage arguments based on benefits versus costs for 
individual species. Here, Norton criticizes the “benefit — cost” 
approaches as piecemeal because every species must exhibit actual or 
potential use to justify itself. He argues that every species 
arguably has utilitarian value and that species perceived values are 
hard to estimate. For this reason, trying to place dollar values is 
“doomed to failure” (1986, p. 202). Norton concludes that we can't 
try to sum up values (in accord with his general advocacy of no 
aggregation of biodiversity values). It is argued that we should 
abandon the “divide and conquer” approach and look at total 
diversity, with species as a unit: “each species in an area can be 
viewed as a unit of total diversity.” Ehrenfeld's (1988) position is 
even more sharply defined: “value is an intrinsic part of 
biodiversity; it does not depend on the properties of the species in 
question.”


This perspective demands some alternative to species-based triage 
that will still accommodate the reality of limited resources. The 
idea of a “safe minimum standard” (SMS) for biodiversity has been 
proposed as a suitable alternative to triage. Norton advocates an SMS
based on unit-species, interpreted to mean that all species are saved
unless costs are intolerable; he argues for “preservation of species 
as a general policy”. Wilson (1992, p. 310) also has advocated an SMS
in which all species are to be protected unless costs are too high. 
He argues that we “treat each as an irreplaceable resource for 
humanity”. This is directly in preference to a cost-benefit approach,
characterized as examining single species and their properties and 
deciding how much to invest.


The SMS leaves the idea of “too high a cost” open to different 
interpretations. These vary with philosophical perspectives about the
nature of values. For example, “deep ecology”, where biodiversity is 
independent of human value, responds differently to “utilitarianism”,
where biodiversity might be preserved to extent that measurable 
benefits to humans exceed costs (see The Preservation of 
Species). Randall's (1986, p. 103) utilitarian position 
considers intrinsic or option value of unit-species in conjunction 
with any recognized utilitarian value: all species not already 
distinguished in having recognised human-use values “would be treated
as having a positive but unknown expected value; implicitly all would
be treated as equally valuable.”


Despite difficulties in actual implementation, the ideal of an SMS 
based on species as units of biodiversity has remained popular from 
the 1986 The Preservation of Species through at least to 
Takacs' review (1996). In the latter book, objections to attempts to 
differentiate and prioritize among species are extended to take into 
account approaches developed in the early 90's that quantify 
taxonomic distinctions among species. These methods address the idea 
that a species that is taxonomically (or phylogenetically) 
distinctive may deserve a higher priority for biodiversity 
conservation (see World Conservation Union 1980). Takacs (1996; p. 
61) cites early proposals of this kind for a “calculus” of 
biodiversity, and objects to the resulting “intricate” calculations 
to prioritize species based on taxonomic distinctiveness. He claims 
that “we can avoid tedious mathematical calculations of relative 
species value by switching to biodiversity”. Takacs joins others in 
arguing that we do not know enough about species to assign different 
values (for further review, see Faith 1994). As an alternative to 
such a triage approach, an SMS-style approach again is advocated 
based on the number of unit-species saved within a budget.


In conclusion, the SMS is compatible with an all-of-biodiversity 
perspective that views species collectively, avoiding the seemingly 
arbitrary “bits and pieces” approaches to individual species 
priorities that arguably are poorly justified given our poor 
knowledge. The SMS approach, however, arguably suffers from a 
double-barrelled arbitrariness of its own, in the choice of a level 
of variation (species) and the choice of a threshold on costs. 
Alternative approaches are considered in the next section.
3. Alternatives to Unit-species


We can recognize two alternatives to the use of species as equal-weight
units for an SMS. One of these (see the section on 
 The Shift from Elements to Processes)
 consciously moves further away from units or items of
any kind. Here, the valuation of species is seen as problematic, with
arbitrary solutions. Valuation is to encompass all of biodiversity but
through a functional perspective, shifting the focus to ecosystems processes
(Norton 1994, 2001). 


The other alternative [see the section on
 Option Value and Hierarchy of Variation]
 might be viewed as going to the other extreme. Units or elements of 
biodiversity are seen (at least implicitly) at every level of 
biological variation, and the quantification of variation is to 
provide relative valuations (e.g. of different places) for 
priority setting.


These two perspectives provide different responses to the issues 
concerning taxonomic distinctiveness valuations on species — so 
providing one benchmark for comparisons. In the ecosystem processes 
case, this has provided a prototype example of problems with attempts
to value species-units. In the hierarchical variation case, it has 
provided a prototype example of the quantification of unknown 
variation and option value at one nominated scale of biodiversity.
3.1 The Shift from Elements to Processes


Norton (2001) summarizes the development of the process perspective on
biodiversity by describing three phases of growth in “biological
resources” conservation over the past years. The first was the focus on
individual species. The second phase was a “problematic” perception of
biodiversity as all about protection of “objects” — merely expanding
the list of “items” from the first phase. Here, Norton (2001) objects
to an “atomistic” bias of western culture towards objects. He argues
that biodiversity has been wrongly focussed on “inventory” of species,
genes, ecosystems and has neglected processes that create and maintain
natural values. This inventory perspective is described as “static”,
not dynamic (see also Frankel and Soule 1981; Takacs 1996). 


Norton argues that the inadequacy of this second phase, being 
“ill-suited” to an emerging process orientation, has lead to the 
third phase based on ecosystem processes. Here, values are not to be 
attached to objects; instead, we should value (or “abhor”) processes.
This approach is characterised as more dynamic in its perspective, as
systems oriented, and therefore more “holistic”. The focus is on 
maintaining functions of healthy ecosystems, such as provision of 
clean air and water. This process orientation is compatible with much
recent work internationally on ecosystem services [Takacs 1996; 
 and Millennium Ecosystem Assessment in Other Internet Resources].
 


The term “biodiversity” is used in this context largely as an assumed
foundation for ecosystem processes. Norton (2001) sees the process 
focus as replacing, not complementing, the “increasingly obsolete” 
inventory/items perspective of biodiversity, arguing that we “will 
likely move away from the inventory-of-objects approach altogether”. 
The processes perspective is to determine how we look at 
biodiversity: “…applied to biodiversity policy, we can focus 
on the processes that have created and sustained the species and 
elements that currently exist, rather than on the species and 
elements themselves” (2001; p. 90). Further, “it is reasonable to 
interpret advocates of biodiversity protection as valuing natural 
processes for their capacity to maintain support and repair damage to
their parts” (2001; p. 91).


Related arguments are found in the advocacy of “biological integrity”
(Karr 1991), in preference to biodiversity, as a focus for 
conservation management. Biological integrity is primarily concerned 
with the persistence of biogeographic, evolutionary, and ecosystem 
processes, such as those relating to energy flows. For Angermeier and
Karr (1994), “integrity is reflected in both the biotic elements and 
the processes that generate and maintain those elements, whereas 
diversity describes only the elements.” They conclude that “resource 
policy would be most effective if based on the more comprehensive 
goal of protecting biological integrity.” Biological integrity is 
discussed further in the section
 Integrating Process and Elements Perspectives.
 
3.2 Option Value and Hierarchy of Variation


The other alternative to the unit-species approach departs from it by
increasing not decreasing our focus on items or elements.
The unit-species perspective has been justified through option values
and a response to a lack of knowledge — we do not know enough to
differentially value species. But consideration of option values also
has been used to justify a move away from a species-as-units approach,
to embrace a whole hierarchy of possible units. Suppose, for example,
that the units of interest are features of species (a feature might be
some morphological characteristic shared by all members of that
species). These features in general have unknown future values.  It
follows that total option value would be increased by having more
features protected. If we apply the rationale that all these features
should be treated as units of equal value, then some species (those
that are phylogenetically distinctive; see below) will make larger
contributions to the overall feature diversity represented by a set of
species. thus, equal value at the fine scale among features leads to
differential values at the coarse scale among species. We see that the
same argument used to justify species as equal-value units can be used
to justify differential valuation of species (Faith 1994).


Feature diversity can provide a basis for valuation, but it raises 
measurement challenges. Not only do we not know, in general, the 
future value of different features, but also we cannot even list the 
features for most species. Phylogenetic pattern provides one way to 
estimate and quantify variation at the feature level. A species 
complements others in representing additional evolutionary history 
(Faith 1994), as depicted in the branches of an estimated phylogeny. 
The degree of complementarity reflects the relative number of 
additional features contributed by that species. For example, given 
some subset of species that are well-protected, and two species in 
that taxonomic group that are endangered, the priority for 
conservation investment may depend on the relative gains in feature 
diversity (the complementarity values) expected for each species. We 
do not know in practice what all the actual features are, but can 
make a prediction about relative gains and losses. The predicted 
total feature diversity of a set of species is referred to as its 
“phylogenetic diversity” (PD; Faith 1994). 


In practice, PD calculations may be integrated with species' 
estimated extinction probabilities (“probabilistic PD”; see Witting 
and Loescke, 1995). Priorities for conservation efforts for 
endangered species then can respond to both threat and the potential 
loss of PD. One such conservation program, attracting much attention,
is the EDGE program (“evolutionarily distinct and globally 
endangered”; for discussion see Faith (2007)).


A nice illustration of the contrast between biodiversity assessments 
at the species and features levels is found in the recent study of 
Yesson and Culham (2006). They showed that, while many cyclamen plant
species are likely to be impacted by expected climate change, the 
expected loss of cyclamen PD nevertheless would be relatively low. 
The set of cyclamen species resistant to climate change would retain 
high PD because they are dispersed throughout the phylogenetic tree. 
Such a potential retention of feature diversity, and corresponding 
evolutionary potential (for discussion, see Forest et al., 2007), 
suggests that future climate change impacts studies may focus on PD 
as an important complement to species-level studies. This link from 
option values to processes is discussed further below in the section
 Integrating Process and Elements Perspectives.
 


This phylogenetic diversity perspective can be reconciled with the 
rejection (Takacs 1996) of “intricate” calculations of 
phylogenetically based valuations of species. Some proposed taxonomic
distinctiveness methods indeed simply have been species-based 
attempts to assign differential values. But when the focus is on 
biodiversity units at a lower level, it is not an attempt to apply 
differential values to species as fundamental units of biodiversity, 
but equal values to those lower-level units. The focus on these units
rather than conventional species is highlighted by the fact that for 
subsequent priority setting on places, species sometimes are ignored 
altogether (Faith 1994). We return to this issue below, in discussing
ways to side-step contentious species designations in DNA barcoding 
(see the section on
 Biodiversity and DNA barcoding).
 


A conclusion is that a taxonomic/phylogenetic distinction among 
species is not a fruitless distraction from “biodiversity” — it is 
all about biodiversity. Features of species quantified in this way 
are just one part of a whole hierarchy of variation. Sarkar and 
Margules (2002) emphasize that, when we speak of genes, species, and 
ecosystems, it is not that these form the specific entities of 
interest but instead are benchmarks for the full hierarchy of 
variation: “there is heterogeneity at every level” (2002, p. 301).


The value of all of biodiversity is in this full hierarchy of 
variation — measuring one measures the other. These values may also 
encompass intrinsic values of biodiversity. Callicott (1989) and 
others have followed Aldo Leopold's (1949) work in arguing that all 
levels of biological organization (species, biotic communities, 
ecosystems) have intrinsic value. This suggest that any calculus of 
relative option values (indicating relative value contributions made 
by species, places, etc) is also a calculus of relative intrinsic 
values.


For conservation priority setting, each new place (for example) adds 
some biodiversity to the total for a set of places. This 
open-endedness means we must consider costs; there is no possible 
policy position that can ask to “save all the pieces”. However, this 
comparison among places is arguably made easier also because we only 
require complementarity — marginal gains in variation — 
rather than total amounts. Sarkar and Margules (2002, p. 302) argue 
that, if we are considering conservation actions in different places,
then “an absolute concept or measure of biodiversity is not 
needed,” and “the relative concept of biodiversity built into the 
definition of complementarity has the level of precision needed to 
undertake conservation planning.”


This perspective, while useful, may be too narrow. Sarkar and 
Margules (2002) describe biodiversity as rooted in place, but this is
just one scale of decision making. We can apply the same 
complementarity principle to species not places, as in the example of
complementarity values at the underlying feature level estimated from
phylogenetic pattern (a general conceptual model for complementarity 
at different levels of biodiversity is found in Faith 1994). 


Sarkar and Margules describe the use of a relative concept of 
biodiversity based on complementarity as “philosophically uncharted 
territory.” At issue are the empirical and “conventional” elements 
involved in estimating complementarity values. These issues are 
addressed in the section on
 Biodiversity and Growth of Knowledge.


An appealing property of unit-species approaches was that 
quantification of option values allowed the political process to 
balance these with other values of society. A full hierarchical 
perspective suggests a continuum of variation rather than a countable
number of objects. The relative complementarity value (say, of a 
place) is not the relative number of different species but the 
relative amount of the hierarchy of variation gained in that place. 
Thus, quantifying complementarity values provides the ability to 
balance these with other kinds of values, through the political 
process and the use of tools such as multi-criteria analyses [e.g., 
see 
 “A Biodiversity Conservation Plan for Papua New Guinea Based on Biodiversity Trade-offs Analysis” in Other Internet Resources]
 that work with values naturally expressed in different measurement 
units. This capacity potentially helps integrate option values with 
process-based values, as discussed in the next section.
4. Integrating Process and Elements Perspectives


The functional/process (see the section on
 The shift from Elements to Processes)
 and elements/inventory perspectives (see the section on
 Option Value and Hierarchy of Variation)
 each try
capture all of biodiversity, but have different emphases. Consideration
of biodiversity option/intrinsic values will not in general capture all
important considerations about processes. Also, taking processes into
account will not always capture option values defined at the level of
elements. Here, the danger in ignoring elements-option values is that
priority-setting and management in a given place may be able to address
ecosystem resilience and other process goals, but still also allow loss
of components of biodiversity of global value. 


The two alternatives, presented as dichotomous above, may be viewed 
as partly overlapping, and not mutually exclusive. An option value 
approach based on units does not neglect process. The descriptor, 
“static”, has been used to describe this so-called “inventory” 
approach (e.g. Norton 2001), with clear negative connotations 
relative to the desirability of “dynamic” approaches. But the 
biodiversity measures based on phylogeny, for example, capture 
evolutionary processes that support future variation. Consideration 
of a hierarchy of elements of biodiversity can be expected to include
diversity of processes (following Noss 1990; but see Angermeier and 
Karr 1994). Further, “static” entities of biodiversity typically are 
protected using dynamic approaches to biodiversity 
conservation, as in methods that set conservation priorities
on different places taking climate change into account. Such links 
between what we protect and how we protect it suggest that concerns 
about biological integrity (see the section on
 The Shift from Elements to Processes)
 may be reconciled with biodiversity goals. Management focussed on 
biological integrity will be critical for the persistence of 
biodiversity in those places recognised as having high 
complementarity values.


While process considerations clearly support biodiversity 
conservation, the maintenance of option values based on elements of 
biodiversity also ensures processes and services. For example, Turner
(1999), using the similar term “insurance value” rather than “option 
value”, observes that “the number of species … serves as a valuable
index of ecosystem reliability. These results support the 
hypothetical ‘insurance’ value of biodiversity, that is, 
insurance against the failure of ecosystems to provide goods and 
services.” This is one way in which biodiversity option or insurance 
values apply at the “local” scale.


The perception of conflict between process and elements perspectives 
appears sometimes as a tension between global and local aspects of 
biodiversity. For example, Vermeulen and Koziell (2002) see global 
biodiversity values as ignoring important local values of 
biodiversity, relating to ecosystem services. They argue that 
treating biodiversity as one composite property corresponding to 
global values is not helpful, and is a consequence of the fact that 
“the global consensus is that of wealthy countries” (2002, p. 89). 
They recommend the consideration of biodiversity in terms of services
derived from it, and not as an end in itself. Thus, the claim is that
“the most useful biodiversity assessments are those based locally” 
(2002, p. 83).


An alternative to a proposed preference for local values of 
“biodiversity” is to pursue balanced trade-offs (and synergies) among
local and global values. As long as local values and opportunities, 
whatever their source, are given weight in these trade-offs, there is
no need to try to define (or re-define) the “important” values of 
biodiversity as local not global. Apparent conflict is resolved also 
by realizing that often the local values and opportunities have 
little to do with the biodiversity (biotic variation per se)
of the place (though they typically will link to its “biospecifics”).


A trade-offs perspective based on complementarity suggests that there
is good capacity for balancing different values in setting priorities
in a given region. Every place has biodiversity, but its contribution
to the global option values of biodiversity is indicated by its 
complementarity value, not its total diversity. It is the comparison 
of the place's current complementarity value to the other 
values/opportunities in that place that matters when considering 
trade-offs at a regional scale. There may be apparent high conflict 
in a region, in that places with high biodiversity have high values 
for some other land use opportunity, but in such cases the region may
well be able to satisfy both needs. Trade-offs applications based on 
complementarity have suggested that other values can be integrated 
without much penalty to biodiversity goals [an example is 
 A Biodiversity Conservation Plan for Papua New Guinea Based on Biodiversity Trade-offs Analysis in Other Internet Resources].
 The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
 [see Other Internet Resources]
 emphasized trade-offs of this kind to find a balanced provision of 
the various ecosystem services provided by the world's ecosystems. 
The assessment also called for further work on developing a calculus 
of biodiversity, so that these trade-offs approaches could integrate 
the biodiversity gains from a wide range of conservation instruments 
(protected areas; payments to private land owners; control of 
invasive species, etc.) 


Recent work has suggested that the most effective pathway to 
achieving the 2010 biodiversity target for a significant reduction in
the current rate of biodiversity loss [see 
 2010 Biodiversity Target in Other Internet Resources]
 is to find balanced trade-offs and synergies between biodiversity and
other needs of society. 
 (See
“Actions for the 2010 biodiversity target in Europe: How does research contribute to halting biodiversity loss?” in Other Internet Resources)
 The Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) has a major 
campaign to address the 2010 target, based on mobilising extensive 
museum species collections data to form the biodiversity calculus 
needed for exploring trade-offs and synergies in different regions 
[see 
 GBIF 2010 Campaign in Other Internet Resources]
 


In conclusion, a possible resolution of the conflict between 
elements-based and processes-based interpretations of biodiversity 
may be part operational, part conceptual. Operationally, trade-offs 
processes can balance different values, whatever their labels. 
Conceptually, biodiversity may retain its original connotation of 
biotic variation at all levels. This does not deny that attention to 
processes is a good way to protect biodiversity, nor that ecosystem 
services represent important values of society, including provision 
of resources. It is interesting that Takacs (1996) points to 
Ehrenfeld and others as making early attempts to move beyond the 
“resource” school in valuing biodiversity as a whole. Yet Norton 
(2001) and others, in linking “biodiversity” to maintenance of 
ecosystem processes, move back to the resource perspective — as 
evidenced in Norton's reference to three phases of “biological 
resources”, not “biodiversity”, protection.


An earlier section 
 (Concepts of Biodiversity)
 referred to a call for “post-positivism” and greater focus on 
advocacy in the context of a biodiversity concept seen as properly 
value-laden. Such a perspective has some compatibility with 
trade-offs; advocacy and society's values may determine how well 
biodiversity conservation fares in the course of trade-offs. But a 
“new positivism” may be required also, in trying to better estimate 
and quantify unknown aspects of biodiversity in order to better 
inform the inevitable trade-offs processes. The final section of this
SEP entry addresses this problem of growth of knowledge, which itself
has raised philosophical issues.
5. Biodiversity and Growth of Knowledge


The sections above highlighted the role of complementarity — the
additional contribution made by a place (or other entity, such as a
species) to the overall representation of the hierarchy of variation
that makes up biodiversity. But the true biodiversity complementarity
of a place inevitably is unknown and must be estimated using some
known, “surrogate”, information. We may not know enough in a particular
case to consider surrogates that are to reflect a fine scale of
variation. For example, at a whole country scale, to a first
approximation all species may be judged equal in comparing biodiversity
contributions of different places. A whole country study may not focus
directly on variation at the genetic or even species scales, but might
use ecosystem types or similar as the surrogates to assess
representativeness of its protected areas system. If the assessment
reveals that a whole ecosystem type is not represented, then this
directs priorities for land acquisition. If all types are already
represented, then variation within these can be the focus, perhaps as
indicated by representation of species. 


Sarkar and Margules (2002) discuss the role of biodiversity
surrogates, arguing that even the relative concept of complementarity
has a “conventional” element built into it because it relies on
“estimator” surrogates (say, a set of butterfly species) for “true”
surrogates (say, the use of species as the basis for assessing
complementarity of places). Whereas estimator surrogates, they argue,
are subject to empirical justification, true surrogates are still
dependent on convention. They defend this conventional element: “a
philosophical point, widely appreciated by philosophers of science,
but often not explicitly acknowledged by scientists, deserves to be
noted in relation to this: conventional elements almost always enter
into theoretical reasoning in science (Nagel 1961; Sarkar 1998). But
‘conventional’ does not mean ‘arbitrary’: it
means that there were choices to be made, no single option was
dictated by the facts at hand, and a choice was justified
instrumentally by its ability to achieve the purpose for which it was
intended” (2002, p. 307).


The empirical approaches for determining effective “estimator” 
surrogates for biodiversity have raised philosophical issues as well.
There are plenty of observations about the congruence (or not) of 
surrogates with other components of biodiversity (for review, see 
Faith 2003), but what constitutes good evidence for an effective 
biodiversity surrogate? 


Popperian corroboration provides one pathway to assess evidence for 
such hypotheses. Corroboration is attractive because it does not 
attempt to assign probabilities of truth to hypotheses (Popper 1982, 
p. 346), but instead focuses on the evaluation of the particular 
evidence at hand. Proposals have focussed on the idea that 
corroboration assessment asks whether apparent good evidence for an 
hypothesis is “improbable” without the hypothesis — it cannot easily 
be explained away by other explanations (possible explanations 
suggested by our “background knowledge”). Popperian background 
knowledge is assigned an important role in this interpretation — the 
investigator is obligated to try to discover any background knowledge
that would suggest that the evidence is probable even without the 
hypothesis (for discussion, see Faith and Trueman 2001; Faith 2006).


The interest in the role of corroboration in biodiversity studies has
prompted debates about its role and meaning. As background to these 
issues, it is revealing to examine one of Popper's own examples of 
falsification/corroboration, as presented in the entry on
 Karl Popper.
 This example, based on the discovery of the planet Neptune, 
effectively highlights the limited prospects for actual 
falsification, but may be under-appreciated as an example of 
corroboration. The hypothesis of interest in this example is Newton's
theory, and the evidence is the observation of the new planet, in a 
position predicted by this hypothesis. Popper (1982, p. 247) argues 
that “a moving star, planet, would have been significant, because 
unexpected.” Popper argues, “the unexpectedness of an event can be 
identified with a low probability, in the sense of the 
calculus of probability, on the background knowledge” and that the 
“predictions which lead to the discovery of Neptune, were such a 
wonderful corroboration of Newton's theory because of the exceeding 
improbability that an as yet unobserved planet would, by sheer 
accident, be found in that small region of the sky where their 
calculations had placed it”. Corroboration was achieved because “the 
success of the prediction could hardly be due to coincidence or 
chance”.


This example supports the idea that Popperian corroboration for a 
biodiversity hypothesis arises only if the evidence is judged to be 
improbable — in spite of attempts to identify background knowledge 
that suggests that the evidence is probable even without the 
hypothesis. For biodiversity surrogates, a common hypothesis is that 
the pattern of species “turnover” over different geographic areas for
one taxonomic group will indicate the pattern for all biodiversity. 
Good evidence for the surrogacy hypothesis is typically claimed when 
the pattern for the surrogate taxonomic group is congruent with that 
of some target set of taxa. However, on many occasions such evidence 
can be explained away as probably arising simply because of a shared 
bias in the geographic sampling of the surrogate and target taxonomic
groups (for review, see Faith 2003). The evidence based on congruence
can be explained away as a probable result even without the 
hypothesis. Based on such evidence, corroboration for the surrogacy 
hypothesis is low.


The following sections address the potential role of such 
corroboration assessments in two other areas of biodiversity 
assessment: phylogenetic inference and species inference (discussion 
of corroboration assessment in the context of biodiversity monitoring
can be found in Downes et al. 2002). The section, 
 Biodiversity and DNA barcoding,
 then links all these issues to the controversies surrounding an 
emerging area of biodiversity assessment, called “DNA 
barcoding”. 
5.1 Phylogenetic Hypotheses


The problem of inferring phylogenetic patterns within a taxonomic group
from character data has long raised philosophical issues. Popperian
falsification has been used to argue for the justification of one
inference method over others (one out of many ways of measuring
goodness-of-fit of characters to phylogenetic trees is claimed as
uniquely capturing the idea of falsification; for review, see Faith and
Trueman 2001). An alternative perspective is that Popperian
corroboration embraces all inference methods in phylogenetics. In this
interpretation, the Popperian evidence for a phylogenetic tree
hypothesis is a measure of the goodness-of-fit (as defined by any given
inference method) of observed character data to that hypothesis. Degree
of corroboration of a phylogenetic tree hypothesis is given by
improbability of that goodness-of-fit — that is, the difficulty in
explaining fit that good by other factors, including elements of
chance, that make up our “background knowledge”. This reflects the
obligation to try to explain-away evidence through identification of
some background knowledge that implies that the evidence was probable
anyway (Faith and Trueman, 2001; Faith, 2006). The goal of the search is a high
probability of the evidence given only background knowledge, even while
the desired outcome may be a low probability. 
5.2 Species Hypotheses


Testing an hypothesis that a set of populations is a single species is
important to conservation management. Also, sets of recognised species
often form the basis for surrogates for geographic priority setting.
Corroboration may play a role in the ongoing debates about the
definition of a species and how species status is to be determined. The
entry on
 species
 discusses the
issue of species pluralism — the idea that there is not just one
correct species concept. While twenty or more different concepts have
been identified (some based on a designated species discovery process),
a possible emerging consensus (e.g. see Claridge et al. 1997; Mayden
1997) is that all of these may be unified under an evolutionary lineage
concept. This is based on the idea of an evolutionary species, defined
as: “a single lineage of ancestor-descendant populations which
maintains its identity from other such lineages and which has its own
evolutionary tendencies and historical fate.” (Wiley 1981, p. 25). 


This “primary” concept arguably is compatible with most other 
proposed species concepts (for discussion, see Mayden 2002). However,
a difficulty is that this seems to simply produce many so-called 
“secondary concepts”, corresponding to all the previously proposed 
ways of detecting and/or defining species. For example, Mayden (1997)
refers to these as “operational concepts” that are “tools” for 
discovering all the different ways to realize the primary concept. 
The unconstrained use of these tools suggests a “grab-bag” that 
amounts to reliance as much as ever on expert opinion. An issue 
therefore is whether a unified species concept can be matched by some
unified operational framework for identifying species. Mayden (2002) 
does claim that there is Popperian “testability” and possible 
“falsification” for species hypotheses. He argues that the typical 
process is one in which we do not reject species status if there is 
no falsification.


Corroboration assessment may be an important missing element in this 
framework. In much the same role it plays for phylogenetic 
hypotheses, it can allow many different kinds of evidence (suggested 
by different secondary concepts), all brought to bear on a single 
species concept. Evidence for a species hypothesis will be some fit 
of observations to the hypothesis, and corroboration will depend on 
the improbability of such goodness-of-fit without the hypothesis 
(Faith and Trueman 2001; Faith, 2004). This supports a unified 
species concept as something more than just a shifting of the 
pluralism problem down one level — the inevitable pluralism now 
properly reflects the various kinds of evidence that may bear on the 
same concept. There are no a priori restrictions on the form
of the evidence for species hypotheses, but assessment of 
improbability of evidence is important in avoiding an arbitrary, 
grab-bag, approach. Further, over time, experience in corroboration 
assessment in different contexts — for example, for different 
kinds of organisms — may have lessons about the 
context-dependent pitfalls of certain kinds of evidence. This process
will help evaluate new kinds of evidence, such as that from DNA 
barcoding, discussed below in the section on
 Biodiversity and DNA barcoding.
 
5.3 Biodiversity and DNA barcoding


The philosophical issues concerning biodiversity surrogacy, 
phylogenetic inference, and species inference are all relevant to a 
new, and controversial, source of biodiversity information — 
DNA barcoding. A DNA “barcode” refers to a short region 
of a gene that changes over evolutionary time at a rate that results 
in measurable distinctions among species (analogous to the barcodes 
on products in stores). The Consortium for the Barcode of Life [see 
 CBOL in Other Internet Resources]
 has brought together natural history museums and other research 
organizations with the goal of producing DNA barcoding information 
for all named species on the planet. Such a large-scale DNA barcoding
program potentially offers a wealth of new information for 
biodiversity assessment, filling both taxonomic and geographic 
knowledge gaps. However, much of the controversy over the past few 
years (for review, see Rubinoff et al., 2006) arises from the 
proposed link from one short bit of DNA (e.g., approximately 600 base
pairs of mitochondrial DNA) to the supposed identification and 
discovery of actual species. While some recent reviews (e.g., Vogler 
and Monaghan 2007) have pointed to the success of DNA barcodes over 
many different taxonomic groups, there remains the concern that the 
use of one small bit of molecular data cannot be used to determine 
species status.


DNA barcoding programs can address two different goals. First, such 
programs may be concerned about diagnosis and identificaiton of 
already-known species (e.g., invasive species that are difficult to 
identify by morphological characters). Second, such programs may be 
interested in the discovery of new species, including “cryptic” 
species that may not be revealed by morphological or other 
characters. The second goal raises issues about species concepts and 
the nature of DNA bracoding based evidence for species status.


The use of limited molecular data for inferences about species 
identification and discovery points to some interesting philosophical
issues. For example, “hypothesis-driven science” is seen 
as abandoned through the adoption of degree-of-difference thresholds 
and other simple recipes for DNA-barcoding-based species delimitation
(deSalle et al, 2005). A related concern is that the scientific 
requirement for “total evidence” is neglected when DNA 
barcoding is used on its own for species inference (Fitzhugh, 2006, 
citing Carnap 1950). Fitzhugh argues that “for one to rationally 
believe a conclusion on the basis of some set of evidence, then all 
available relevant evidence must be taken into consideration. 
Barcodes cannot be used, even initially, to understand biodiversity 
because they are incomplete and often incongruent with other sources 
of data.” Similar arguments are used in calling for an “integrative 
taxonomy” that includes DNA barcoding in combination with other lines
of evidence (e.g., Dayrat, 2005). 


The philosophical arguments for total evidence would seem to place 
severe limits on the role of DNA barcoding for biodiversity 
assessment. An alternative argument is that DNA barcoding, in 
providing one form of valid evidence for species hypotheses, clearly 
can be charactersied as “hypothesis driven”. The limited 
evidence from DNA barcoding here is not taken to be the only possible
evidence, but nevertheless is regarded as potentially able to provide
some degree of corroboration for a species hypothesis. This 
corroboration assessment process does not strictly require “total 
evidence”, because the focus (as described in the overview on 
Popperian corroboration above) is about probing the current evidence 
to see if it can be explained away. The different ways that barcode 
data potentially can mislead should be integrated into such 
assessments. Only evidence from DNA barcoding that is improbable — 
not easily explained away — provides high corroboration. 


An effective integrative taxonomy will depend on Popperian 
corroboration assessments to provide the necesary critical 
questioning of evidence, from various sources, for species 
hypotheses. It is premature to claim (as in Rubinoff et al., 2006) 
that an integrative taxonomy based on corroboration is already in 
place. The required corroboration process goes well beyond the 
simplistic view of corroboration as depending on the number of bits 
of evidence. Because it is improbability of evidence that matters, a 
small number of bits of evidence might provide higher corroboration, 
compared to that provided by some alternative large number of bits of
evidence.


Missing from emerging DNA barcoding programs is any well-defined 
process for such Popperian corroboration assessments of species 
hypotheses. This limits the capacity to combine corroborated evidence
for species hypotheses from DNA barcoding with corroboration derived 
from evidence from other data sources.


While the definition of “the barcode of life” is clearly 
focused only on the species level (“a short DNA sequence from 
standardized portions of the genome, used as an aid in identifying 
species”; see the Consortium for the Barcode of Life in Other Internet Resources),
 others have suggested that this wealth of new information need not be
tied to species hypotheses in order for it to be useful for 
biodiversity assessment. One proposal is that it is possible to 
side-step the contentious species designations and make use of 
corroborated phylogenetic patterns (e.g., Faith and Baker, 2006). 
Such an approach then uses PD calculations (see the section on
 Option Value and Hierarchy of Variation)
 to quantify gains and losses in biodiversity, without counting 
changes in species numbers. Such an application of PD makes an 
assumption that the limited DNA sequence data provides useful 
information about phylogenetic pattern. 


The vast biodiversity knowledge gap suggests that DNA barcoding 
applications makes it tempting to consider barcoding data for any one
taxonomic group as valuable information for making predictions about 
other taxonomic groups. Application of PD to inferred phylogenetic 
patterns may boost surrogacy in reflecting historical processes and 
relationships among geographic areas that are shared by many 
different taxonomic groups. For example, the phylogeny for one 
taxonomic group may reflect historical processes/relationships among 
geographic areas that are shared by other taxonomic groups, so that 
observed differences among areas in PD-complementarity values also 
reflect the values that would have been calculated for the other 
groups. Such a surrogacy hypothesis remains largely untested, and 
requires corroboration assessments (see the section on
 Biodiversity and Growth of Knowledge).
 
6. Conclusions


There is a nice parallel to be found in the debates about the 
definitions/concepts of species and the broader definitions/concepts 
of biodiversity. In both cases, an unnecessary pluralism has 
developed because operational issues have become intertwined with 
definitions (for species — the meaning sometimes is to include 
information about the process of species detection; for biodiversity 
- the meaning sometimes is to include information about the process 
of biodiversity protection). In both cases, there is perhaps a good 
case for monism regarding the concept, with pluralism welcomed at the
operational level (for species — many kinds of evidence for 
hypotheses; for biodiversity — many kinds of protection strategies 
and many kinds of values of society to be traded-off). 


Despite a wide range of usage, biodiversity remains a concept 
strongly linked to the idea of biological variation that is largely 
unknown in its extent, and its future values. Any “calculus” of 
biodiversity providing quantitative estimates of this unknown 
variation automatically provides at the same time a measure of those 
values that link to the need to maintain variety — option values and 
intrinsic values. Such values broadly reflect values of elements of 
biodiversity having unknown present value. These quantified values 
typically will not be in conventional units (e.g. dollars), but 
nevertheless can be balanced with other values of society. Decision 
making (for example, deciding whether we should invest in 
conservation of area A or area B) may require only estimates of 
relative gains in represented variation offered by different
places (their “complementarity” values). Complementarity helps 
integrate biodiversity option values with other values attributed to 
biodiversity, and with values of society more generally. This 
integrative process, together with processes for the growth of 
knowledge about components of biodiversity, provide an alternative to
the “post-positivism” perspective that sees biodiversity conservation
as predominantly value-laden.


The perspective that biodiversity reflects option and intrinsic 
values, to be balanced with other values, appears to be compatible 
with the broader discipline of conservation biology: “the field is 
rooted in a philosophy of stewardship rather than one of 
utilitarianism or consumption. The latter has been the basis of 
traditional resource conservation, that is, conserving resources 
solely for their economic use and human consumption” (Meffe 2000).