States have long demanded reparations from other states at the end
of wars. More recently non-state actors such as the Aborigines of
Australia, the Maori of New Zealand, and the Native Americans of North
America are demanding the return of their tribal lands from Europeans
as reparation; Eastern Europeans dispossessed by socialist governments
are demanding the return of their property as reparation; and African
Americans are demanding reparation for the injuries of slavery and its
aftermath. The last of these demands is our subject.
 
1. History
Oddly Thomas Jefferson was probably the first to imply that America
ought to make reparation to its slaves. He did not say that
it did, and his proposal to send them off to “such place as
circumstances of the time should render most proper”, and to
“declare them a free and independent people”, was mainly
motivated by a desire to rid the country of them, but it also suggests
that they were a people and that the U.S. was under some obligation to
set them up as a people (Jefferson 1954 [1785a]: 138). Some years
after Jefferson’s proposal American slaveholders founded (1816)
the American Colonization Society whose ostensible object, made
plausible by the presence of some Quakers among its founders, was to
help African Americans to go to Liberia and get a fresh start in a
country free of racial discrimination. But the real object of the
Society, or at least that of the slaveholders who founded it, was to
rid the country of free blacks who they feared endangered their
peculiar institution. Their stratagem was therefore dealt a deadly
blow when Martin Delany who agreed with Jefferson that African
Americans were a people and needed a territory on which to become a
state, declared that Liberia was


not an independent nation at all; but a poor miserable
mockery—a burlesque on a government—a
pitiful dependency on the American Colonizationists

and its “principal man, called President,
in Liberia” was a “mere parrot” of these individuals
(Delany 1852 [2004]: 185, emphasis in original).
Demands for compensation related to slavery frequently came up
during the Civil War, but not in the way present day Americans would
expect. The demands were not to compensate the slaves for the injuries
of slavery, but to compensate the slaveholders for the anticipated
loss of their slaves. These demands were voiced in the South when they
faced the prospect of having to free their slaves, but also voiced in
the North, and from the highest sources. President Abraham Lincoln for
example repeatedly urged compensated emancipation, which meant paying
the slaveholders for the loss of their slaves who would then be
deported from America. Indeed at one time he appeared to be ready to
propose paying the South $400,000,000, for the loss of their
slaves. As W.E.B. Du Bois observed dryly

 Lincoln was impressed by the loss of capital
invested in slaves, but curiously never seemed seriously to consider
the correlative loss of wage and opportunity of slave workers, the
tangible results of whose exploitation had gone into the
planters’ pockets for two centuries.  (Du Bois 1992 [1935]:
150)

And Lincoln did not even sugar coat his
deportation proposal with the suggestion that the freedmen were a
nation and therefore needed a separate territory on which to govern
themselves.
Thaddeus Stevens, congressman from Pennsylvania argued that it was
not enough to free the slaves and give them the right of suffrage; but
that in addition they should be given land confiscated from the
rebels. Charles Summer, senator from Massachusetts eventually came to
agree with him, but surprisingly the radical ex-slave Frederick
Douglass did not. In an excellent discussion Peter C. Myers speculates
that Douglass’s “moderation” at this point was a
reflection of “what was politically possible”, and of his
concern that benevolent missions organized by whites might encourage
dependence in the freedmen and prevent them from developing and
exercising the virtues of a free people. Douglass’ proposed
instead a federal corporation that would purchase tracts of land and
then resell or lease them on favorable terms to the freedmen, urging
that this arrangement was “more fully consistent with the
principle of self-reliance” and give “greater societal
recognition of the freed people’s virtue in providing for
themselves”. Meyers suggests that Douglass was following
Jefferson in emphasizing the corrupting effects of dependence. But
while Jefferson had indeed identified dependence as a crucial
corrupter, it “begets subservience and venality, suffocates
virtue, and prepares fit tools for the designs of ambition”
(Jefferson 1954 [1785a]: 165) he declared, he was equally clear that
legislators must protect the independence of the small yeoman farmer
“the most precious part of the state” from the usurpation
of the powerful (Jefferson 2006 [1785b]: 154). In other words Stevens
had proposed his scheme for the freed people for exactly the reasons
Jefferson proposed legislation for protecting the white yeomen. Years
later Douglass evidently saw the error of his moderation. Myers cites
his comment in 1882 that had the counsels of Thaddeus Stevens, Charles
Sumner, and ‘leading stalwart Republicans’ prevailed,
“the terrible evils from which we now suffer would have been
averted”, and “the Negro to-day”, would be
“tilling his soil in comparative independence” (Myers
2008: 239, quoting Douglass 1882, Appendix A, 440–441). The
theme continues to the present day.
Perhaps the most noteworthy demand for Black Reparations after the
Civil War occurred in 1969 when James Foreman a member of the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), read his “Black
Manifesto” at the National Black Economic Development
Conference, in Detroit, and later on in Riverside Church. The
“Manifesto” demanded $500,000,000, in reparations from
Christian white churches and Jewish synagogues, or as the
“Manifesto” put it, “15 dollars per
nigger”. This demand for reparation the Manifesto argued was
justified because over three and a half centuries, whites with the
assistance and collaboration of their churches and synagogues had
unjustly, through slavery and discrimination, wrested enormous
economic advantages from blacks. Although this argument relied on
widely accepted moral intuitions, the Manifesto received little
popular support. It did however provoke discussion in newspapers and
news magazines as well as some scholarly discussion. Boris Bittker
included it as an appendix in his book The Case for Black
Reparations (1973); Hugo Bedau provided and extended analysis in
his “Compensatory Justice and the Black Manifesto” (1972);
Michael Harrington and Arnold Kaufman debated its merits in
“Black Reparations—Two Views” (1969); and a number
of philosophers wrote essays inspired by its argument.
Although interest in the topic remained high among African American
philosophers, the wider community of political philosophers
preoccupied with Rawlsian ideal theory generally ignored it. But broad
and vigorous interest has been rekindled. Perhaps the causes lie
outside of academia; in 1988 Congress passed the Civil Liberties Act
which authorized payment of reparations to Japanese American citizens
who had been imprisoned during World War II; John Conyers has in each
session of Congress since 1989 introduced a bill to create a
commission to study reparations for slavery and segregation; in 2000
Randall Robinson published his book The Debt: What America Owes to
Blacks; in 2003 David Horowitz published his Uncivil
Wars; and in 2014 Ta-Nehisi Coates’s widely discussed essay
“The Case for Reparations”, appeared in The
Atlantic. 
2. Locke on Reparation
John Locke provided an early and very clear argument for the
reparation owed a lawful conqueror, and many arguments for black
reparations follow the outlines of his argument. For Locke people have
natural rights they get directly from Natural Law and rights they have
acquired in accordance with Natural law. To restrain violations of
rights he proposed punishment; punishment must be administered

 with so much Severity as will suffice to make it
an ill bargain to the Offender, give him cause to repent, and terrifie
others from doing the like. (Locke 1689: sec 8)

And to repair the damage that crime “commonly” causes
“some person or other” Locke proposed reparation. As he
put it reparation must give the “satisfaction due to any private
Man, for the damage he has received” (Locke 1689: sec
11). According to Locke reparation was a right stemming from the right
of self-preservation. But he insisted that the right can be pressed
only against the “goods or service of the Offender” (Locke
1689: sec 11). More precisely while the person damaged can seek help
from anyone, she, the victim, has a right to reparation only against
the one who wrongly caused her damage. But Locke does not say that she
must be the immediate victim of the “Offender”. His claim
that crime commonly damages “some person or other”
suggests that she may be anyone damaged as a result of the
offender’s violation of right. For example she may be damaged
because someone murdered her father and thus caused her to live in
straitened conditions. On Locke’s account she may be entitled to
press her right to reparation against the murderer for the damage he
caused her to suffer. On the other hand Locke’s claim that crime
“commonly” damages someone suggests that crime or
violations of rights do not always cause damage and
consequently do not always generate rights to reparation, though it
does not suggest that such violations of right do not deserve to be
punished. But even when the violation of right does not cause material
losses it may cause damages to its victim’s self-respect and
moral standing, and in such cases the satisfaction due to her may
include an admission of wrong doing from the wrongdoer, a plea for her
forgiveness, and an apology. If such admission, plea, and apology
require that the wrongdoer repent, reparation may seem to require that
the wrongdoer be punished, given Locke’s view that repentance is
among the objects of punishment (Locke 1689: sec 8). But Locke’s
seems clear that the right to reparation and the right to punish are
different rights. On his view we give up the right to punish to the
state, but retain the right to reparation. The
“Magistrate” he says “may remit deserved punishment
where the “publick good demands not the execution of the
Law”, but he cannot “remit the satisfaction due to any
private Man, for the damage he has received” (Locke 1689: sec
11). Arguably then the apology the wrongdoer must give to his victim
in order to give her the satisfaction she has a right to does not
require that he repent and perhaps therefore does not require that his
apology be sincere. It is also worth noting that although unjust
enrichment from crime should not be tolerated, it has little if
anything to do with reparation. Reparation focuses on getting
satisfaction for the injured victim of crime and the criminal need not
unjustly enrich himself as a result of the crime to have wrongfully
injured her. He owes her reparation even if he impoverished himself in
the process of injuring her. Finally given Locke’s separation of
the right to punish from the right of reparation, and his claim that
the right of reparation is about making satisfaction to the victim of
wrongdoing, Locke would seem committed to holding that when an act of
wrong doing is excused though it causes harm, that the victim has a
right to reparation although the magistrate may well decide that the
public good does not require that the state exercise its right to
punish the wrongdoer. 
3. Reparation, Restitution, and Compensation
In its primary sense restitution is “restoration of something
lost or stolen to its proper owner” (The New Oxford American
Dictionary 2001?). Clearly then reparation and restitution clearly
both presuppose the separation of something from its proper owner. But
equally clearly reparation is not restitution. Reparation can only
occur after some losses or damage due to a prior wrongdoing. But
though restitution can only occur after some loss or damage, that loss
or damage need not be due to a prior wrongdoing. If A loses his
wallet and B finds it and returns it to A, restitution
has been made although no wrongdoing was committed. Further while
reparation is a right, though the right can be outweighed, restitution
is not always a right. If B leaves A’s wallet
where it is, restitution has not been made, but it is not clear that a
right was violated. I doubt that a person who loses things has a right
that others find it for him. If B keeps the wallet then again
restitution has not been made, and A has a right that B
return it. But in that case A has a right that B return
it because he has a right to reparation and restitution can sometimes
be part of reparation. Some authors seem to think that B ought
to return the wallet because otherwise he will have unjustly enriched
himself at A’s expense. But it is not clear to me why his
unjust enrichment is a necessary condition for his obligation to
return the wallet to A. Even if the wallet is worthless
and B is not unjustly enriched by keeping it, he has no
business holding on to it since it is not his property. 
Restitution is neither necessary nor sufficient for reparation even
when the thing to be restored to its proper owner was
stolen. If A steals a bicycle from B, B has a
right to reparation and consequently to restitution if A has
the bicycle; reparation must give satisfaction, and A’s
satisfaction may depend on her getting back the very thing that was
stolen from her. But she may have lost more that the bicycle as a
direct result of its theft and her right to reparation requires
satisfaction for that further loss. Consequently restitution is not
always sufficient for reparation. On the other hand the bicycle may
have been destroyed or loss after its theft, making restitution but
not reparation impossible. Consequently restitution is not necessary
for reparation.
Compensation is related to reparation and restitution but is not
the same thing as either. It is not reparation because it simply makes
up for damage, harm or loss or lack whether or not it was caused by
wrongdoing. Robert Nozick’s famous definition of compensation
makes this sufficiently clear. It goes as follows:

 Something fully compensates a person for a loss
if and only if it makes him no worse off than he would otherwise have
been; it compensates person X for
person’s Y’s action A if X is no
worse off receiving it, if Y had not done A.  (Nozick
1974: 57)

Note that Nozick (correctly) does not say that
the loss or the action A must be wrongful. Thus a person may be
compensated for a loss though he does not have a right to
reparation. If a person deserves a loss he has no right to reparation
for it, but he may be compensated for it, probably unjustifiably. Even
if he has a right to compensation, he may still have no right
to reparation. For example he may have a right to be compensated for a
loss if he is insured against it, but his right is a right to
compensation not a right to reparation if no wrongdoing caused his
loss. Similarly if a government is obligated to compensate its
citizens for damages caused by certain accidents or “acts of
God”, then they may have rights for compensation against their
government for losses caused by a hurricane though the government did
not wrongfully harm them. Of course, as in the case of Hurricane
Katrina and New Orleans in 2005 people who suffer losses caused by a
hurricane may have rights to reparation against their government if it
was obligated to build sea walls to protect them from hurricanes but
negligently failed to do so. But in that case their right to
reparation would not be based simply on their losses but also on the
fact that they resulted from the wrongdoing of the government
(Goldberg 2006: 83–95).
But if a person has a right to reparation he will also often have a
right to compensation. This is because his right to reparation is a
right to satisfaction for the damages he suffered and such
satisfaction often requires that he be made no worse off than he would
have been had he not suffered the loss. This does not make a right to
compensation the same thing as a right to reparation since a right to
reparation can only be generated by damages caused by wrongdoing.
Since a right to reparation is always generated by a wrongful harm,
such rights are part of corrective justice or to use Rawls’s
term, “partial compliance theory” (Rawls 1971: 8, 9). But
Rawls must allow that there can be rights to compensation in full
compliance theory. This follows since people can suffer damages that
result from no one’s wrongdoing, and may have insured themselves
against such damages. Consider too Rawls’s “principle of
redress”. This is a principle of compensation for full
compliance theory. It may be objected that it cannot be such a
principle, but must be instead a principle of non-ideal justice, since
according to Rawls himself it requires that “undeserved
inequalities”, such as the “inequalities of birth and
natural endowment” be “somehow compensated
for” (Rawls 1971: 100). But Rawls’s use of
“undeserved” at this point is not meant to imply that he
is referring to inequalities that are the result of injustice. It only
means that those with the inequalities in question did nothing to
deserve them. People with the “inequalities of birth and natural
endowment” did nothing to deserve these inequalities. Neither
are these inequalities necessarily the result of any injustice, though
of course they could be. No one’s wrongful act need
have caused a baby to be born with autism or Down’s syndrome,
though again it could have. 
4. Reparation and Affirmative Action
As we have suggested reparation can require different things
depending on the nature of the wrongful harm that it addresses. As we
saw earlier it can require that territory wrongfully taken from a
country be returned to that country. Or as Thaddeus Stevens urged it
could require that freed slaves be given forty acres and a mule to
enable them to become independent yeomen farmers. Conceivably
reparation for blacks today could require that they be according
preferential treatment in the competition for jobs and places at
universities or colleges. That possibility has been challenged on
grounds reminiscent of Douglass’s alleged opposition to
Stevens’s scheme, namely, that preferential treatment would
undermine the self-reliance of its beneficiaries. Jefferson’s
proposal cited earlier that legislators should make laws to enable the
poor to become yeomen meets this challenge as effectively. Legislators
encourage rather than undermine the self-reliance of the poor when
they make laws that protect them from the powerful or enable them to
protect themselves from the powerful. Sycophancy not self-reliance is
encouraged by being always at the mercy of the powerful. A different
challenge has had more lasting effects and has thoroughly changed the
face of affirmative action. Suppose to take a straightforward case
that a firm wronged and harmed a black person by denying her on
account of her race a well paying position for which she was the most
qualified candidate. Plausibly the firm could satisfy her claim to
reparation by hiring her in preference over better qualified
candidates for the same position if it became available. In fact when
affirmative action was introduced some years ago its fiercest and most
effective critics usually claimed that they would support it if it
involved reparation of the sort just described. The problem as they
saw it was that most of affirmative action’s beneficiaries were
young well qualified men and women who were entering the job market
for the first time. The defenders of affirmative action tried to meet
this objections by pointing out that if the youngsters’ parents
and grandparents had suffered from unjust racial discrimination, then
the youngsters too had probably suffered from such discrimination even
if indirectly and even if they were entering the job market for the
first time. But the critics had anticipated this reply by insisting
that the parents and grandparents would have to prove in court that
they had suffered from unjust racial discrimination which was of
course usually almost impossible for them to do. The defenders of
affirmative action tried more complicated replies, but their attempts
to justify affirmative action as reparation came to an end when the
Supreme Court offered a far easier and ostensibly less divisive way to
justify affirmative action. In the Bakke decision of 1978 the Court
rejected the argument that affirmative action for blacks could be
justified as compensation for disadvantages caused by past unjust
racial discrimination, but allowed that such affirmative action could
be justified to secure “diversity”. Clearly with a
suitably flexible definition of “diversity” this new
argument could justify affirmative action for a very wide variety of
groups. Probably it would fail to do so only for young able bodied
middle and upper class white males. Although or perhaps because
it’s main beneficiaries are now no longer African Americans it
has proved to be far more popular than the older arguments that tried
to justify affirmative action as reparation. But this essay is about
reparation and not specifically about affirmative action so I will not
attempt to examine the flaws of the new diversity based argument for
affirmative action.
5. Reparations for Slavery
This entry focuses on making a case for reparations for
contemporary blacks for the enslavement of their ancestors, partly
because slavery was the most horrific experience that blacks have
endured in America, and the one for which the immediate victims of the
experience most clearly deserve reparation; and partly because making
the case in question nevertheless presents peculiar, difficult, and
interesting philosophical problems. As we will see much of that case
will depend on the argument that the injustices blacks endured after
emancipation have caused some of the injuries of the slaves to persist
into the present. But there is no reason to suppose that these
injustices did not themselves cause damages to their victims, quite
apart from causing the damages of slavery to persist, and that these
damages may also deserve reparation. In fact there is good reason to
suppose that arguments to that effect may be more important
politically that slave based arguments for black reparations. Andrew
Valls and Jonathan Kaplan have published a stimulating essay that
focuses less on slavery and more on Jim Crow segregation and
systematic housing discrimination as a basis for contemporary black
reparation claims. The issues they raise deserve more attention, but I
will persist in this entry on the issue of black reparations for
slavery because as I hope we will agree it retains its fascination
despite its age. 
Thaddeus Stevens’s argument for slave reparations was simply
that the slave holders had committed serious harmful transgressions
against the slaves, who consequently had rights for reparation against
their masters that could plausibly be satisfied by some of their
masters’ land. Today few would challenge that argument, at least
publicly. The argument that many challenge today is that present day
African Americans have rights to reparation from the American people
or the American government because three hundred years ago the
American government permitted the American people to enslave their
ancestors. That argument seems to get no support from the undeniable
fact that their ancestors had rights to reparations from their
masters. People do not have rights to reparation for the wrongful
harms others suffer. Two arguments which I have called the
harm argument and the inheritance argument attempt to circumvent that
difficulty.
The harm argument relies on the idea that the transgressions of
slavery initiated an unbroken chain of harms linked as cause and
effect that began with the slaves and continues among African
Americans to the present day. Therefore since the transgressions of
slavery harm present day African Americans they have rights to
reparation against those who committed those transgressions. It
differs crucially from the inheritance argument because it assumes
that slavery’s transgressions against the slaves have harmed
present day African Americans but the inheritance argument does
not. The inheritance argument relies on the idea that present day
African Americans have inherited the rights to reparation that was
owed their enslaved ancestors and was never paid. 
6. The Harm Argument
Three main objections have been urged against the harm
argument. First, that although the transgressions of slavery harmed
the slaves, and present day African Americans do suffer from many
disadvantages, these disadvantages may not be the result of the
transgressions of slavery; they could easily be the result of vast
economic and political changes that have occurred since slavery ended
one hundred and fifty years ago. As George Sher put it the present
harms may not be the “automatic effects of slavery” (Sher
1981: 7). Second, that even if present day African Americans have been
harmed by the slaveholders’ transgressions against their
ancestors, and have rights to reparation against these slaveholders,
such rights can only be pressed against the slaveholders who are now
all dead. Third that if present day African Americans demand
reparation for the harms that the transgressions of slavery caused
them, then since reparation implies compensation they demand to be
made no worse off than they would have been had the transgressions of
slavery never occurred. But if these transgressions had never occurred
present day African Americans would not exist. Consequently the harm
argument is incoherent (Morris 1984, Levin 1980).
Fullinwider has reformulated the harm argument so that it avoids
the first two objections. His reformulated argument goes as follows:
the government after 1865 failed “to vindicate the rights to
full and equal citizenship the Civil War Amendments extended to
blacks;” but, had that government “vigorously”
protected those rights, “the legacy of slavery would have faded
considerably if not wholly by now through the industry of blacks
themselves”. Consequently if present day African Americans do
suffer from various aspects of the legacy of slavery, the real cause
of those harms is not slavery, but the governments after 1865, for if
those governments had vigorously protected the rights of the freed
people and their descendants, the legacy of slavery would have faded
and present day African Americans would not be disadvantaged by it
(Fullinwider 2004).
Boris Bittker made a similar suggestion. His main argument is that
had the goals of Reconstruction not been foiled by the
“political settlement of 1877” and the network of Jim Crow
laws not been introduced and finally fully authorized by Plessy
v. Ferguson in 1896 the “only identifiable residue of
slavery today would have been cultural”, and the descendants of
slaves and the descendants of slaveholders would lead the same lives
(Bittker 2003: 12, 13). In other words though Bittker seems to go a
little further than Fullinwider, suggesting that the legacy of slavery
would have disappeared completely if the nation had protected the
rights of the freedpeople and their descendants, he too concludes that
any responsibility for the legacy of slavery that persists today must
be attributed to post Civil War governments. 
The arguments of Fullinwider and Bittker are a clear improvement on
the original harm argument. But they seem to assume that post Civil
war governments committed only one transgression against their black
populations, namely those governments failed to protect the civil
rights of the members of those populations. In fact these governments
committed another and quite distinct transgression against their black
populations; they failed to make reparation to those
populations. These two transgressions are not the same thing. The duty
of government to protect its citizens’ civil and political
rights is one thing; its duty to make reparation to them if it has
wrongly injured them is another thing.
Fullinwider seems aware that protecting civil and political rights
is not the same as making reparation. He seems clear that the
U.S. government did not fulfill all of its obligations to the Japanese
it interred during World War ll just because it released them after
the war and protected their civil and political rights after that. But
he writes as if he believes that the post Civil war governments would
have fulfilled all of their obligations to their black citizens if
only they had protected those citizens’ civil and political
rights (Fullinwider 2004: 148). Bittker’s oversights on this point are
strange. He writes on page 12 of his book that compensation
in 1865 to the slaves for their forced or unpaid might have been
“strong”, and on page 28 that “compensation in 1865
for blacks’ forced labor would certainly have been
appropriate;” But having conceded that monetary compensation
would have been in order in 1865, he then drops the point without
comment. Interestingly too he seems to think that unpaid labor is the
only harm the transgressions of slavery caused the slaves or that
merits any mention. This is very strange in a book titled The Case
for Black Reparations for of course unpaid labor was perhaps the
least of the harms that the transgressions of slavery visited on the
slaves. What about reparation for the theft of their liberty?
But Fullinwider’s claim that
 Had the federal government done nothing after
1865 except vigorously protect the civil and voting rights of blacks,
the legacy of slavery would have faded considerably if not wholly by
now through the industry of blacks themselves

suggests that only the governments’ failure to protect the
civil and political rights of the freed people and their descendants
caused any problem (Fullinwider 2004: 148). An obvious difficulty with
this view is that large economic inequalities make it difficult for
the government to protect the rights of the poor. That problem aside,
Fullinwider and Bittker give no argument to support their view that
the freed peoples’ descendants would have recovered from the
harms of slavery without the help of reparation if only government had
protected their civil and political rights.  Fullinwider’s
confidence seems to rest on the “immigrant model”, by
which he means the path to success taken by the European immigrants
who came to America after the Civil War, and with “little to
offer but their physical labor”, and “by dint of hard
work” eventually “blended into the larger American
fabric”. The implication is that the freed people were
sufficiently like these immigrants to justify the inference that had
government vigorously protected their civil and voting rights then
they too by would have blended into the larger American fabric.
But the freed people and their descendants were not very
much like the white immigrants arriving from Europe. To say the
obvious, slavery is very bad for people. It prevents them from
developing the useful dispositions and skills that people tend to
develop in freedom. Although the immigrants had had a rough time in
Europe—that is why they flocked to America—they were
better prepared to take advantage of the opportunities available than
the slaves. Consequently they would likely have kept well ahead of the
freed people and their descendants even if the civil and political
rights of each group were equally protected. The issue is debatable of
course. Some black writers, Frederick Douglass, for example, seem to
think that human beings are resilient, equipped as they are with an
almost ineradicable love of liberty, and consequently the slaves would
recover readily from the rigors of slavery if only they were given
justice. He liked to say that all he asked for the Negro was
“simply justice”, though the contexts always left it
unclear how much he included in justice, whether it would involve
reparation, and whether he was simply denying that he was not asking
for “benevolence” or “pity” for the Negro
(Douglass 1865: 283). Alexander Crummell on the other hand seemed to
worry about the enduring effects of slavery especially because of the
tendency of its victims to remember its horrors, though interestingly
Douglass thought that these memories could be bracing (Crummell 1891:
18, 19). The issue of the effects of the memory of enslavement and
domination on recovery from the effects of these evils deserves
further study. Whatever the results of that study however it does not
follow straightaway that the wrongly injured are not owed reparation
just because they are resilient enough to recover from the effects of
their injuries without it.
The economist Glenn Loury makes the further point that advancement
depends on informal contacts that involve the sharing and transfer of
genuinely useful information and skills among people who enjoy what
used to be called “social equality”. But social equality
cannot be secured by even the most rigorous protection of the civil
and political rights of the freed people; on the contrary such
protection can help social inequality to persist since it entitles
individuals to choose their friends and associates even if their
choice is determined by color prejudice. Since color prejudice
remained strong after the Civil war the white immigrants would more
readily associate with well placed and well educated locals and learn
useful information and skills from them. Finally since social equals
tend to marry each other rather than their inferiors, and since
immigrant whites were more likely than the freed people and their
descendants to become the social equals of prosperous native whites,
they were also more likely to marry such individuals and thus to gain
access to their wealth, much of it incidentally inherited from the
spoils of slavery.
 Bittker seems aware that the official enforcement of civil and
political rights might not nullify the effects of personal
prejudice. Thus he asks whether “personal” prejudice
without official segregation would have produced segregation,
“first in the home, then in Mrs Murphy’s boardinghouse,
and then in business and politics”. This issue is of decisive
importance for his implied contention that even without reparation
blacks would have made themselves equal to whites if there had been no
Jim Crow legislation. He rejects William Graham Sumner’s maxim
“law-ways cannot alter folkways” which implies that
segregation and prejudice could have persisted without the help of Jim
Crow laws, but so far as I can see without given any argument to show
that the maxim was mistaken. He says simply that he takes it as a
“working hypothesis” that

 statutes, ordinances, and other official actions
have been the predominant source of the racial discrimination that
has blighted our public and private life,

given that we have no science

 capable of producing a model of the United States
as it would have been if blacks had come here as voluntary immigrants
rather than as slaves, or if emancipation had been followed by

an integrated society (Bittner 2003: 26).
The many and various considerations just canvassed suggest that
Fullinwider and Bittker are far too optimistic in supposing that the
descendants of the freed people, without reparation, would have
achieved parity with the descendants of the immigrants if only their
civil and political rights had been protected. In any case the issue
they raise is a distraction from the central question whether African
Americans are owed reparation. Achieving parity with the descendants
of immigrants is not the same thing as receiving the reparation one is
owed. The point of reparation is not to make people equal to others;
reparation is not defined as making the wrongly harmed equal
to others. In fact, equality has little to do with reparation. People
deserve reparation when they have been harmed by transgression but a
person may be harmed as a result of transgression and may therefore
have a right to reparation and yet be better off than
others. Similarly a person may be worse off than others without having
suffered from any harm or disadvantage for which he deserves
reparation. If reparation necessarily requires compensation it
requires that people be put as far as possible in the condition they
would have been in had they not been wrongly injured. This may make
them equal to others, but it may not. It can leave them worse off than
others and it can also make them better off than others. Some
philosophers may protest that we should not allow claims for
reparation to get in the way of an ideal egalitarian society, but of
course their position is as bad as the utilitarian arguments they
disparage that rights may and should be violated in order to maximize
utility. 
But it is now time to consider the third main objection to the harm
argument. This objection let us recall is that making reparation to
the present black population for the harms that slavery caused it is
impossible because if slavery had never occurred the present black
population would not exist. This problem is now known as the
non-identity problem. This difficulty might seem to reappear in the
revised harm argument I have just described. For although this
argument does not call for compensating the present black population
for the harms that slavery caused it, it may seem to call for
compensating the present black population for the harms it suffers
because of policies enacted and enforced before it was
conceived. Given that these policies would have affected who was
conceived in succeeding black populations, had they not occurred the
present black population would not exist. 
The following discussion shows how this difficulty can be
avoided. Imagine two slaves, Tom and Beulah released from
slavery. They were released from slavery but the government continued
to wrong them in at least two ways: First, by preventing them from
exercising rights guaranteed to every citizen; second, by violating
their rights to be compensated for the harms that it had caused them
by supporting their enslavement. And both these wrongs probably harmed
them. Obviously preventing them from voting or going to school
probably harmed them; and the harm that often results when one’s
right to be compensated is violated is an additional harm, on top of
the harm caused by the first violation of right. If you owe me a
hundred dollars to compensate me for wrongly breaking my arm, you
wrong me again by refusing to give me what you owe me, and you might
owe me another thousand dollars for the harms that second wrong might
cause me, for example going around for a month with the pain and
inconvenience of an unfixed broken arm. Now the government wronged Tom
and Beulah in the two ways mentioned as soon as it caused them to be
released from slavery and before Beulah conceived any child; but it
also continued to wrong them in these ways after the conception of
their daughter, Eulah. These wrongs to Tom and Beulah almost certainly
harmed them by forcing them to remain longer in the poverty and
ignorance that slavery had put them in. But it is more germane to the
present argument that the wrongs also almost certainly harmed their
daughter Eulah. They harmed her by keeping her parents in poverty and
ignorance and by therefore also keeping her in ignorance and
poverty. They also harmed her by causing her to be raised by parents
with the various disabilities that the experience of slavery normally
causes its victims. And if she acquired these disabilities from her
parents by imitation and necessity, and if these disabilities harmed
her, the government’s wrongs caused those harms too. If
wrongdoers must make reparation for the damages their wrongdoing
causes other people then the government must make reparation to Eulah.

The argument is not that Eulah has a claim to the compensation her
parents Tom and Beulah’s were owed and never paid. If that were
the argument we would have an inheritance argument, not a
counterfactual argument. Eulah’s claim for compensation is for
harms she herself suffered. And she can rightly press that claim
against the government. It is not as though her parents could have
done better by her but chose not to. The government’s wrongs
prevented them from doing better by her. They had no choice but to
raise her in poverty and ignorance. The government could have given
them a choice if it had compensated for their wrongfully caused harms,
or allowed to recover from them. But it did not. Second the amount of
the compensation she is owed does not depend on the amount of
compensation they were owed. It depends on the harms she
suffered. Though she suffered those harms because they were harmed and
not compensated, compensating her for her harms may be much more, (or
much less), than compensating them. 
Third, she may have an inheritance based claim to their
compensation. The fact that she was harmed because they were not
compensated and can claim compensation for that harm does not mean
that they lose their claim to be compensated for their harms. If they
were never compensated she may therefore inherit a right to their
compensation. The counterfactual argument is compatible with the
inheritance based argument.
Fourth, her claim for compensation is not confounded by the
argument that she would not exist had the wrongs that caused her harms
not occurred. Those wrongs are not the wrongs of slavery, which
occurred before she was conceived, and indeed were among the causes of
her being conceived. And they are not the wrongs that government
committed against her parents after it released them from slavery and
before she was conceived. They are the wrongs that were all committed
after her conception. They are the wrongs of not protecting her
parents’ rights and failing to compensate them for the wrongs
already committed against them. Had those wrongs not been committed,
she would have lived in less straitened conditions, and would have
been less constrained to imitate and duplicate her parents slavery
induced qualities and habits.
Nahshon Perez has mounted a rebuttal of the argument to avoid the
non-identity problem that I have just presented. He calls that
argument the “timing argument”. Perez argues that the
timing argument fails to distinguish two different arguments, one for
restitution and one for compensation. He does not challenge the
restitution argument, but claims that the compensation argument
fails. This is because, he argues, a person owes compensation for the
damage done to the victim/descendant from an earlier wrong for which
he is culpable, but

 by hypothesis the original wrong is over, all the
original wrongdoers have passed away; current persons have not wronged
descendants of victims of the distant original injustice. (Perez 2014:
212)
But in my version of the timing argument although the crime of
slavery has ended and its main wrongdoers are all dead, new
wrongdoers have taken their place, committing new crimes that ensure
that the damages caused by the earlier crime of slavery persist, and
it is these new wrongdoers who are required to compensate the
descendants of the slaves. As I noted immediately after slavery ended
these new wrongdoers were the former slaveholders now in the guise of
exploiting capitalists, and committing new crimes that prevented the
ex-slaves from recovering from their ordeal in slavery; for example
by refusing to compensate their former slaves and preventing them
from exercising the rights guaranteed to all citizens. Of course some
of these crimes were committed before their ex-slaves had conceived
any children, and consequently might have helped determine who the
children they conceived were. But the crimes in question continued
after their slaves conceived their children, in particular Eulah in
my example, and could therefore not have helped determine that Eulah
was conceived.  And Eulah is claiming compensation only for the
damages caused by the crimes that were committed after she was
conceived. Had those crimes not been committed she would still have
been conceived, and consequently her claim for compensation for the
damages they caused her is not incoherent. 
But suppose that a tenacious skeptic raises the following
objection: the timing argument relies on the two crimes that I called
the “later” crimes; but one of these two later crimes, the
crime of refusing to compensate Tom and Beulah for their enslavement,
seems impossible to commit unless the first crime of slavery was
already committed. A person cannot commit the crime of refusing to
compensate his former slaves unless he had former slaves and
consequently had already committed the crime of slavery. Consequently
if Eulah is claiming compensation for the harms she suffered because
Tom and Beulah were not compensated for being enslaved, she is
claiming that Tom and Beulah should be compensated for the harms they
suffered as a result of being enslaved. That is, assuming that Tom and
Beulah would not have been enslaved if there had been no slavery, she
is claiming they should be brought to the condition they would enjoy
if there had been no slavery. But if there had been so slavery, Tom
and Beulah would never have existed. And if Tom and Beulah had never
existed, then Eulah would never exist. Consequently the non-identity
problem persists. 
This attempt to revive the non-identity problem does not affect the
second of the former slaveholders “later” crimes, namely,
their preventing their former slaves from exercising the rights
guaranteed to all citizens; the former slaveholders could have
committed that crime without having first committed the crime of
slavery. But it seems to affect the first of the former
slaveholders’ later crimes, namely, failing to compensate Eulah
for the harmful consequences she suffered because the slaveholders
refused to compensate her parents for the damages they suffered as a
result of being enslaved. Certainly the slaveholders could not
possibly have committed that crime if they had not already committed
the crime of enslaving Eulah’s parents. But this attempt to
revive the non-identity problem ignores the difference between
claiming compensation for the descendants of slaves for the evil
consequences they suffered because of the enslavement of their parents
and ancestors; and compensating slaves for the evil consequences they
suffer because of their own enslavement. The first sort of
compensation may run afoul of the non-identity problem, but the second
does not. Compensating slaves for the harms resulting from their own
enslavement involves compensating them for the pain, exploitation, and
loss of liberty that comes with being a slave. It does not involve any
attempt to compensate slaves for the harms they suffered because their
parents were enslaved and not compensated. Such an attempt would raise
the non-identity problem. But the timing argument for Eulah’s
right to compensation does not claim that Tom and Beulah’s
former masters should compensate Tom and Beulah for the harms they
suffered because their parents were enslaved. It claims only that Tom
and Beulah’s former masters should compensate them for the harms
they suffered because they, Tom and Beulah, were enslaved. And
although they wronged and harmed Tom and Beulah by never compensating
them, my argument for Eulah’s right to compensation relies only
on the harms they suffered after Eulah’s conception. That
argument therefore raises no non-identity problems. 
The case for Eulah’s compensation can be repeated for her
children. The government did not compensate their mother; this
injustice impoverished her mother, and although this began to harm her
before her children were conceived, they began to harm her children
too as soon as they were conceived; and they therefore have a claim
for compensation against the government for the harm its injustice of
failing to compensate their mother after they were conceived caused
them. Their claim for compensation is not a claim to inherit the
compensation she was owed for her harms, but a claim for compensation
for their own harms. The amount of their compensation does not depend
on the amount of her compensation, but on how much the failure to
compensate her harmed them. I suspect that it will be greater than her
compensation, given that there are many of them and one of her. In
addition to their claim for compensation for their injuries, they may
also have an inheritance based claim for the compensation she was owed
but never paid. Their claims for compensation are for harms they
themselves suffered from, but some of these harms would have their
origin in slavery since they suffered them because their mother lived
in straitened conditions, and she lived in straitened conditions
because her parents, Tom and Beulah were harmed by slavery, prevented
from recovering from these harms and never compensated. And again,
there is no danger that their grandchildren would fail to exist had
the injustice that caused their harms not occurred, for that injustice
was not slavery or the failure to compensate their grand parents which
occurred long before they were conceived and were probably among the
conditions for their conception, but the failure to compensate their
mother, which we can suppose occurred after they were conceived. No
innocent is asked to make compensation since every new generation of
whites did its part in holding down every new generation of blacks at
or near the level to which their slave ancestors had been
reduced. Proceeding in this way we can arrive at the present
generation of African Americans. They are entitled to seek reparation
from the government for the harms it caused them by failing to
compensate their parents.
7. The Inheritance Argument
The inheritance argument for black reparation says that the freed
people had rights to reparation for their injuries; that they held
these rights against the slave holders and also against the state and
federal government for failing in its duty to protect them from the
slave holders; that these rights were never honored; and finally that
they passed by the right of inheritance to present day African
Americans who are their descendants and heirs.
This argument avoids the objection that the present black
population would not exist if their ancestors had never been
enslaved. As Thompson puts it

 The claims of descendants depend on them being
the heirs of their forebears—not on their being the particular
individuals they are. The fact that they might not have existed if
that injustice had not been done does not undermine their
claim. (Thompson 2002: 108)

And each premise seems plausible. When people
die their rights to their property are normally passed on to their
heirs (Boxill 1972: 113–122; Kershnar 1999: 95–101). The
reparation owed to the freed people was their property; it was never
in their physical possession of course, but obviously something need
not be in your possession to be your property. Neither did the freed
people abandon their inheritance. Laws and guns very forcefully kept
it from them. Consequently it should pass, by right of inheritance,
to their descendants, the present black population. 
Two important objections against the inheritance argument are:
first that it relies on the counterfactual claim that the freed people
and their descendants would have held on to their reparation had they
received it; and second that it demands that people make reparation
for the injuries of a crime that they could not have committed. Let us
begin with the second.
Locke’s discussion of a lawful conqueror’s rights to
reparation suggests how to solve it. “The right of
Conquest”, Locke claims,

 extends only to the Lives of those who
joyn’d in the War, not to their Estates, but only in order to
make reparation for the damages received, and the Charges of the War,
and that too with reservation of the right of the innocent Wife and
Children. (Locke 1689: sec. 180)

Locke’s claim is that the lawful conqueror
has rights to reparation from the estates of those who unjustly waged
war against him, though some part of these estates should be reserved
for their wives and children. The clear implication is that the wives
and children would have gotten a larger part of the estates in
question had their husbands and fathers not harmfully transgressed
against the lawful conqueror; but Locke would be guilty of
self-contradiction if he had meant that the wives and children were
being forced to make reparation for the harms their fathers’
and husbands’ the crimes caused. His view was that when people
unjustly harm others, a portion of their estates may be used to make
reparation to the people they harmed, and as a necessary result their
children cannot inherit that portion of their estates.
The following argument parallels Locke’s argument: the slave
holders harmed the slaves. Consequently the slaves had rights to
reparation against the estates of the slave holders; these rights
reduced the extent of the estates that the slave holders’
children would otherwise have inherited from them; the slaves were
forcibly prevented from exercising those rights; but it is absurd to
suppose that people lose rights just because they are forcibly
prevented from exercising those rights; consequently the slaves
retained their rights against the estates of the slave holders;
present day African Americans are their heirs; consequently present
day African Americans have rights against the estates of the slave
holders. This argument does not prove much. Even if many descendants
of the slave holders can be identified, proving that they inherited
their property from their slave holding ancestors seems hopeless. But
the argument can be improved. The first step is to see that the slaves
did not have rights to reparation only against the slave holders. This
step may seem to follow easily from Locke’s famous theory that
residence in a state is tacit consent to it (Locke 1689: sec
119). This theory applied to the case of the lawful conqueror might
seem to commit Locke to the view that the lawful conqueror had rights
to reparation against all members of the state that waged the unjust
war against him. But in fact Locke explicitly denied that it
did. “The people” he said gave

 to their governors no power to do an unjust
thing, such as is to make an unjust War, (for they never had such
power in themselves:) They ought not to be charged as guilty of the
Violence and Injustice that is committed in an Unjust war, any
further than they actually abet it. (Locke 1689: sec 179)

And he identified those who “actually
abet” and unjust war as those who “assisted, concurred,
or consented”, to that war (Locke 1689: sec 179). It may seem
that Locke is guilty of self-contradiction here at least if we
suppose that to consent to something, even tacitly, is to give the
“power”, that is, the right to do it. But Locke evidently
did not suppose that to consent to another’s action is to give
the other the right to do it; and no one else supposes that it does,
except perhaps confused philosophers. For such a supposition implies
that one could not consent to another’s unjust action since of
course one cannot give another a right to act unjustly, but of course
people can and do often consent to another’s unjust action. To
consent to another’s action is “to make oneself a partner
in the other’s action and to accept a share in the
responsibility for it” (Boxill 1993: 96–99). This
suggestion may seem to leave us with the conclusion that if residence
in a state is tacit consent to it, as Locke’s theory says, then
all the residents of a state must have accepted responsibility for
the state’s actions, including its unjust wars, and
consequently that the just conqueror must have rights to reparation
against all residents of the state. But as we have seen Locke denies
that the lawful conqueror has such rights. The solution to this
puzzle lies in a peculiarity of most signs of tacit consent. The
peculiarity is that signs of tacit consent are normally conditions
people have good reason to be in other than to give their
consent. Thus residence in a state is a sign of tacit consent to it
because most residents of a state have good reason to reside in the
state other than to give consent to it. Since a sign of consent would
be coerced, and consequently not a sign of consent if not making it
is impossible or very costly, it follows that every sign of tacit
consent, like residence in a state, must be such as to allow people
to make the sign, while withdrawing their consent by making some
cheap and easily performed sign of dissent. This reasoning suggests
how Locke can say both that residence in a state is tacit consent to
its actions and that the lawful conqueror has rights to reparation
from only those who “assisted, concurred, or consented”,
to their state’s unjust wars against him. All residents of a
state have tacitly consented to its actions but only those who fail
to make some sign of dissent to its unjust wars, have consented to
its waging these wars, at least if there are signs of dissent that
are relatively easy to make and are not too costly.
Returning to the question of reparations for slavery, Americans
prior to the Civil war knew that their government permitted and
supported slavery and also knew that slavery was a crime. The slave
holding states certainly tried to conceal the full horrors of their
“peculiar institution” but the evidence suggests that
their efforts were not successful. Consequently, since few white
Americans expressed dissent from their government’s complicity
in the crime of slavery, although it did not punish such dissent, it
seems fair to conclude that most white Americans consented to their
government’s complicity in the crime. In Locke’s language
they “assisted, concurred, or consented” to the
government’s injustice against the slaves. Therefore still
following Locke, it follows that the slaves had rights to reparation
against the entire white population of the United States for the
damages that their enslavement caused them. This argument is perhaps
open to the objection that there was in the period of slavery more
than a little dissent to the government’s complicity in the
crime of slavery; certainly the abolitionists strongly expressed their
dissent.  Or alternatively it could be objected that dissenting from
the government’s complicity in slavery in the Deep South did
carry considerable costs including costs not necessarily imposed by
the government. Finally the argument also requires a fuller account of
what residents of a state must do in order to make appropriate signs
of dissent from the injustice of their government, and consequently to
avoid being accused of consenting to that injustice.  Presumably
confiding to a few friends that one was opposed to slavery would not
be enough. But if these problems can be satisfactorily settled, then
since the slaves had titles to reparation against the estates of those
who assisted, concurred or consented to their enslavement, they would
have titles to reparation against practically the entire white
population, not just against the estates of the slave
holders. This reparation was never paid. Instead each white
generation specified that only whites of the succeeding generation
were permitted to own, or compete for, or be educated by, the assets
it was leaving behind.  Since the slaves had titles to reparation
against these assets, and the present generation of African Americans
is the slaves’ heir, the present generation of African Americans
has inherited titles to a portion of the assets held by the present
white population. This includes the white immigrants who arrived in
the U.S. after the abolition of slavery to take advantage of
opportunities, funded by assets the slaves had titles to, or for the
education the slaves and descendants were prevented from getting, or
to take natural assets including land that the slaves also had titles
to. The fact that they competed for these opportunities and worked
hard misses the point since many of these “so called”
opportunities had already been inherited by and were the property of,
the slaves’ heirs.
Locke put a limit on the right to reparation. In the case he
discussed the lawful conqueror’s right to reparation was limited
by reservations made for the rights of the wife and children of those
engaged in or consented to the unjust war against him. As Locke put it

 The Conqueror has a Title to Reparations for
Damages received, and the Children have a Title to their
Father’s Estate for their Subsistence…What must be done
in the case? I answer; The Fundamental Law of Nature being, that all,
as much as may be, should be preserved, it follows, that if there be
not enough fully to satisfy both, viz, for the Conqueror’s
Losses, and the Children’s Maintenance, he that hath, and to
spare, must remit something of his full Satisfaction, and give way to
the pressing and preferable Title of those, who are in danger to
perish without it. (Locke 1689: sec.183)

Thus Locke appeals to the Fundamental Law of
Nature which requires that all or as much as may be should be
preserved in order to argue that that the lawful conqueror’s
right to reparation must give way if it comes into conflict with the
rights to subsistence and maintenance of the children of those who
owe him reparation. But Locke does not say that the lawful
conqueror’s right to reparation is trumped by the
children’s right to inheritance; on his account, it is
the right to subsistence that trumps the right to reparation when the
two rights conflict. When Locke limits the conqueror’s right to
reparation he does so in order to accommodate the rights to
subsistence of innocent children. He is concerned that such children
will die if he presses the right to reparation too hard, not that
they will inherit very little.
Do these reasonable limitations on the right of inheritance have
any relevance to whether African Americans have a right to inherit the
reparation owed their slave ancestors? Here it is important to note
these limitations do not abolish or cancel the right to
inheritance. They do not imply, that is, that there is no right to
inherit at all. They allow that there is such a right, and that it
holds in normal circumstances, but that it fails to hold or is
outweighed when allowing it to hold would make innocent people
destitute, or create large inequalities that are likely to lead to
exploitation and domination. In other words we cannot set aside the
inheritance argument just because it depends on the right of
inheritance. We can set aside the inheritance argument aside only if
implementing it would make innocent people destitute or create large
inequalities that are likely to lead to their exploitation and
domination. But would implementing the inheritance argument have these
results? It would not. The slaves were horribly harmed by slavery, but
making reparation to them would not have required turning over a
continent to them. It would have called for no horrendous uprooting of
populations, or driven anyone into poverty, or created morally
outlandish inequalities. The slaves would not suddenly have become the
masters and the whites their subordinates. The nation could have made
reparation and suffered mild discomfort at worst. As for the right of
inheritance of their heirs, we must remember that it is not limited by
the mere length of time between benefactor and heir. The right of
inheritance is limited by the dangerous and morally repugnant
inequalities that would result from honoring it. These could appear
after one generation, or fail to appear after ten generations. We are
certainly not speaking here of a statute of limitations. It would be
wrong for someone’s immediate heir to insist on his right to
inherit his father’s goods if this would cause undue hardship to
others, or put him in a position to oppress them. But it would be
right for someone’s distant heir to insist on her right to
inherit his goods if this could save her from hardship or oppression
at the hands of her debtors. But is not this latter case exactly
similar to that of African Americans in the U.S.? Would they not save
themselves from hardship and oppression at the hands of their debtors
if they insisted on their right to inherit the reparation that was
owed their slave ancestors and never paid?
8. Supersession
Jeremy Waldron has objected to arguments for reparation for
“historic” injustices specifically Europeans’ theft
of Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the U.S. from their original
owners the Aborigines, Maori, and Native Americans (Waldron 1992:
4–28). His objection is that the historic wrongs of the
ancestors of the Europeans now in the territories have been
“superseded” (Waldron 1992: 24). Possibly the objection
can be raised against the inheritance argument for black
reparation.
Waldron uses the following example to illustrate what he means by
an historic wrong being superseded. Suppose he says that there are
plenty of water holes on the savanna and two groups P
and Q each have a waterhole, but

 motivated purely by greed, members of
group Q descend on the water hole possessed by group P
and insist on sharing that with them. (What’s more they do not
allow reciprocity; they do not allow members of P to share any
water hole that was legitimately in the possession of Q.) That
is an injustice. But then circumstances change, and all the water
holes of the territory dry up except the one that originally belonged
to P. The members of group Q are already sharing that
water hole on the basis of their earlier incursion. But now that
circumstances have changed, they are entitled to share the water hole;
so that their doing so no longer counts as an injustice. It is in fact
part of what justice requires. The initial injustice of Q
against P has been superseded by circumstances. (Waldron 1992:
25)
What does Waldron mean when he says that circumstances have changed
so that the initial injustice “has been superseded?” The
meaning his example suggests is that although the members of Q
acted unjustly when they first shared P’s water hole,
they do not act unjustly now when they share P’s water
hole; and this is because circumstances have changed. In the changed
circumstances the members of P and Q are now joint owners of the
waterhole. Waldron indicates that this follows from one of the
conditions Locke laid down as necessary for taking something as
property, the Lockean proviso, as Nozick famously put it (Nozick 1974:
175; Locke 1689: sec 27). According to the proviso the water hole used
to be P’s waterhole when circumstances were such that it
was permissible for P to make it is property. But circumstances
have changed so that it is no longer permissible for P to make
the waterhole his exclusive property. The present circumstances make
the waterhole the joint property of P and Q.
This argument seems persuasive if we suppose that the only
alternative to making the waterhole the joint property of P
and Q is for P to prevent Q from using its water
since it that case Q would die very painfully. But there are
other alternatives. Members of P (Ps) can generously
allow the members of Q (Qs) to use the water; or they
can sell the water to the members of Q; or they can
rent Q a piece of land next to the waterhole. These
alternatives may be ruled out by Locke’s apparent opposition to
arrangements that put some people in a position of extraordinary
dependence on others. For example he argued that a beggar has a
“right” to a portion of a rich man’s surplus when
she must have it in order to survive. If so the Qs must have
rights to an adequate supply of the water in P’s
waterhole. Otherwise if the Ps with ostensible generosity
allowed Qs to drink they could also have demanded demeaning
behavior from the Qs in exchange; or if they sold water to
the Qs they could raise its price as much as they liked; and so
on. But in any case there are alternatives to the joint ownership of
the waterhole by the Ps and Qs that do not turn
the Qs into P’s dependents. We could for example
divide the waterhole so that the Qs get an adequate supply of
water and are not dependent on the Ps.
In that case the entire case for supersession would seem to rest on
the Lockean proviso and its alleged prohibition of claiming unowned
stuff as property when there is not enough and as good left over for
others. I say “alleged prohibition” for it is not at all
clear that Locke’s words amount to such a prohibition. However I
will not dispute the issue because the supersession thesis fails even
if we allow the prohibition. To see this let us agree that
the Ps and Qs are now joint owners of the waterhole and
that the Ps cannot demand that the Qs depart leaving
them the waterhole’s sole owners. Our agreement does not imply
that we also agree that the Ps cannot demand reparation from
the Qs for the damages that the Qs earlier wrongly
caused them. That would be absurd because it implies that
the Ps and the Qs had always been joint owners of the
waterhole, but by assumption the Ps and Qs were not
always joint owners of the waterhole. In particular, by assumption,
the Ps were once the sole owners of the waterhole when
the Qs attacked them and stole their water. This foregoing
sketch is meant to parallel the case of the Europeans and native
peoples in New Zealand, Australia, and the Americas. For convenience
let us speak of the Europeans and the Maoris in New Zealand. We
concede that these two people are now the joint owners of the land
mass of New Zealand. The Maoris cannot demand that land mass back as
reparation because they are no longer its sole owners. They used to be
its sole owners, but circumstances have changed and now they are only
its joint owners. No one can demand that anyone leave. But that
concession does not make the injustice of the European conquest two
hundred years ago disappear into thin air. New Zealand may not now
belong exclusively to the Maori, but it once did, and when it did, the
Europeans did then injure them unjustly. If those injuries persist in
the Maoris’ descendants because the European conquerors and
their descendants did not make reparation to the original Maoris,
their descendants have rights to reparation against the
Europeans’ descendants for their injuries, even if they do not
have rights that the Europeans’ descendants leave New Zealand to
them. To put the point in a different way, the fact that restitution
is no longer possible and morally mandatory does not imply that
reparation is not still possible and morally mandatory. Restitution,
the return of a stolen item to its rightful owner, is often a part of
making reparation to the victim of the theft, but as I stressed
earlier it is neither necessary nor sufficient for such reparation. It
is not sufficient because if I steal your bicycle and then return it
to you, though I have made restitution I have not made reparation
since the damages you suffer as a result of my theft may be more that
the loss of the bicycle; and restitution the return of your bicycle
may not cancel, undo or erase the damages you suffered as a result of
my theft. And restitution is not necessary for reparation because
while the loss or destruction of a stolen item may make its
restitution impossible, it does not make reparation for the loss of
the item impossible or obligatory. If the bicycle I stole from you is
lost restitution is impossible. But it does not follow that reparation
is impossible. I can still make reparation to you by providing you
with the money to buy another one.
The distinction between restitution and reparation resolves another
case that Waldron presents us with evidently in order to weaken
sympathies for reparation for historic injustices. The case involves
the theft of a car that ends up years later the treasured possession
of the thief’s daughter who has no idea that it was stolen. In
the meantime the car’s original owner has eventually outgrown
his attachment to it and gotten many other cars. The inference that we
are invited to draw is that it would be wrong for him to compel the
thief’s daughter to return the car to him, given that she has
invested so much of her life in it and he has lost interest in
it. Perhaps; but just because it would be wrong of him to demand
restitution, it does not follow that it would be wrong of him to
demand reparation; that his rights to reparation are somehow
“superseded”. This is an entirely different question. The
owner may act wrongly in insisting on restitution; maybe he should
allow the thief daughter to keep the car. But it does not follow that
he cannot demand reparation from the thief for the losses he suffered
as a result of the theft of his car.
These results should make it obvious that the supersession argument
cannot nullify claims for reparation for historic injustices. To
consider the example of New Zealand, perhaps restitution of the land
mass of New Zealand to the Maori is out of the question. Perhaps
justice cannot demand that Europeans leave New Zealand to the
Maori. But it does not follow that justice does not demand that the
Europeans make reparation to the Maori for violating their rights and
injuring them when New Zealand belonged to them. Theft injures the
victim by depriving him of the thing that was stolen from him; but it
also injures him by depriving him of the benefits that he was going to
earn and enjoy because of his possession of that thing. For the
reasons we have surveyed he may lose his rights to restitution; the
thing for example may be lost or destroyed. But it does not follow
that he therefore also loses his rights to reparation. Arguments for
those rights have to deal with the various objections to historic
reparations reviewed in this entry, but they are not undone by the
supersession argument.