We are aware of our bodies. I see the world by opening my eyes and
in so doing, I feel the motion of my eyelid. I feel that my legs are
crossed and that my arm is raising. I feel tired and thirsty. I feel
cold. I feel my teeth begin to chatter. My back itches. The way we
relate to our body, including the way we perceive it, control it and
affectively react to what happens to it, is unlike the way we relate to
other objects.


Despite its richness, bodily awareness has attracted relatively little
attention from philosophers with the notable exception of
phenomenologists. Neuropsychologists and psychiatrists, however, have
confronted the multi-faceted phenomenology of bodily awareness through
a wide variety of disorders. In addition, the study of the body is now
crucial in cognitive neuroscience. Bodily illusions have raised a wide
range of philosophical questions about the underlying mechanisms of
bodily self-awareness. The notion of bodily awareness is at the crossroads of philosophical
debates on the self, perception, action and space. This entry will
focus on three main questions: (i) How does the awareness of one's body
differ from the awareness of other objects? (ii) What are the roles of
action and mental representations of the body for bodily
awareness? (iii) What makes us feel our body as our own? 
 
1. Characterizing bodily awareness


Bodily awareness may seem less rich and detailed than visual
awareness, which can be analysed as full of fine-grained colour shades
and well-individuated three-dimensional shapes that move around. All
we experience is this constant blurry fuzzy “feeling of the same
old body always there” (James, 1890, p. 242). Yet, as soon as we
pay attention to our body, we become aware of the position and
movements of our limbs, of the contact of our clothes on our skin, of
the muscle pain in our legs, of our feeling of thirst. It may be
difficult to describe what we feel, but what we feel can be so intense
that we are sometimes not able to think of anything else than our
body.
1.1 The phenomenology of bodily awareness


Although introspectively familiar, it is hard to exactly pinpoint the
nature of the specific relation that we have with our body. What makes
our body so special may be that unlike other physical objects, not
only do we perceive it through external senses, but we have also an
internal access to it through bodily sensations. One way to
characterize the relation that we have only with our body (or what we
experience as our body) is thus to say that only our body appears to
us from the inside. In contrast, many bodies, including our
own, can appear to us from the outside. The duality of access to our
body is best expressed in what is known as
the touchant-touché phenomenon. When we touch our knee
with our hand, we have a tactile experience of our knee from the
outside (touché), but we have also a tactile
experience of our knee from the inside (touchant), and the
same is true of the hand.


Despite the constant flow of information about our body from the
inside, our bodily awareness is surprisingly weak. While typing on a
laptop, we do not vividly experience our fingers on the keyboard. Our
conscious field is primarily occupied by the content of what we are
typing, and more generally by the external world rather than by the
bodily medium that allows us to perceive it and to move through it. We
use the body, but we rarely reflect upon it.The body has thus this
peculiar feature. It is always immediately present to the subject
(Merleau-Ponty, 1945; O’Shaughnessy, 1980), but the most permanent and
preponderant object in life may also be the most elusive one (Leder,
1990).


This is not to say, however, that we are completely unaware of our
body. Our attention can turn to our body for instance in acute
sensations of pain, or in motor learning. In addition, one may claim
that we are constantly conscious of the presence of our body, though at
the margin of the stream of consciousness. As James (1890, 242) says,
“Our own bodily position, attitude, condition, is one of the
things of which some awareness, however inattentive, invariably
accompanies the knowledge of whatever else we know.” Similarly,
Gurwitsch (1985, 31) asserts: “There is no moment in our
conscious life when we are completely unaware of our bodily posture, of
the fact that we are walking, standing, sitting, lying down”.


The question then arises: how detailed is marginal bodily awareness?
Are we constantly conscious of the body in all its details or only as
a unitary whole without any internal differentiation? At first sight,
bodily awareness seems to be reducible to an unarticulated
feeling. However, both James and Gurwitsch describe a more specific
phenomenology, not only global feelings of bodily presence,
but also particular sensations of bodily posture and
state. In The Will, O'Shaughnessy (1980) argues that in
order to act, we need to be pre-attentively conscious of all the
points of the body at any moment.  However, he later criticizes his
own view for lack of parsimony and plausibility (O'Shaughnessy,
1995). Instead, he suggests that we are permanently aware of our body
as an undifferentiated whole, except when acting. Actions then
automatically trigger a precise awareness of the bodily effectors,
while the other parts of the body recede in awareness. His latter
claim, however, raises another set of issues about the relationship
between bodily awareness and action (Wong, forthcoming), which will be
addressed in section 2.4. 
1.2 Sources of bodily awareness


One strategy to analyse the phenomenology of bodily awareness is to
track its origin. As said earlier, we perceive our body not only from
the outside, but also from the inside. Although widely accepted, the
distinction between the two experiential modes of presentation of the
body is rarely spelled out and often reduced to the dichotomy between
external senses and body senses, which include touch, proprioception,
the vestibular, the nociceptive and the interoceptive systems.

Touch is mediated by cutaneous mechanoreceptors. It carries
information both about the external world (shape of the touched object)
and about the body (pressure on the specific part of the skin) (Katz,
1925). Furthermore, touch is said to process many types of properties
including texture, temperature, solidity, humidity, contact, weight,
pressure, force, vibration, and so on.

Proprioception provides information about the position and movement
of the body. The mechanisms of proprioception include muscle spindles,
which are sensitive to muscle stretch, Golgi tendon organs, which are
sensitive to tendon tension, and joint receptors, which are sensitive
to joint position.


The vestibular system in the inner ear provides information about
the balance of the body. It includes three roughly orthogonal
semicircular canals, which are sensitive to motion acceleration as our
head moves in space, and two otolith organs, which are sensitive to the
pull of gravity.

Nociceptors respond to dangerously intense mechanical stimuli, to
mechanothermal stimuli or to thermal and chemical stimuli. According to
the dominant theory, noxious signals are inhibited, enhanced or
distorted by various factors via a gating mechanism at the level of the
spinal cord that controls the amount of signals from the periphery to
brain structures and via a central gating mechanism (Melzack and Wall,
1983).

Interoception provides information about the physiological condition
of the body in order to maintain optimal homeostasis, namely,
cardiovascular, respiratory, energy (feeding and glucose), and fluid
(electrolyte and water) balances. The parasympathetic system is
sensitive to mechanical, thermal, chemical, metabolic, and hormonal
status of skin, muscle, joints, teeth and viscera.


At the cortical level, tactile, proprioceptive and nociceptive signals
are processed in the primary and secondary somatosensory
cortex. Interestingly, the primary somatosensory area (SI) generally
follows the natural anatomical divisions of body parts, having
receptive fields confined to single fingers or limbs (Penfield and
Rasmussen, 1950; Blankenburg et al., 2003). Penfield and Boldrey
(1937) described the somatotopical organization of SI that associates
cortical areas to specific parts of the body surface resulting in the
metaphor of a “Homunculus”. The Homunculus, however, is a
distorted representation of the body. In particular, some body parts
are over-represented, whereas others are under-represented. For
instance, a relatively large cortical area responds to hand-related
signals and a relatively small cortical area responds to torso-related
signals. Furthermore, SI does not represent the anatomical contiguity
of body parts. For instance, the hand-specific area is next to the
face-specific area. In addition to the somatosensory cortex, the body
is represented at the level of several brain areas, including the
insula (for nociceptive and interoceptive signals), the extrastriate
and the fusiform body areas (for visual information about the body)
and the right parietal cortex (for multimodal representations of the
body) (Blanke et al., 2010; Craig, 2003; Berlucchi and Aglioti, 1997,
2010; Mancini et al., 2011).


Through body senses, one gains information about the body, which can
lead to bodily experiences of various types (Eilan et al. 1995). David Armstrong (1962)
proposes distinguishing bodily sensations, like pain and touch, which
are experienced as being located in a particular part of the body and
bodily feelings, like hunger, thirst and tiredness, which are
not. Within the category of bodily sensations, he then distinguishes
transitive bodily sensations, in which there is an object
independent of the sensations (for example, tactile sensations),
and intransitive bodily sensations, in which there does not
seem to be such an independent object (for example, tickles). Most of
the debate in philosophy has focused on intransitive bodily sensations
like pain (see the entry on Pain). By contrast, bodily feelings are
rarely mentioned in the philosophical literature, though recent work
in neuroscience on the interoceptive system posits them at the core of
bodily awareness and even of the self (Craig, 2003; Damasio,
1999; Seth, 2013).
1.3 Disorders of bodily awareness


Another way to analyse the phenomenology of bodily awareness is to
investigate the variety of bodily disorders. As reported by one
amputated soldier with a phantom leg, “I am more sure of the leg
which ain't than of the one that are” (in Mitchell, 1871,
566). As soon as one component of bodily awareness is disrupted, the
body is brought to the foreground of consciousness and one realizes
the complexity and the richness of the experience of the supposedly
‘same old body’. Bodily disorders are not rare, and can be
encountered in both neurological (after brain lesion, peripheral
lesion, migraine and epileptic seizure) and psychiatric conditions. By
analysing a few of those disorders, one may shed some light on what it
is like to feel embodied.

Out-of-body experience (cf. Blanke and Mohr, 2005). Some
individuals feel that they are located outside of their body, which
they can see often from an elevated location: “He felt as if he
were at the other end of the room, as if he were floating in space
below the ceiling in the corner facing the bed from where he could
observe his own body in the bed” (Lunn, 1970).
Supernumerary phantom limbs (cf. Miyazawa et al., 2004). After
brain lesions and in some psychiatric disorders, some people report
experiencing the presence of more than two legs and two arms:
“Examiner: How did you notice that you had a third arm? Patient:
The first time was when I had visitors in the hospital. I was waving
goodbye with my right hand and I thought it was strange, as they did
not wave back… And I moved my arm a second time, looking at it,
but did not see an arm” (In Staub et al., 2006, p. 2142).
Somatoparaphrenia (also called asomatognosia or alien hand sign,
cf. Vallar and Ronchi 2009; Feinberg, 2009). Following a brain lesion
or epileptic seizure, patients deny ownership of one of their limbs,
and can attribute it to another individual: “Examiner: Whose arm
is this? AR: It's not mine. Ex: Whose is it? AR: It's my
mother's. (…) Ex: So, where is your left arm? AR: It's under
there (indefinite gesture forwards).”  (In Bisiach et al., 1991,
p. 1030).
Alice in Wonderland syndrome. Some individuals suffering from
migraine aura vividly experience their body parts as growing in size
(i.e. macrosomatognosia) or as shrinking (i.e. microsomatognosia):
“Sometimes I feel ‘real tall’—and I'm only
five feet two! I'll feel weird and tall, and walk into my kitchen and
feel like my head is going to hit the ceiling and like I'm towering
over the countertops.” (alt.support.headaches.migraine, cool
aura page, February 2, 2000—see the Other Internet
Resources).
Peripheral deafferentation (cf. Cole and Paillard, 1995). After
rare acute neuropathy, some patients lose all tactile and
proprioceptive information on their body. They no longer know where
their limbs are without looking at them: “IW: I looked where my
legs were before I started. I looked where my arms were. I looked
where my body was and then I started to sit-up very gradually. And I
was so euphoric at having sat-up for the first time that I almost fell
out the bed because I lost the concentration” (Rawlence and
Crichton-Miller 1998).

Anosognosia for hemiplegia (cf. Vallar and Ronchi, 2006;
Vuilleumier, 2004). Although paralyzed, patients experience that they
can move and that their body is immediately available to carry any
action they may intend. “N: Could you go surfing on the sea
should you wish to do so? NS: Why not, if the wind is strong
enough” (Cocchini et al., 2002, p. 2031).



These are only a few examples of the many ways bodily awareness can be
distorted (see Vignemont, 2010 for a comprehensive list of bodily
disorders). Each of them highlights some aspects of ordinary
phenomenology of bodily awareness, which normally remain dim and
elusive. To experience one's body is to experience one's body as a
whole in a specific location in the external space, which constitutes
the centre of one's visuo-spatial perspective on the world
(cf. out-of-body experience). To experience one's body is to
experience from the inside the presence of parts of one's body
(cf. supernumerary limbs). To experience one's body is to experience
the body parts as one's own, as part of oneself (cf.
somatoparaphrenia). To experience one's body is to experience the
shape and size of the body parts (cf. Alice in Wonderland
syndrome). To experience one's body is to experience the posture and
the location of the body parts (cf. deafferentation). To
experience one's body is to experience the limbs immediately available
to carry any movement one may intend to perform (cf. anosognosia for
hemiplegia).
2. Theories of bodily awareness


In the philosophical literature on bodily awareness, one can
distinguish two main approaches. These can be called the
representationalist approach and the sensorimotor approach. They both
give a privileged significance to bodily awareness and they share the
same interest in pathological disorders, action and the spatiality of
bodily experiences. The claims they respectively defend, however, are
different in both their methodology and their content. Whereas the
representationalist approach is mainly anchored in analytic
philosophy, the sensorimotor approach is mainly anchored in the
phenomenological tradition. Whereas the former posits mental
representation(s) of the body at the core of bodily awareness, the
latter highlights the importance of interacting with the world.
2.1 The representationalist approach


Until the end of the 19th century, bodily awareness was typically
understood in terms of a bundle of internal bodily sensations. Bonnier
(1905) first introduced the term schema to refer to the spatial
organization of these bodily sensations. But it was only in Head and
Holmes (1911)'s fundamental paper (discussed in the next section)
that one finds the first systematic analysis of the way(s) the brain
represents the body. They initiated what might be called the
representationalist approach to bodily awareness (e.g.,
O'Shaughnessy, 1980; Vignemont and Massin, 2015;
Carruthers, 2008; Longo and Haggard, 2010).


Proponents of the representationalist approach claim that in order
to account for bodily awareness one needs to appeal to mental
representations of the body. On a minimal definition of the notion of
representation, a body representation is an internal structure that has
the function to track the state of the body and encode it, that can
misrepresent it and that can be decoupled from it.


Interestingly, a large number of the representationalist advocates
argue that there is more than one type of body representations,
leading to several taxonomies of body representations. But before
describing them, let us consider the motivations to posit the
existence of body representation(s).
2.1.1 Why body representations?


Three main reasons have been offered to explain why bodily awareness
might require body representation(s). The first reason finds its
origin in disturbances of bodily awareness. Most of the literature on
body representation can be found in patient studies (Schilder, 1935;
Lhermitte, 1942; Cole and Paillard, 1995, Schwoebel and Coslett, 2005;
Sirigu et al. 1991). With the help of the notion of body
representation, and thus of body misrepresentation, one can easily
explain how the way the body is experienced can be at odds with the
physical reality of the body. Phantom limbs may be one of the clearest
expressions of the existence of body representations (Schilder, 1935;
Hilti and Brugger, 2010). Patients feel the presence of their
amputated limb because the physically missing limb is still
represented. On the other hand, the body can be physically intact
while its representation is impaired. For instance, patients with
autotopagnosia are not able to correctly identify the parts of their
body. According to Schwoebel and Coslett (2005), autotopagnosia
results from a deficit of the representation that normally encodes
spatial and functional relations among body parts (i.e. body
structural description). Most bodily disorders are thus interpreted in
terms of disruption of representations of the body.


The second reason focuses on the spatial organization of bodily
awareness (Bonnier, 1905; O'Shaughnessy, 1980, 1995; Vignemont, 2014a). Over an
extended period, all bodily experiences share the same spatial content
of the structural shape of the body. To account for this commonality,
O'Shaughnessy posits the existence of a long-term body image
(similar to the notion of body structural description) that plays a
structural role in spatially shaping bodily experiences. Consequently,
if the long-term body image is distorted, if it represents, for instance,
an octopus-shaped body, if it represents a part that no longer exists
like an amputated limb or if it represents an artificial extension like
a cane, then one can have bodily experiences in one's tentacle,
phantom limb or at the tip of the cane.


The last reason to postulate body representation is to account for
our ability to move our body. In order to act,
one needs to know where one's limbs are and how far they can
reach. However, on the Perception-Action model of vision
(Milner and Goodale, 1995, 2008), it has been suggested that what is
needed for action is different in many respects from what is needed for
bodily experiences. If so, action may recruit a specific type of body
representation, which is encoded in a sensorimotor format (Paillard,
1999; Djikerman and de Haan, 2007; Vignemont, 2010).
2.1.2 How many body representations?


There is therefore more than one reason to posit the existence of
body representations. However, these reasons may also be a source of
difficulty for the representationalist approach, as they lead to posit
a multiplicity of body representations. Clearly, one single body
representation cannot suffice to account for the variety of bodily
disorders and for the variety of aspects of bodily awareness. There
needs to be more, but how many? Two? Three? Four?


The first taxonomy was offered by Head and Holmes (1911). They
distinguished between three types of body
representations. The postural schema encodes the relative
position of body parts after each movement.  The superficial
schema is the model of the skin surface of the body used for
localizing bodily sensations. The two body schemata are “before
they enter consciousness” (p. 187). In contrast, the body
image is when “recognizable change enters into
consciousness” (p. 187). Head and Holmes's complex taxonomy,
however, was soon forgotten. For a long time, the terms of body schema
and body image were indifferently used (see for instance Schilder,
1935). As for the fine-grained distinction between postural and
superficial schema, it has completely disappeared.  Nonetheless, since
the eighties there has been a renewal of interest for distinguishing
various types of body representation (O'Shaughnessy, 1980; Paillard,
1980; Gallagher, 1986), although there is little agreement, neither on
the way to individuate the distinct types of body representations, nor
on their precise number (for review, see Vignemont, 2010). One can
distinguish at least three main taxonomies.


The temporal dyadic taxonomy (O'Shaughnessy, 1980; Carruthers, 2008)
is based on the dynamics of body representations. One can contrast the
representation of long-term bodily properties such as limb size and
the representation of short-term bodily properties such as limb
posture. Long-term body representations are relatively stable in
adulthood. They may include some innate components that carry
information about the structure of the human body (for example,
two-arm/two-leg). On the other hand, short-term body representations
are constantly updated on the basis of afferent and efferent
information.


The functional dyadic taxonomy (Paillard, 1999; Dijkerman and de Haan,
2007; Vignemont, 2010) is based on the functional role played by each
body representations. The underlying assumption is that the way one
uses information about the body determines the way the information is
encoded. It draws a distinction between the body image and the body
schema on the Perception-Action model of vision. The body schema is
used for action planning and action control.  It consists in
sensorimotor representations of bodily properties that are relevant
for action. The body image groups all the other representations about
the body that are not used for action, whether they are perceptual,
conceptual or emotional (Gallagher, 1995).


The triadic taxonomy (Schwoebel & Coslett 2005; Sirigu et
al. 1991) introduces another way to take apart the various types of
body representations, which is based on their format. This new
criterion leads to a three-fold distinction: sensorimotor body
representation (also called body schema), visuospatial body
representation (also called body structural description) and conceptual
body representation (also called body semantics).


The taxonomies can be conceived as more orthogonal than contradictory. The
problem, however, is that they result in opposite interpretations of
the very same bodily disorders. For instance, personal neglect (i.e.
lack of exploration of half of the body) has been interpreted as
resulting from a deficit of body schema (Coslett, 1998), from a deficit
of body image (Gallagher, 1995), or of attention
(Kinsbourne, 1995). Furthermore, although most taxonomies rely on
neuropsychological dissociations, it does not seem likely that they can
account for all bodily disorders. Even three types of body
representation might not suffice to explain all the possible
dissociations. On the other hand, one may wish to avoid a
quasi-infinite list of body representations.


Some may then conclude that the project of individuating distinct
types of body representations is a “slippery issue”
(Holmes & Spence, 2005, p. 16) that should be avoided. But should
we then give up the notion of body representation itself or merely the
enterprise of classifying distinct body representations?  We shall see
now an alternative approach, the sensorimotor approach to bodily
awareness, which favors the most radical solution.
2.2 The sensorimotor approach


Although strongly influenced by Husserl (1913) and by Gurwitsch
(1985), the most comprehensive treatment of the phenomenology of
bodily awareness within the sensorimotor approach can be found in
Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception (1945) (see Carman, 1999
for a systematic comparison between Husserl's and Merleau-Ponty's
views of bodily awareness). The sensorimotor view can be articulated
into three related claims: (i) the body is not an object that can be
represented; (ii) the presence of the body is the presence of the body
in the world, and (iii) the body we experience is the body in
action. By positing action at the core of bodily awareness,
Merleau-Ponty initiated a long tradition of phenomenological
investigation of bodily awareness (Henri, 1965; de Preester, 2007;
Gallagher, 2005; Legrand, 2006; Mishara, 2004; Thompson, 2005; Zahavi
and Parnas, 1998), as well as the recent sensorimotor theories of
consciousness (O'Regan and Noë, 2001; O'Regan, 2011; Noë, 2004; Hurley,
1998; Thompson, 2005).
2.2.1 The lived body


“The body is not one more among external objects” (MP,
1945, 92). Merleau-Ponty draws the distinction between the objective
body made of muscles, bones and nerves and the lived body, that is,
the body that we experience in pre-reflective awareness. He argues
that the lived body is not an object that can be perceived from
various perspectives, left aside or localized in objective space. It
cannot even be represented because, on his view, representing the body
necessarily involves adopting an objective stance on the lived
body. The objectified body could then no longer anchor the way we
perceive the world. Further criticisms against the notion of
representation can be found in the most radical versions of the more
recent embodied approach (Thelen and Smith, 1994; Turvey and Carello,
1995; van Gelder, 1995; Gallagher, 2008). On their views,
representations are inadequate because they are too costly and they
are unnecessary because they can be easily replaced by sensorimotor
loops .


Instead of body representations, Merleau-Ponty appeals to the notion
of action to account for the lived body. The lived body is understood
in terms of its practical engagement with the world. The bodily space
is a space of actions endowed with existential meanings, of ways of
existing towards objects. The body schema therefore consists in a
sensorimotor function rather than a sensorimotor
representation (Gallagher, 2005). The unity of the lived body derives
from comprehensive bodily purposes. The action needs not be performed,
but can remain virtual movements, what Siewert (2005) calls bodily
know-how (i.e. practical knowledge of how to act with or towards a
part of one's body). In Merleau-Ponty's words, the lived body consists
in an “I can” (p. 137). He illustrates his view with a
series of dissociations between the lived body and the objective
body. For instance, the patient Schneider was unable to localize where
a mosquito was stinging him, and yet, was able to scratch his leg
where he was stung (it was later found that this patient faked part of
his symptoms, for details see Goldenberg, 2003). As for phantom limbs,
Merleau-Ponty interprets them as resulting from the preserved
readiness to move the amputated limbs.


Merleau-Ponty argues in favor of the constitutive role of action for
consciousness in general. As such, he can be considered as one of the
ancestors of the recent sensorimotor approach, which elevates the
importance of bodily interactions with the world in explaining
cognitive activities. On this view, conscious experiences are
inseparable from bodily activities or from sensorimotor expectations
(Siewert, 2005; O'Regan and Noë, 2001; Noë, 2004; Hurley,
1998; Thompson, 2005; O'Regan, 2011). Hence, what we feel is said to
be determined by what we do and what we know how to do. More
specifically, perceptual experiences constitutively depend on our
ability to keep track of the interdependence between sensory inputs
and motor outputs, this ability being grounded in the procedural
knowledge of how the way one moves affects the sensory signals that
one receives (or how the movement of objects affects these
signals). Although vision has received the most attention, the
sensorimotor approach is more likely to be true of tactile experiences
than those of any other senses. Noë (2004, 1) even starts his
book Action in perception by claiming “All perception
is touch-like”. O’Regan (2011, 157-158) also proposed to account
for bodily experiences in sensorimotor terms: “For example, when
something tickles you on your arm, you can move your other hand and
scratch the tickled location (…) What we mean by feeling something in
a particular place in our bodies is precisely that certain
sensorimotor laws apply”. 
2.2.2 To what extent does bodily experiences require action?


That the body that we experience from the inside differs from the
physical body is hardly controversial. The notion of representation
actually enables such a decoupling. The representationalist approach
is also compatible with the hypothesis that the body is not
experienced like an object among others. In this sense, one could say
that the representationalist approach and the sensorimotor approach
agree on the notion of the lived body. But in this sense
only. According to the representationalist view, the lived body can be
an intentional object without being transformed into an object among
others. Subjectivity is not incompatible with intentionality. 


Another problem that the sensorimotor approach faces concerns the role
of action. Actions are encoded within an egocentric spatial frame of
reference, which is centred on the agent’s body. But can such a
reference frame suffice to account for the felt location of bodily
experiences? When I feel something tickling my arm, I feel it as being
located in a specific area of my arm, and if I move my arm, I still
feel it at the same location. Yet the egocentric coordinates of my arm
have changed. It thus seems that sensorimotor knowledge is not encoded
in the right kind of spatial frame to account for the bodily location
of sensations (Vignemont, 2014b).


Another difficulty comes from empirical dissociations between action
and bodily awareness, which indicate that sensorimotor knowledge is
neither necessary nor sufficient for bodily experiences (Vignemont,
2011). If bodily awareness consisted in bodily know-how, then one
could not have one without the other. However, it has been recently
found that the possession of accurate bodily know-how does not
guarantee that one consciously feels touch or feels where the touch
occurs (Paillard et al., 1983; Anema et al., 2009). For instance,
patients with numbsense have no tactile awareness, but retain a
surprising ability to point to where they were touched: “But, I
don't understand that. You put something there; I do not feel anything
and yet I got there with my finger. How does that happen?”
(Paillard et al., 1983, p. 550). The Rubber Hand Illusion as well
indicates that bodily know-how can be at odds with bodily
experiences. Botvinick and Cohen (1998) found that if one looks at a
rubber hand, while one’s own hand is hidden, and both the rubber and
the real hands are synchronously stroked, one locates one’s hand as
being at a location that is closer to the rubber hand than it is to
one's actual hand. Proponents of the sensorimotor approach might argue
that one feels one’s hand to be closer to the rubber hand because one
is misleadingly induced to expect that if one reaches the location
close to the rubber hand, one will touch one’s own hand. However, it
was found that participants accurately grasped the stimulated hand
with their opposite hand at its real location, and not at the illusory
location that they reported (Kammers et al., 2009).


Proponents of the sensorimotor approach may deny that bodily know-how,
as displayed in these tasks, includes the type of actions that are
constitutive of bodily experiences (Noë, 2010). This answer
assumes that there are two types of bodily know-how, only one of which
constitutively linked to bodily experiences. Proponents of the
sensorimotor approach then need to clarify and defend their
distinction at the conceptual level (how does one draw the line
between the ‘right’ bodily know-how and the
‘wrong’ bodily know-how?) and at the empirical level (is
there evidence of dissociation between two types of bodily
know-how?).
2.3 A milder sensorimotor approach


The difficulties that the most radical version of the sensorimotor
approach faces does not entail that action plays no role for bodily
awareness. As noted by Schilder (1935, p. 112), “we do not know
much about the body unless we move it”. One can then propose
various compromises between the representationalist approach and the
sensorimotor approach. One can, for example, argue that action plays a
causal role in calibrating body representations. During the first few
years of our life, we learn about our body through action and
self-exploration (Rochat, 1998). We later update our body
representation while moving. For instance, after tool use we include
the spatial and functional parameters of the tool in the representation
of our body (Cardinali et al., 2009). Hence, action intervenes at many
stages to inform us about our body.


The question then is whether this role of action gives a motor
format to the representation of the body that is exploited for bodily
awareness. This hypothesis seems especially intuitive in the case of
kinaesthetic experiences (Wong, 2009) and in the case of pain (Klein,
2007, 2015; Hall, 2008; Martinez, 2011). Because of its motivational
dimension, it has indeed been suggested that pain has an
imperative content. According to the imperative view, pain
does not correspond to the perception of bodily damage; rather it
prescribes actions to perform. Although appealing in its general shape,
the imperative theory is more problematic when it comes to the details.
What actions does pain prescribe? It seems that there are so many
possible pain-related behaviors that there is risk losing the unity of
the feeling of painfulness (for discussion see Bain, 2011; Jacobson, 2013).


Another mild sensorimotor approach consists in claiming that bodily
experiences are structured by the representation of bodily
affordances, that is, of body parts described in terms of
movements they afford (Alsmith, 2012; McDowell, 2011;
O’Shaughnessy, 1980; Brewer, 1995; Bermúdez, 2005; Smith,
2009). On this view, when I feel the contact of the table on my
arm, I feel it on the body part that can do such and such movements.
Unlike the imperative view, this hypothesis does not imply that I will
automatically perform the movements. But if I were to react, and
retrieve my arm for instance, I would not need to translate the
location of my sensation to a motor format to plan the movement because
where I feel the table is already encoded in a motor format. The
question for this mild sensorimotor approach is then twofold. First,
what is the nature of what O’Shaughnessy (1980) calls a practical
photograph of the body? Despite the frequent invocation of
action-centred representations (or something similar), little work has
been devoted to the articulation of the core features that distinguish
them from other forms of representation. Second, is such an
action-centred representation sufficient to account for the focality of
the localization of our bodily experiences (e.g., pinprick right here
on my arm)?
2.4 To what extent does action require bodily experiences?


According to the sensorimotor approach, bodily awareness requires
action. But one may be tempted to make the opposite claim and argue
that action requires bodily awareness (O’Shaughnessy, 2000).
Action requires detailed information about the long-term and short-term
properties of the bodily effectors. But does the information need to
reach the threshold of awareness, even at the margin? Several empirical
results cast some doubts on the necessity of kinaesthetic experiences
for action control (Wong, forthcoming). First, deafferented subjects
who have no kinaesthetic and tactile awareness of their body retain
their ability to control their movements as long as they receive visual
feedback. Second, even healthy subjects have limited awareness of the
details of their bodily movements and rely more on visual information
(Fourneret and Jeannerod, 1998). Third, as described earlier with the
Rubber Hand Illusion, action can be immune to bodily illusions (Kammers
et al., 2009). Fourth, action requires fast processing of information,
whereas bodily awareness takes time. Hence, kinaesthetic experiences do
not seem to be necessary for action. The body is not always immediately
present in all its details to the subject, even when acting. Yet as
Descartes pointed out, we are not like pilots in a ship. The difference
indeed is that we are able to feel our ship from the inside. Hence,
there must still be a connection, still to be explored, between our
capacity to act directly with our body and our capacity to feel our
body from the inside (Wong, forthcoming).
3. Bodily awareness and perception


Is bodily awareness a kind of perceptual awareness? In other words, am
I aware of my body in the same way as I am aware of the sea in front
of me? One difference is that I see and hear the sea, but I am aware
of my body from the inside thanks to the body senses, which go beyond
the classic five senses. Yet, if those body senses behave like sensory
systems that lead to perceptual experiences, then there seems to be
little difference between my awareness of the sea and my awareness of
my body. Another way for bodily awareness to be perceptual would be if
it resulted not only from information conveyed by body senses, but
also from information conveyed by more classic sensory modalities,
including vision and audition. The literature on bodily awareness
often takes for granted the fact that our bodily experiences are
exclusively based on body senses. However, this view neglects the
essential role that vision plays in our bodily experiences, which has
been recently revealed by the experimental literature on multisensory
interactions.
3.1 Do bodily experiences qualify as perceptual experiences?


Many debates on bodily experiences concern their perceptual nature.
The perceptual debate has been the most vivid in the case of pain (see
Aydede, 2006), but it can be raised for other bodily experiences as
well (Gallagher, 2003). There are at least five worries that may
disqualify bodily experiences from being perceptual. First, not all
body senses are under voluntary control. I cannot decide to
proprioceive my body or to check my glycaemia. Second, they rarely
give rise to distinct conscious experiences. For instance, both the
interoceptive and the vestibular system are continuously active even
at rest, but we are not continuously aware of the state of our viscera
and of gravity. Third, it has been argued that bodily sensations do
not contribute to bodily knowledge (Anscombe, 1962; McDowell,
2011). Fourth, some bodily experiences, like pain but also
interoceptive feelings (e.g., hunger), seem subjective and
incorrigible. Fifth, body senses may appear as giving access only to a
single object, namely our own body.


However, some of the worries outlined above may just evaporate if one
gives up theories of perception that treat vision as the paradigm of
sense perception (Shoemaker, 1994, for instance). Actually, it is even
controversial that every external sense, including olfaction for
example, meets all the constraints posited by visuo-centric models.
Other worries may be unjustified. It is false to assume that all body
senses convey facts only about one's body (Gallagher, 2003; Bermudez,
1998; Schwenkler, 2013). For instance, the vestibular system encodes
the motion of the head relative to the outside world. Another
question is whether one should analyse the object of the body senses
at the level of the sensory receptors or at the representational
level. For instance, nociceptive receptors are restricted to one's
body, but recent results in social neuroscience show that the same
cortical representations are used when one’s body is injured and when
another’s body is injured (Singer et al., 2004). Such interpersonal
representations may cast doubt on the sole object view of the body
senses (Vignemont, 2014c).


At this stage, it may be useful to appeal to Armstrong's
classification to articulate the perceptual debate of bodily
experiences. Transitive bodily sensations are the easiest to account
for in perceptual terms. It is generally accepted that we have a
perceptual sense of touch, bodily posture, movement, and of balance
(Armstrong, 1962; Bermudez, 1998; Martin, 1995). Intransitive bodily
sensations, like pain, are more of a problem (Aydede, 2009), though
Armstrong himself defends a perceptual view of all bodily sensations.
Finally, bodily feelings seem to be the most resistant to a perceptual
account.
3.2 The importance of vision for bodily experiences


Classically, one draws a contrast between bodily awareness and visual
awareness of the body. Vision does indeed give access to our own body
as well as to many other bodies and we can fail to visually recognize
the body that we see as our own. Most literature on visual awareness
of the body is restricted to the analysis of face recognition in
mirror, and its possible failures. However, the discovery of the
Rubber Hand Illusion, along with other recent empirical findings on
multisensory interaction, raises new fascinating questions about the
consequences of seeing one's body for bodily experiences. In
particular, it has encouraged psychologists and neuroscientists to
study proprioception and touch no longer in isolation but in their
interaction with vision. The Rubber Hand Illusion indeed results from
the incorrect integration of somatosensory information and visual
information about the rubber hand. It can be explained by three major
facts about the sensory systems. First, optimal estimates of bodily
properties require combination of information from various sensory
channels. Second, vision can dominate over proprioception and touch
because it often offers more accurate and precise spatial information
(Welch and Warren, 1980). Third, visual information can affect the
phenomenal content of bodily experiences. What we feel is
determined not only by information from body senses, but also by
information from external senses.


The various ways bodily experiences are affected by visual information
are too many to be listed here. Let me just mention a few effects. For
instance, viewing the body part that is touched (without viewing the
touching object) enhances tactile acuity and accuracy (Tipper et al.,
1998; Kennett et al., 2001). The mere presence of visual information
can suffice to induce bodily experiences (Durgin et al.,
2007). However, if visual information is incongruent one way or the
other with tactile experiences, or if they are in competition for
attentional resources, then it can be detrimental to tactile acuity
and accuracy (Di Pellegrino et al., 1997; Spence et al., 2004). A last
striking example comes from individuals with mirror-touch
synaesthesia, who experience tactile sensations on their body when
they see another individual being touched (Blakemore et al.,
2005).


What are the implications of these multisensory effects for bodily
awareness? Philosophers have become only recently interested in
multimodality (O'Callaghan, 2011; Macpherson, 2011; Spence and Bayne,
2015; Hill and Bennett, 2014). There is still little agreement on the
way to define it. In particular, one must be careful to distinguish
between perceptual, attentional and cognitive multimodality, though
they can come together. Distinctions need also to be made between
conversion effects (i.e. recoding into the format of another modality)
and convergence effects (i.e. recoding in a common amodal format) and
between short-term and long-term effects. With the help of this
preliminary conceptual grid, one can determine to what extent and in
what manners bodily experiences are constitutively multimodal (de
Vignemont, 2014a). This requires not only analysing the experimental
literature on visuo-somatosensory effects, but also comparing bodily
experiences in sighted and blind individuals (for experimental results
in blind people, see Kinsbourne and Lempert, 1980; Röder et al.,
2004; Yoshimura et al., 2010; Goldreich and Kanics, 2003; Petkova et
al., 2012). One may then conclude that bodily awareness would not be
the same if one were blind.
4. The spatiality of bodily awareness


In Armstrong's classification, bodily feelings such as thirst are not
ascribed to a specific part of the body, though they can be associated
to localized sensations (e.g., sensation of dryness in the throat). By
contrast, bodily sensations are spatially ascribed at more or less
determinate body locations, which can be reported and acted upon. For
instance, when you feel your legs crossed, you are aware of (i) a
specific bodily property (e.g., posture) and (ii) the part of the body
where the property is instantiated (e.g., legs). More formally, one
might distinguish the descriptive component and the spatial component
of bodily sensations (Bermudez, 1998; Dokic, 2003). The spatial
component, however, displays puzzling features, which do not seem to
be captured by typical treatments of spatiality. What grounds the
spatiality of bodily awareness? And in which spatial frames of
reference is the body experienced?
4.1 The peculiarity of the spatiality of bodily sensations


As Merleau-Ponty (1945, 98) warns, “ordinary spatial relations
do not cross” the experience of the space of the body. It seems
indeed that the way we experience bodily space does not follow some
basic spatial rules. For instance, the pain that I feel in my thumb is
not felt in my mouth when my thumb is in my mouth (Block, 1983). Nor
does it seem to make sense to claim that the pain in my thumb is far
from the pain in my foot. How can one envisage accounting for bodily
space in terms of Cartesian reference frame when one cannot provide a
center of this frame, nor suggest axes on which one could compute
distances and directions (Bermudez, 1998, 2005)? The problem affects
not only intransitive sensations like pain, but also transitive
sensations like tactile sensations, which have their own
peculiarities. For instance, according to Martin (1992), touch has no
unified tactile field equivalent to the visual field (see also
Richardson, 2011; Hopkins, 2011).


One may conclude that the claim that one feels pain in the finger
does not indicate the location of the sensation, but rather the state
of the finger (Noordhof, 2001). It becomes then questionable whether
bodily sensations themselves are intrinsically spatial. There is indeed
a long tradition initiated in the 19th century by psychologists such as
Wundt, Titchener and James, which denies “that there can be in a
sensation any element of actual locality, any tone as it were which
cries to us immediately and without further ado, ‘I am
here’, or ‘I am there’” (James, 1890, p. 798). But if
spatial ascription does not derive from the spatial content of bodily
sensations themselves, then what is at its origin? According to the
Local sign theory, each sensible nerve gives rise to its own
characteristic sensation that is specific to the body part that is
stimulated. Alternatively, according to behaviorist theories, the
‘place’ of the sensation is the part of the body towards
which one has the disposition to act like scratching (see for instance
Anscombe, 1962)


However, both views suffers from several serious flaws, including
the absence of qualitative differences between sensations in distinct
body parts (Holly, 1986; O'Shaughnessy, 1980; Margolis, 1966;
Coburn, 1966) and the failure to account for sensations in phantom
limbs (Baier, 1964). It is thus hard to explain spatial ascription of
bodily sensations if bodily sensations are not intrinsically
spatial.


By contrast, representational theories seem to fare better in their
account of the spatial peculiarities of bodily sensations (Tye, 1995,
2002). On this view, bodily sensations have a spatial intentional
content that represents the sensations (or the cause of the
sensations) as being located in a part of the body. In intentional
contexts, co-referential terms cannot safely be substituted. This
explains, for instance, why the pain in my thumb is not felt in my
mouth though my thumb is in my mouth.
4.2 Dual spatial content
Another spatial peculiarity of bodily sensations is their dual
frames of reference. If bodily sensations were ascribed only to parts
of our body, then our bodily posture would make no difference for our
bodily experiences. No matter whether our hands are crossed or not, we
are touched on the right hand. However, experimental studies have
found that posture does make a difference. When our hands are crossed
and one hand is touched after the other, we have difficulties in
judging which hand was touched first, (Yamamoto and Kitazawa,
2001). Bodily sensations thus seem to be located relative to two
distinct frames of reference, which can be in conflict (e.g., the
touch on your left hand is represented on the right). In
O’Shaughnessy’s (1980) terms, we experience sensations
“at-a-part-of-body-at-a-point-in-body-relative-space”. In
Bermudez’s (2005) terms, bodily sensations have both A-location
(i.e. bodily frame of reference independent of the posture of the
body) and B-location (i.e. external frame relative to the posture of
the body).

A-location involves mastering a kind of folk anatomy that
segments the body into categorical parts such as hand, foot, leg, and
so forth. But is folk anatomy really necessary for spatial ascription
of bodily sensations (see debate between Vesey, 1964 and Margolis,
1966)? Furthermore, how do we individuate body parts (Vignemont et
al., 2005)? Are body parts individuated on the basis of their visual
features like geons (Andersen, 1978; Biederman, 1987; Brown, 1976)? Or
on the basis of their functional salience like joints (Cholewiak and
Collins, 2003; Morrison & Tversky, 2005; Bermudez, 1998; Vignemont
et al., 2008)? Interestingly, recent cross-cultural studies have shown
that linguistic categorization of body parts can vary
substantially. For instance, a single term can refer to the whole
upper limb with no distinction between hand and arm (Majid et al.,
2006). We still know very little of the origins of what seems like one
of the most basic experiences, namely, that we feel touch on the
hand.

B-location can be conceived in egocentric terms (Evans, 1985;
Brewer, 1995).  But what is the relationship between the egocentric
frame exploited by bodily sensations and the egocentric frame
exploited by visual experiences of external objects. Are they one and
the same? And if so, in what sense is the spatiality of our bodily
sensations different from the spatiality of the experiences of other
objects? Marcel (2003) argues that we can interact with external
objects because we represent our body and the world within the same
frame. However, it seems highly unlikely that we localize our
sensations in the external space in the same way that we localize
objects. In particular, it does not seem that we are aware of the
touch on our hand because we are aware that it is at such location in
the external space where our hand happens to be (Holly, 1986;
O’Shaughnessy, 1980; Brewer, 1995). Rather, B-location is derivative
from A-location (Bermudez, 2005).
4.3 Peripersonal space


A last peculiarity of the spatiality of bodily awareness should be
noted. One may believe that our representation of the world is
structured under a binary mode. There is the bodily self and then
there is the rest of the world. One may also believe that the bodily
self has clear boundaries, boundaries that are those of one’s
body. However, both conceptions have been recently revealed as
misleading. Between the self and the external space, there is a small
zone in which boundaries are blurred. What is close to the body is
indeed directly relevant for the self and yet outside bodily
boundaries. Neuroscientific evidence of the special processing of the
zone surrounding the body has been found in 1981 by Rizzolatti and his
colleagues. They found that some neurons were activated both by
tactile stimuli and by visual stimuli presented in the space close to
the body of a monkey. They coined the term of peripersonal space to
refer to this multisensory spatial area.


Since then, numerous studies in monkeys and humans, both in healthy
and pathological conditions, have shown that peripersonal space is
represented in a special way in the brain (for review, see Brozzoli et
al., 2012). Those findings raise new philosophical puzzles about
perception, space, self-awareness and social cognition, which remains
to be solved (Fulkerson, 2014; Vignemont and Iannetti, 2015). Here is
a sample of questions. What is the relationship
between the perception of peripersonal space on the one hand, and
action and emotion on the other hand? Do peripersonal representations
contribute to bodily self-awareness? What differences peripersonal
space makes for social interaction?
5. The sense of body ownership


Not only am I aware that I am touched on the hand, but I am aware that
I am touched on my hand, and on nobody else's
hand. Interestingly, although most of the time I feel my own
biological body as my own, the sense of ownership (i.e. I am aware
that the hand is mine) can sometimes be at odds with the fact of body
ownership (i.e. the hand is mine), like in some bodily illusions and
in syndromes of bodily alienation. One may then ask: what does it mean
to feel one’s body as one’s own? What distinguishes a body part felt
as one’s own from a body part felt as alien? The debate on the sense
of bodily ownership has been structured along two main issues. First,
is there a feeling of ownership (i.e. positive phenomenology of
“mineness”) in addition to the judgment of ownership? In a
nutshell, one can defend either an eliminativist view (i.e. no
experience of ownership, cf. Bermudez, 2011), or a reductionist view
(i.e. experience of ownership that can be reduced to other properties
of bodily experiences, cf. Martin, 1995; Dokic, 2003; Vignemont, 2007,
forthcoming), or an inflationary view (i.e. an irreducible experience
of ownership, cf. Gallagher, 2005). According to the reductionist
conception, the feeling of body ownership has its source in some more
fundamental facts about bodily awareness. This raises the second main
issue: which facts are relevant, and how can they ground the sense of
body ownership?
5.1 The phenomenology of mineness


What is it like to feel one’s body as one’s own? But first, does it
feel like anything? According to Bermudez (2011, 2015), there is no
feeling of mineness, which goes over and above the mere experience of
the physical properties of the body, no distinctive positive
phenomenology of ownership as such. Bermudez, (2011, 2015) applies to
the sense of ownership Anscombe’s (1962) argument on knowledge of
bodily position (see also McDowell, 2011). He argues that like
sensations of position, experiences of ownership cannot be
independently describable, and thus cannot ground judgments of
ownership. He then concludes that one does not feel one’s
body as one’s own (for another cognitive account of the sense of
bodily ownership, see Alsmith forthcoming).


By contrast, Peacocke (2014) and Vignemont (2007, 2013) claim that
there is an experiential component to the sense of bodily
ownership. They base their argument on illusions of bodily ownership,
such as the Rubber Hand Illusion. Further recent bodily illusions that
involve the whole body also indicate that one can feel a virtual
avatar or another individual’s body as one’s own (Ehrsson, 2007;
Lenggenhager et al., 2007). These illusions might be taken as evidence
that experiences of ownership are actually independently describable
insofar as participants report feeling as if a body part belonged to
them while judging that this is not their own body part (Harcourt,
2008). Further support against the eliminativist view comes from the
study of syndromes of bodily alienation, in which patients report
feeling as if their own limb did not belong to them (e.g.,
depersonalization, somatoparaphrenia; deafferentation; Body Integrity
Identity Disorder). Interestingly, not all of those patients are
delusional. Some only feel as if their hand were alien, for
instance, without judging that it is not their own. On Peacocke’s and
Vignemont’s views, our body can be manifested to us as our own in
a more primitive form than judgments. One may then talk of experiences
of ownership, in the same way as one can talk of experiences of agency
(Bayne & Pacherie, 2007). Although sometimes
called feelings of mineness, one should not conceive
experiences of ownership in terms of pure raw feels without
representational properties. There are actually two ways they can be
understood in representational terms. The specific phenomenology of
ownership can arise either from non-conceptual content that represents
one’s body as one’s own, or from a specific mode of presentation of
bodily representations. 


Bermudez, (2015), however, deny the relevance of the borderline cases
of bodily ownership previously described. It is true that the
interpretation of the Rubber Hand Illusion remains controversial: do
participants really feel the rubber hand as their own (they show only
mild agreement when explicitly asked? cf. Longo et al., 2008)? Even if
it were a true illusion of ownership, still this would not suffice for
Bermudez to show that experiences of ownership are independently
describable, and thus exist because, “There is no way of
characterizing the content of our experience of our own bodies that
can exclude the fact that we experience our bodies as our own”
(2015, p. 44). The challenge for theories of bodily ownership is thus to find a way
to offer such an independent characterization. To do so, one strategy
consists in analysing what grounds the sense of bodily ownership.
5.2 The grounds of the sense of body ownership


Reductionist approaches to the sense of bodily ownership aim at
accounting for the sense of ownership in terms of specific properties
of bodily experiences. Three main candidates have been suggested,
which respectively reduce the sense of bodily ownership to spatial
awareness, to agentive awareness and to affective awareness (for
cognitivist models, see Makin et al., 2008; Tsakiris, 2010).
5.2.1 The spatial conception


According to Martin (1993, p. 212), we have a sense of bodily
ownership because “we have a sense of ourselves as being bounded
and limited objects within a larger space, which can contain other
objects”. Martin (1995) defends what he calls the Sole object
view, according to which sensations are experienced within the
boundaries of one’s own body. In other words, there cannot be any
sensation that does not fall within the limits of the bodily space as
it is experienced. When I feel a bodily sensation, I do not feel it in
one body as opposed to another body. I feel it in my own body. Bodily
sensations thus confer a sense of ownership on the body part in which
they are felt to occur (see also Brewer, 1995; Dokic, 2003). The sense
of bodily ownership is grounded in the sense of the spatial boundaries
of one’s body, within which one can feel sensations.


In order to defend his reductionist conception, Martin (1995) appeals
to a reductio ad absurdum. If the sense of ownership
is not exhausted by the spatial phenomenology of bodily experiences,
then it should be possible for there to be cases in which one has
bodily experiences while experiencing the converse of ownership,
namely, disownership. According to Martin, there could not be such
cases (for a similar prediction, see also Bain, 2003; Dokic,
2003). However, what Martin and the others claim to be inconceivable
actually exists. Bodily sensations and bodily ownership can be taken
apart (Vignemont, 2013). On the one hand, one may argue that in
referred sensations in tools, one feels sensations as being located at
the end of the tool, and yet does not feel the tool as part of
one’s body. On the other hand, patients with syndromes of bodily
alienation can feel sensations as being located in a body part that
feels as alien to them.


A further difficulty for the spatial conception is the risk of
exclusion of the first person from the sense of ownership. It seems
that the awareness of bodily boundaries that is given by bodily
experiences can only guarantee that the boundaries are true only of
one’s body, but this is different from the sense of bodily
ownership. One can be aware of the boundaries of the body without being
aware of the boundaries of the body qua one’s own. 
5.2.2 The agentive conception


The spatial conception has difficulties accounting for the
self-referentiality of the sense of ownership. One may then wonder
whether the sense of bodily ownership cannot borrow, so to speak, its
self-referentiality from the self-referentiality of agency. On the
agentive conception, the sense of bodily ownership is given by the
sense of the spatial boundaries of one’s body as being under
direct control (Vignemont, 2007; Gallese and Sinigaglia, 2010;
Davies et al., 2001). This is not to assume that the sense of agency
and the sense of bodily ownership are one and the same thing. Still,
there is an intuitive sense in which bodily control and bodily
ownership must go hand in hand. In particular, the sense of
disownership seems to be nicely explained by the lack of bodily
control “The body is a unity of actions, and if a part of
the body is split off from action, it becomes ‘alien’ and
not felt as part of the body” (Sacks, 1984, p. 166). Furthermore,
it is possible to elicit illusions of bodily ownership by controlling
an avatar in a virtual reality setting (Slater, 2008).


However, the relationship between ownership and bodily control is
complex (Carruthers, 2009). For one thing, it is not clear whether what
matters is the sense of being able to control one’s body or the
actual ability to control it. Furthermore, one should not forget that
most patients that are paralysed do not feel disownership. Finally, as
said earlier, the main illusion of ownership is the Rubber Hand
Illusion, which seems to have no agentive component whatsoever (Longo
et al., 2008; Kammers et al., 2009).
5.2.3 The affective conception


One may then turn to a different source of self-referentiality, that
is, the affective significance of the body for the self. The affective
conception, however, is often only implicitly defended, and the exact
nature of the affective significance of the body not well articulated.
For example, some philosophers and neuroscientists have recently
highlighted the importance of affective factors for self-consciousness.
On their view, what they might call the “bodily self”
(Damasio, 1999; Craig, 2003; Seth, 2013) or the phenomenology of
mineness (Mishara, 2004) is based on the interoceptive system. Their
account, however, is not restricted specifically to the sense of bodily
ownership, but rather to self-awareness in general.


Still, it is interesting to note that the main measure of ownership
illusions is affective (e.g. skin conductance response, cf. Ehrsson et
al., 2007). This measure is also used in the study of the feeling of
familiarity. The familiarity one experiences with people one knows
cannot be reduced to the sensory content of visual experiences. Rather,
it consists in a kind of affective coloring of the experience of
objects and events that have personal significance. This affective
coloring can be missing, as it is the case in Capgras syndrome.
Patients can see that a person is visually identical to their spouse
for example, but they do not feel that she is their spouse that they
see and they believe that this person must be an impostor. Their
sensory phenomenology is thus intact, but they lack the affective
responses normally associated with it. One may then interpret syndromes
of bodily alienation, such as somatoparaphrenia, as a kind of Capgras
syndrome for one’s body parts (Feinberg and Roane, 2003).


There is, however, a main difference between the sense of ownership
and the feeling of familiarity. Arguably, one feels only a single body
as one’s own, while one feels many faces familiar. Hence, one
cannot reduce the former to the latter. Still, the notion of
familiarity can point to us the path to undertake. One may argue that
the sense of ownership is a kind of affective feeling that highlights
the significance of the body for the self (Vignemont, forthcoming). The
affective significance that defines familiarity results from previous
encounters with the object that feels familiar, and it does not guide
how to behave with the object in the next encounter (one’s enemy
feels familiar, for instance). By contrast, the affective significance
that defines the sense of ownership results from selective pressure,
and it guides how one should try to protect it for self-preservation.
Hence, bodily awareness is not simply about one’s body. It is
about one’s body for the self, for its needs and
interests.
6. The epistemology of bodily awareness


“It is tempting to think that because our bodies are, as it
were, so close to us, the scope for illusions here is minimal. In
fact, however, recent research in this area has presented some of the
most striking illusions in all the literature” (Smith, 2002,
24). We have already seen some of them, but the list is even
longer. On the other hand, the satisfaction conditions of some bodily
experiences are difficult to articulate. Can one have an illusory pain
for example? Furthermore, there seems to be at least one type of error
that all bodily experiences may be immune to, namely, error through
misidentification relative to the first-person.
6.1 Bodily illusions


Through body senses we have a privileged, though not exclusive, access
to our body. It may then be tempting to conclude that the privileged
immediate access that we have to our body is a source of infallible
knowledge. However, there are a wide variety of bodily illusions. We
have already seen the Rubber Hand illusion, which indicates that one
can feel a rubber hand as one's own after only a couple of minutes of
synchronous stroking of one's hand and a rubber hand. Another famous
bodily illusion is the Pinocchio illusion (Lackner, 1988). Vibrations
of muscle tendons induce illusory kinaesthetic sensations (e.g. arm
stretching during biceps tendon vibration and arm flexing during
triceps tendon vibration, though the arm remains still). If at the
same time one holds one's nose with the stimulated arm, then one feels
one's nose elongating (during biceps tendon vibration) or shrinking
(during triceps tendon vibration). One may also mention what might be
called the Dentist illusion. After having been to the dentist, one
often feels as if one's mouth or lips were inflated though they look
normal. And indeed it was experimentally shown that complete lips
anaesthesia could induce the sensation of the lips increasing in size
by as much as 100% (Gandevia and Phegan, 1999).


Those illusions are only a few within a long list. They are actually
not surprising if bodily experiences are perceptual. One may, however,
wonder whether there are illusions that correspond to every single
type of bodily experiences, including pain. In this latter case, the
distinction between appearance and reality may be difficult, if not
impossible. Some phenomena, however, might be interpreted as cases of
illusory pain. For instance, in the thermal grill illusion, when one
presses one's fingers on two warm objects surrounding one cool object,
the cool object feels painfully hot. But is this illusion more a
thermal illusion or a pain illusion? Another possible candidate is the
phenomenon of referred pain. One can sometimes experience pain at a
location distinct from the location of the cause of pain. It then
seems that the spatial content of pain is illusory. However, this is
true only if one defends the view that the location of pain is the
location of its cause. If pain seems infallible, it is even more so
for bodily feelings like thirst and hunger.
6.2 Immunity to error through misidentification of bodily self-ascriptions


Though there are various interpretations of the notion of immunity to
error (hereafter IEM), it is typically accepted that if I feel in
pain, I cannot be wrong about who is in pain. Most accounts of IEM
have focused on self-ascriptions of mental states like bodily
sensations, but one may raise similar questions for self-ascriptions
of physical bodily properties (e.g. size, weight, posture). The debate
is then articulated around three main questions: (i) Can bodily
self-ascriptions be immune to error, and if so, what are the
appropriate grounds that secure bodily IEM (e.g., Vignemont,
2012)? (ii) Is bodily IEM of a different type from mental IEM
(e.g., Coliva, 2012)? (iii) Does bodily IEM reveal the bodily
nature of the self (e.g., Cassam, 1997; Chen, 2011; Smith, 2006)?


According to the dominant view on bodily IEM, which has been
defended by Evans (1982) and others (e.g., Bermudez, 1998; Dokic, 2003;
Brewer, 1995; Cassam, 1995), perceiving one's body through body
senses grounds bodily self-ascriptions that are immune to error through
misidentification. There are indeed no other bodies than one's
own that one can directly access to through body senses. One can thus
dispense with identifying whose body one experiences when one
experiences it from the inside. For instance, one cannot rationally
doubt that the arms that are crossed are one's own when one knows the
position of the arms through proprioception. Most theories then reject
vision as an appropriate candidate for bodily IEM. For the most part,
visual experiences of one's body do not guarantee bodily IEM: I
can see my arms crossed and rationally doubt whether those are my arms
or not. However, there may be exceptions (Bermudez, 1998; Vignemont,
2012). For instance, I can see my nose if I close one eye. I
then cannot doubt that this is my own nose when I see it from this
specific angle. Hence, one should not rule out all visual experiences
as being inappropriate for bodily IEM. There are some visuo-spatial
perspectives from which we can see our body such that we cannot
rationally doubt that the body is our own. Indeed, the body that we see
that way has always been our own. Our cognitive system has evolved with
this invariant fact, making self-identification process superfluous and
error through misidentification impossible.


Bodily experiences, and possibly some visual experiences, seem to
guarantee bodily IEM. Some may deny, however, that bodily
self-ascriptions display the same type of IEM as mental
self-ascriptions (Shoemaker, 1968). The IEM of pain self-ascriptions,
for instance, may seem absolute or logical. On this view, there is no
possible world where I can feel pain and be mistaken about who is
feeling pain. By contrast, one can easily conceive that my
proprioceptive system is connected to another body. When I judge that
my legs are crossed on the basis of proprioception (or what we may call
quasi-proprioception), I may actually be feeling someone else's
legs. Bodily IEM is only de facto (true only in the actual world)
(Evans, 1982).


But if bodily IEM is only de facto, what can it tell us about the
true nature of the self? Yet Evans (1982) and Cassam (1997) use bodily
IEM as an argument against the Cartesian view of the self. In a
nutshell, bodily awareness is the awareness of oneself qua subject, as
shown by bodily IEM. One can therefore self-ascribe bodily properties as
well as mental properties to the self without self-identification.
Hence the object of such judgments, the self, is not a Cartesian ego,
but a bodily subject of both mental and physical properties. One may,
however, wonder if one is entitled to draw such a metaphysical
conclusion from the epistemological fact of bodily IEM (Chen, 2011; Smith, 2006).
7. The functional role of bodily awareness


Via body ownership, bodily awareness may thus play a role in grounding
self-awareness (Bermudez, 1998; Neisser, 1992), and even a
non-Cartesian view of the self (Evans, 1982; Cassam, 1997). Its
significance may even extend further. Stressing the importance of the
body for the mind actually constitutes one of the main claims of the
recent approach of Embodied cognition (see the entry Embodied
Cognition) (Clark, 1997). The body is said to affect not only perception, emotion,
and action, but also higher mental processes. Gallagher (2005, 247)
concludes: “nothing about human experience remains untouched by
human embodiment”. However, one should distinguish the role of
the physical body, the role of bodily activities and the role of
bodily awareness. This section will briefly discuss only the latter,
and in particular in relation to emotion, perceptual awareness and
social cognition.
7.1 Emotions


Theories of emotion have oscillated between cognitive theories and
embodied theories. On the one hand, some theories have focused on the
intentionality of emotions, accounting for emotions in purely cognitive
terms (Solomon, 1993). It is not clear, however, how they differentiate
propositional attitudes and emotions. On the other hand, other theories
have focused on the phenomenology of emotions, explaining certain (if
not all) emotions in terms of experiences of bodily changes (e.g.,
James, 1884, Damasio, 1999; Prinz, 2004; Niedenthal, 2007). There are
some states, including pain, pleasure and disgust, that can be
conceived either as emotions or as bodily sensations. A recent study
even showed that conventional painkillers could decrease psychological
distress (Dewall et al., 2010). For other types of emotions, however,
the link with bodily sensations seems more remote.


Embodied theories of emotions have been criticized for their failure
to account for the target of the emotion (I feel frightened of the
dog, for instance). Furthermore, even for primary emotions, which
seem the most embodied, there is some opacity concerning the specific
nature of their bodily component. Does this component refer to
physiological states, subpersonal recording of physiological states,
bodily sensations and/or bodily expressions of emotions? For instance,
it was shown that if you hold a pen horizontally between your lips,
artificially forcing you to smile, the cartoon that you read looks
funnier (Strack et al., 1988). But is it the feeling of smiling that
makes you happy or the fact of smiling?
7.2 Perceptual awareness


Merleau-Ponty emphasizes how the lived body anchors the awareness of
the world. Similarly, O'Shaughnessy (1980) argues that bodily
awareness is a major determinant of perceptual awareness by spatially
structuring it. When I see that the book is on my left on the table, my
visual experience of the book is spatially organized by my body in two
distinct ways. First, the book is directly located relative to the
location of my body. This egocentric location is especially important
for action. I need to locate the book relative to my hand for me to
grasp it. Second, even the location of the book relative to the table
is determined by my body. It is only from my perspective that the book
is on the table. From the spider's perspective on the ceiling,
the book is under the table. Bodily space thus orients external space
by offering spatial axes such as up and down, left and right, front and
back.


The influence of bodily awareness on perception has been said to go
beyond anchoring reference frames. According to some, bodily awareness
affects not only how we perceive the location of objects, but also
their other properties, including affordances or what Campbell (1994)
calls causally indexical properties. Causally indexical properties like
the weight of an object have immediate implications for our actions. As
such, they depend on the state of our body that will carry on the
actions. For instance, some results indicate that the effortful
experience of wearing a heavy backpack makes slopes look steeper and
distances seem longer (Proffitt et al., 2003). The authors concluded
that what we feel determines what we perceive. However, these results
are controversial (Durgin et al., 2009).
7.3 Social cognition


Another example of the influence of bodily awareness concerns social
perception, that is, the perception of cues in other people indicating
their mental states like facial expressions. Since Lipps (1900), it has
been recurrently suggested that when perceiving other people's
actions, we mentally simulate or re-enact their bodily movements
(Goldman, 2006; Gallese, 2001). This view seems to be confirmed by the
discovery of mirror systems for action. It was found that perceiving
another individual acting partially activates the same regions in the
brain as when one is acting (Rizzolatti et al., 1995; Decety et al.,
1997). Shared cortical networks have also been found for empathy. Brain
imaging studies have shown overlapping brain activity when subjects
feel pain and when they observe another in pain (Singer et al., 2004),
when they feel being touched and when they see another being touched
(Keysers et al., 2004), when they inhale disgusting odorants and when
they observe disgust-expressive faces (Wicker et al. 2003).


What makes motor and affective resonance special is that it goes
beyond mere conceptual sharing. One does not share abstract knowledge
about the observed action or emotion; one shares what might be called
embodied knowledge or knowledge in a bodily format. Four related
questions can then be raised. First, to what extent and in what manner
is social cognition embodied (Goldman and Vignemont, 2009; Goldman,
2012; Vignemont, 2014c)? Does one exploit representations about the
body in social cognition or only representations with what may be
called a bodily format? And in the latter case, what is a bodily
format? Second, is motor resonance similar to affective resonance
(Jacob and Vignemont, forthcoming)? Third, what mechanisms generate
motor resonance and affective resonance? Do they directly derive from
the perception of actions and facial expressions (Gallese, 2001;
Gallagher, 2005)? Or are they mediated by processing of contextual
information (Csibra, 2007; Vignemont and Singer, 2006)?  Fourth, what
role do motor resonance and affective resonance play for mindreading?
Do they result in the understanding of other people's mental states
(Goldman, 2006; Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia, 2008) or not (Jacob,
2008)?
8. Conclusion


Bodily awareness reveals a new rich territory for philosophical
exploration in its own right, but it also provides a new approach to
general issues on perception, action, self and space. Empirical
research on body representations, bodily sensations, bodily illusions,
and self-awareness has grown exponentially. A
comprehensive understanding of bodily awareness will likely require
taking on board its insight.