Carneades (214–129/8 B.C.E.) was a member and eventually scholarch or
head of the Academy, the philosophical school founded by Plato, for
part of its skeptical phase. He is credited by ancient tradition with
founding the New or Third Academy and defended a form of probabilism
in epistemology.

 
1. Life and work


Born in Cyrene (a Greek city in North Africa), Carneades came to
Athens to study philosophy. In addition to his studies in the Academy,
he found time to study dialectic (the discipline that corresponds most
closely to present-day logic) with Diogenes of Babylon, the fifth
scholarch of the Stoa and a pupil of Chrysippus. Chrysippus, the third
scholarch of the Stoa, was the principal architect of the Stoic
philosophical system and the most important stimulus to Carneades, who
is reported to have said, “If Chrysippus had not been, I would not
have been” (a version of the saying, “If Chrysippus had not been,
there would have been no Stoa”). Carneades became head or scholarch of
the Academy sometime before 155 B.C.E., when, together with Diogenes
and Critolaus, the head of Aristotle's school, the Peripatos, he was
sent to Rome to represent Athens in a petition before the senate.


Like Arcesilaus and Socrates before him, Carneades wrote nothing,
but made his mark through face to face teaching and argument. The
influence he exerted in this way on his students and contemporaries
was considerable.  From the time of his scholarchate until the
dissolution of the Academy under its last leader, Philo of Larissa
(159/8–84/3 B.C.E.), philosophy in the Academy and among the
philosophers in its orbit largely took the form of interpreting
Carneades. We are ultimately indebted for what we know about Carneades
to works by those with firsthand experience of him, especially
Clitomachus, his student and eventual successor as scholarch. Although
none of the latter's many books has survived, they were used by
authors like Cicero, and Sextus Empiricus, whom we are able to
read.
2. Academic skepticism


According to tradition, in addition to fulfilling his official
duties while in Rome, Carneades scandalized the city by delivering
public lectures on two succeeding days, defending justice on the first
and arguing that it is a form of folly on the second.  This apparently
shameful exercise was an instance of the Academy's practice of arguing
on both sides of a question, the better (if possible) to discover the
truth. Most often, Academics in this period left the defense of a
theory to its proponents and argued the negative or skeptical side,
and Carneades was renowned in antiquity above all for the virtuosity
that he displayed in this sort of argument. He was indebted to the
example of Arcesilaus (316/15 – 241/40 B.C.E.), the Academic
scholarch responsible for the school's turn to skepticism.  From
Arcesilaus' time on, the examination of the theories of other schools,
chiefly the Stoa's, was the Academy's principal occupation, and this
practice reached its peak under Carneades.


Later ancient writers speak of Carneades as founding the third or
New Academy, which followed the second or Middle Academy of Arcesilaus
and the first or Old Academy of Plato and his successors before
Arcesilaus.  (The distinction between Academies was meant to signal
changes in philosophical doctrine or approach, not changes in the
school as an institution.) The New Academy seemed, to both ancient
philosophers and modern historians, to differ from the Middle chiefly
in two respects. Carneades appeared to favor a more mitigated form of
skepticism, which admitted the possibility of well-founded opinions if
not of certain knowledge. And he tackled issues in, and sometimes
defended positions about, logic, ethics, natural philosophy and
theology as well as epistemology, which had been the focus of
Arcesilaus' interests. The two features supposed to characterize the
New Academy are complementary. A mitigation of the Academy's
skepticism would have opened the way for the suitably circumspect
adoption of views in a wide range of areas.


Caution is in order, however. “Skeptic” was not a term used by the
Academics themselves, but was first applied to them later in
antiquity, and to assess these claims about developments in the
Academy, it is first necessary to discover what Academic skepticism,
mitigated or unmitigated, might have been. We may begin by considering
the arguments that Carneades inherited from his predecessors.  The
Academy's method of argument was, in the first instance, dialectical,
like that of Socrates in Plato's Socratic dialogues.  The Academics
took the part of the questioner, who puts questions to his
interlocutors and deduces conclusions that are unwelcome to them from
their answers. The difficulties that the questioner uncovers in this
way are internal to his interlocutors' position, and in drawing them
out he has not committed himself to a position of his own. This was
the Academics' contribution to argument on both sides of the question,
meant to assist the search for truth, not to deliver the truth by
itself (cf. Cicero, Acad. 2.7. 60, 76; N.D.
1.11).


The Academics' principal target was Stoic epistemology. The Stoics
maintained that it is possible for human beings to achieve a condition
of wisdom entirely free of opinion, that is, false or insecure belief.
According to them, all a wise human being's judgments will qualify as
knowledge by being based on a firm and unshakable grasp of the
truth. A necessary condition for knowledge of this kind on their view
was the existence of cognitive impressions, which they identified as
the criterion of truth (cf. Frede, 1999). A cognitive impression was
defined by the Stoics as an impression from what is, stamped and
impressed in exact accordance with what is, and such as could not be
from what is not. This seems to mean, in the paradigm case of a
perceptual impression, that it is an impression that arises in
conditions which:

ensure that, by capturing its object with perfect
accuracy, it is true, and
at the same time impart to it a clarity and distinctness that
belong only to impressions that arise in these conditions.



According to the Stoics, by restricting one's assent in the sphere
of perception to impressions with this character, one can avoid ever
assenting to a false perceptual impression. As the criterion of truth,
cognitive impressions are the ultimate basis of all knowledge, and if
further conditions are satisfied, the Stoics maintained, one can avoid
error entirely.


The Academics appealed to the skeptic's stock in trade, dreams,
madness, optical illusions and divinely inspired visions, in order to
argue that the special character allegedly proper to cognitive
impressions was not in fact confined to impressions produced in the
required truth-guaranteeing way, but could also be found in false
impressions (Cicero, Acad. 2.49–54, 79–82,
88–90; Sextus Empiricus, Adversus mathematicos
[henceforwad S.E. M] 7.402–8). If so, impressions that
arise in the specified conditions, though true, will be
indistinguishable from false impressions—as far as any intrinsic
discriminable character is concerned. Therefore they will not be
cognitive, and not being cognitive, they will not be able to serve as
a criterion. That there are no cognitive impressions is the first of
the two propositions most closely associated with ancient
skepticism. And since it then follows, on Stoic assumptions, that
nothing can be known, this was often taken to be equivalent to the
claim that nothing can be known. The second skeptical proposition,
that one ought to suspend judgment, the Academics deduced from the
first together with the Stoic doctrine that the wise do not hold
(mere) opinions (S.E. M 7.155–7).  On Stoic
assumptions, assent to an impression that is not cognitive (either in
the strict sense or in a broader sense which covers impressions that,
though not perceptual, nonetheless afford an equally secure grasp of
their contents), gives rise to opinion. Therefore, in the absence of
cognitive impressions, one can avoid opinion only by suspending
judgment entirely.


On a strictly dialectical interpretation, the skeptical
propositions for which the Academics argued need not tell us anything
about what philosophical views, if any, they accepted themselves. The
skeptical position that comprises these two claims—that
knowledge is not possible and that one ought to suspend judgement
about everything—is an unwelcome consequence of Stoic views and
presents the Stoics with a problem that it is their responsibility to
solve, not the Academy's.  What is more, it would have been manifestly
paradoxical for the Academics to adopt the skeptical position if
holding it meant taking themselves to know that its component
propositions are true and assenting to them. If it is true that
nothing can be known, this too cannot be known. And if there is a duty
to suspend judgment by withholding assent, to accept or acknowledge it
may be to violate it.


To be sure, Arcesilaus and other Academics defended the possibility
of a life without knowledge and without assent (Plutarch, Adversus
Colotem 1122A–F; cf. Long and Sedley [henceforward L&S]
69A). But that need not show that they somehow held the skeptical
position all the same.  Instead their aim may have been to counter the
Stoic charge that the Academic arguments for the skeptical
propositions must be faulty because they render rational action
impossible. And Arcesilaus' account of how one can act in the absence
of knowledge and without assent is so heavily dependent on Stoic
doctrines that it looks very much like an effort to show the Stoics
that their system already contained the resources necessary to explain
how action was possible for the skeptic, as envisaged in the Academy's
arguments.


Nevertheless, there is evidence that at some stage in the school's
history, even if they did not use the term ‘skeptic’, some
Academics were skeptics in the sense that they endorsed one or both of
the two skeptical propositions as the correct philosophical
position. There was a tradition in the Academy, according to which
Arcesilaus agreed with Zeno that opinion is a sin utterly alien to
wisdom (Acad. 2.66–7, 77, 108, 133). The lesson he drew
from the difficulties that he had uncovered in the Stoic position
among others, however, was that he and his opponents were not in a
position to give their assent with confidence.  Suspension of judgment
and continued open-minded inquiry were therefore indicated. The
skepticism characterized by this attitude was a matter of intellectual
honesty and prudence; it was a provisional outlook or stance, though
one capable of being sustained indefinitely, rather than a position to
be resolutely adhered to. Inevitably the question how attachment to
this stance differed from adherence to a philosophical position became
the subject of an extensive discussion in the Academy and among its
opponents.
3. Epistemology


It is likely that Carneades added to the stock of skeptical
arguments employed in the Academy. In particular, he may be
responsible for the arguments that focus on the requirement that
cognitive impressions be distinct (Acad. 2.54–8,
84–6; S.E. M 7.408–11 = L&S 40H). These
arguments are based on the idea, denied by the Stoa, that two objects
might be exactly alike. If this were true, then even if impressions
that captured their objects with complete accuracy by arising in the
specified ideal conditions did possess a clarity that it was possible
to acquire in no other way, it would not be possible to avoid errors
of identification by confining one's assent to impressions with the
required clarity.  One could, for instance, mistake someone for his
identical twin.  The only sure way to avoid error would then be to
suspend judgment.


The contribution for which Carneades is best known, however, came in
response to the Stoics' counter-argument in defense of the cognitive
impression. They contended that, without cognitive impressions, human
beings would be deprived of any basis for action or inquiry. In reply
Carneades argued that such a basis could be found in so-called
probable impressions (from “probabilis,” that which lends
itself to or invites approval, Cicero's Latin for the Greek
“pithanos,” persuasive).  The theory of probable
impressions went far beyond anything Arcesilaus had said and had an
independent appeal which Arcesilaus' response to the same challenge
lacked. Carneades' defense of this theory is the main reason why he
was thought to have departed from or moderated the stricter skepticism
thought to have been espoused by Arcesilaus and the Middle Academy
(S.E. Pyrrhoneae hypotyposes [henceforward PH]
1.227–30; M 7.166–89 = L&S 69DE).


This may be so, but Carneades' defense of probabilism can also be
viewed as a natural extension of the Academy's tradition of
dialectical argument (cf. Allen, 1994). The epistemological debate
between the Stoa and the Academy extended over many years and was
conducted with a great deal of energy and ingenuity on both sides. It
tended toward the condition of an impasse. If the burden of argument
belonged wholly to the Academy, and the Academics were restricted to
premises that were strictly implied by Stoic theory, AS seems to have
been the case with Arcesilaus, the Academic case was not proved. The
Stoics were not required on pain of self-contradiction to accept all
the premises the Academics needed. Nonetheless, by rejecting these
premises, the Stoics often committed themselves to highly disputable
contentions. This mattered to them, because their aim was not simply
to vindicate the internal consistency of their system. They claimed
that their views were true and uniquely consistent with common
conceptions had by all human beings.


In effect, the Stoics claimed that no position apart from theirs
could do justice to a set of considerations that were not peculiar to
their school but were accepted by everyone. It should, then, be
possible for them to convince open-minded and intelligent auditors of
the truth of Stoicism. The challenge that Carneades accepted was to
show that there were alternatives which could do justice to the agreed
upon considerations as well as or better than did the Stoic position,
while dispensing with its most distinctive and contentious features.
Though it does not restrict itself to premises that are already Stoic
doctrines, this form of argument is broadly dialectical. By aiming to
do justice to the considerations which the Stoics agree are relevant
to the area in question, and directing his arguments to intelligent
and open-minded auditors whom they are committed to taking seriously,
Carneades was trying to show the Stoics that their position did not
satisfy the standards they set for themselves.  Because the theories
he put forward and defended to this end are not based solely on Stoic
doctrines, they sometimes have a wider appeal, and it is easier to
attribute them to their author. Nonetheless, though they are
Carneades' in the sense of being his creations, they need not have
expressed his convictions.


In keeping with this style of argument, Carneades prepared the way
for his theory of probability by setting out an epistemological
framework which, though obviously indebted to Stoic views, was
intended to capture intuitions that were held much more widely. In
this broadly foundationalist framework it is natural to look for a
criterion of truth where the Stoics and other Hellenistic philosophers
do, viz. among self-evident perceptual impressions (S.E. M
7.159–65 = L&S 70A).  Yet the Academy's arguments against
cognitive impressions seem to have shown that no such impressions are
to be found. The task of Carneades' account of probability is to show
that, after all, they are not needed.  Rational action and inquiry are
possible without the foundation that cognitive impressions promised to
provide because probable impressions can serve in their place. And if
this is right, or if it is sufficiently plausible, the Stoics' attempt
to provide indirect support for their contentions about the cognitive
impression by showing that there are no acceptable alternatives will
fail to be conclusive.


The account of probability explains how one can discriminate among
impressions by investigating whether an initially persuasive
impression agrees with one's other impressions or if there is
something about the conditions in which it arose that undermines
confidence in it. The more such checks it survives, the more
confidence one will have in it. Depending on the amount of time
available and the importance of the matter in question, it is possible
to perform more or fewer of them. Although no amount of checking is
sufficient to eliminate the possibility of error, it will be possible
to achieve the degrees of confidence required in different
circumstances to make rational action and theoretical inquiry possible
(Acad. 2.32, 110). Carneades' theory is thus an early
instance of fallibilism. And he seems to have used it not only to
counter the Stoics' argument that there are no alternatives to their
theory, but also to suggest that that theory's reliance on
self-evident perceptual impressions is misplaced, even when viewed as
an epistemological ideal. According to Carneades' theory, the
improvement of which our powers of perception are capable is not a
matter of approaching the condition of perfect discrimination of
self-evident impressions ever more closely; it consists instead in
refining one's appreciation for the complicated relations between
impressions in virtue of which they add to or detract from each
other's value as evidence.


Drawing on his account of probable impressions, Carneades defended
two views about assent. He sometimes argued that the wise person will
always withhold assent, but will be able to act and inquire by
following or using probable impressions in a way that does not amount
to assent, and so does not involve holding opinions about anything
(Acad. 2.59, 99, 108). On other occasions, he maintained that
the wise person will assent to what is probable and so form opinions,
but with the proviso that he may be wrong (Acad. 2.59, 67,
78, 112). In this way he gave his interlocutors a choice between two
alternatives to Stoic orthodoxy, each of which describes a way of life
without the certainty furnished by cognitive impressions. Either one
lives entirely without opinions, while following probable impressions
without assenting to them or one lives with opinions, but opinions
that are held in a self-consciously tentative spirit and subject to
revision in the light of new evidence.


The view according to which the wise person assents and forms
opinions appealed to those convinced by the Academy's arguments that,
though certainty is unobtainable, well founded probabilities are
within reach, among which is this view itself. Someone who thinks
this, is likely to see little point in keeping assent in reserve for a
kind of certainty which he thinks is neither needed nor possible,
though he cannot be certain of this any more than he can be of
anything else. This view was favored by Philo of Larissa among others
(cf. Brittain, 2001), and it gave rise to a form of probabilism, as a
positively endorsed theory of knowledge, which is one of the New
Academy's legacies. The other view, which favors withholding assent,
appealed to those who were attracted, as Zeno and Arcesilaus had been,
to the ideal of certain knowledge and were struck by the force of what
is said on both sides of the epistemological debate between the
Academy and the Stoa. This is the classical skeptical stance that was
the New Academy's other legacy. It was defended by Clitomachus, and it
also influenced the other main ancient school of skepticism, the
Pyrrhonists.  It is noteworthy that the more radical forms of
skepticism defended by Clitomachus and the Pyrhonists were less firmly
attached to the skeptical proposition that nothing can be known than
moderate skeptics like Philo, who who were willing to recognize it as
a school dogma (Acad. 2.133, 148).
4. Ethics


In ethics Carneades proceeded as he had in epistemology and
constructed a framework intended to classify not only all the views
about the goal of life that had been held, but also all those that
could be held (Cicero, Fin. 5.16–21 = L&S 64EG;
cf. Algra, 1997). He sets out from the assumption that practical
wisdom, the knowledge we need to conduct our lives successfully, must
have an object. That is, it must be knowledge of something other than
itself.  This immediately rules out of contention views that identify
human good with knowledge, but without having anything to say about
what it might be knowledge of apart from human good. He further
supposes that this object must be one towards which human beings have
a natural impulse.. There were, he maintained, three possible such
objects: pleasure, freedom from pain, and the natural advantages such
as health and strength. The principle of virtue corresponds to this
initial choice: to be virtuous is to act with a view to obtaining one
of them. There are six simple views about the goal of life itself,
three of which identify the goal with virtue, that is, acting with a
view to obtaining either pleasure, freedom from pain, or the natural
advantages; and three of which identify it with actually obtaining one
of these objects. Three combined views take the goal to be a
combination of virtue and actually obtaining the corresponding
object. There are thus nine views altogether. The Stoic position, that
virtue is the only good, is the third view mentioned, namely that the
goal is acting with a view to obtaining the natural advantages whether
or not one obtains them.


On different occasions, we are informed, Carneades defended the
simple view that the goal is actually to obtain the natural advantages
or the combined view that it is virtue together with pleasure
(Fin. 2.35; 5.20; Acad. 2.132, 139). His aim seems
to have been to challenge the Stoics by showing that the
considerations captured by the framework do not all point to the Stoic
view. By defending the view that the goal is the actual enjoyment of
the natural advantages, Carneades probably intended to suggest that
the considerations which support taking the natural advantages as the
object of our first natural impulse, as the Stoics did, also count in
favor of taking them to be goods. The point of arguing in support of
the view that the goal is a combination of virtue and pleasure, on the
other hand, was probably to show that taking pleasure as the ultimate
object of impulse would require a recognizably virtuous life, a view
for which there were Socratic antecedents in Plato's
Protagoras. Neither of these positions had the kind of
independent appeal that Carneades' probabilism and his views about
assent did—our sources always describe them as put forward for
the sake of argument—but Carneades' division of ethical views
was extremely influential, and through Cicero it shaped the modern
understanding of Hellenistic ethical theory (cf. Striker, 1991
sect. 5).
5. Other interests


Among the other issues that engaged Carneades' attention were Stoic
and Epicurean views about determinism, fate, and freedom (much of the
evidence is in Cicero's De Fato); Stoic belief in divination
(see Cicero, De divinatione 2); and Stoic theology (see
Cicero, De natura deorum 3). He argued against the Epicureans
that their commitment to free will does not require the rejection of
the principle of bivalence applied to propositions about the future or
the postulation of an uncaused swerve among the atoms. Against the
Stoics he argued that a commitment to bivalence and the principle that
every action has a cause does not entail that all actions are
fated. And he sought to raise questions about their conception of the
gods by means of a sorites argument that appeared to show that they
could not consistently set any bounds to the divine, with the result
that everything threatened to become divine (cf. Burnyeat, 1997). It
is very likely that Carneades had a hand in the arguments raising
problems in logic which Cicero preserves (Acad. 2.91–8;
cf. Barnes, 1997).