In contemporary political thought, the term ‘civil rights’
is indissolubly linked to the struggle for equality of American blacks
during the 1950s and 60s. The aim of that struggle was to secure the
status of equal citizenship in a liberal democratic state. Civil
rights are the basic legal rights a person must possess in order to
have such a status. They are the rights that constitute free and equal
citizenship and include personal, political, and economic rights. No
contemporary thinker of significance holds that such rights can be
legitimately denied to a person on the basis of race, color, sex,
religion, national origin, or disability. By contrast, among the
issues contested at present are those concerning whether the
law-enforcement practice of racial profiling is justifiable, how to
protect the equal right to vote of racial minorities, and whether the
right to marry should be extended to same-sex partners. In addition,
there is an extensive literature debating the philosophical and
practical issues raised by the right of the disabled to equal
citizenship.
 
1. Rights
1.1 The Civil-Political Distinction

Until the middle of the 20th century, civil rights were
usually distinguished from ‘political rights’. The former
included the rights to own property, make and enforce contracts,
receive due process of law, and worship one’s religion. Civil
rights also covered freedom of speech and the press (Amar 1998:
216–17). But they did not include the right to vote or to hold
public office. The latter were political rights, reserved to adult
males. Accordingly, the woman’s emancipation movement of the
19th century, which aimed at full sex equality under the law, pressed
for equal “civil and political equality” (Taylor
1851/1984: 397 emphasis added)

The civil-political distinction was conceptually and morally unstable
insofar as it was used to sort citizens into different categories. It
was part of an ideology that classified women as citizens entitled to
certain rights but not to the full panoply to which men were entitled.
As that ideology broke down, the civil-political distinction began to
unravel. The idea that a certain segment of the adult citizenry could
legitimately possess one bundle of rights, while another segment would
have to make do with an inferior bundle, became increasingly
implausible. In the end, the civil-political distinction could not
survive the cogency of the principle that all citizens of a liberal
democracy were entitled, in Rawls’s words, to “a fully
adequate scheme of equal basic liberties” (2001: 42).

It may be possible to retain the distinction strictly as one for
sorting rights, rather than sorting citizens (Marshall, 1965; Waldron
1993). But it is difficult to give a convincing account of the
principles by which this sorting is done. It seems neater and cleaner
simply to think of civil rights as the general category of basic
rights needed for free and equal citizenship. Yet, it remains a matter
of contention which claims are properly conceived as belonging to the
category of civil rights (Wellman 1999). Analysts have distinguished
among “three generations” of civil rights claims and have
argued over which claims ought to be treated as true matters of civil
rights.
1.2 Three Generations of Rights

The claims for which the American civil rights movement initially
fought belong to the first generation of civil rights claims. Those
claims included the pre-20th century set of civil rights
— such as the rights to receive due process and to make and
enforce contracts — but covered political rights as well.
However, many thinkers and activists argued that these
first-generation claims were too narrow to define the scope of free
and equal citizenship. They contended that such citizenship could be
realized only by honoring an additional set of claims, including
rights to food, shelter, medical care, and employment. This second
generation of economic “welfare rights,” the argument
went, helped to ensure that the political, economic, and legal rights
belonging to the first generation could be made effective and that the
vital interests of all citizens were protected. Accordingly, Martin
Luther King, Jr. wrote, “With Selma and the Voting Rights Act
one phase of development in the civil rights revolution came to an
end,” and “[a] new phase opened” which would seek a
massive national investment in “programs to fight poverty,
ignorance and slums.(1967: 3 and 6).

Yet, some scholars have argued that these second-generation rights
should not be subsumed under the category of civil rights. Thus,
Cranston writes, ”The traditional ‘political and civil
rights’ can…be readily secured by legislation. Since the
rights are for the most part rights against government
interference…the legislation needed had to do no more than
restrain the executive’s own arm. This is no longer the case
when we turn to the ‘right to work’, the ‘right to
social security’ and so forth“ (1967: 50–51).

However, Cranston fails to recognize that such first-generation rights
as due process and the right to vote also require substantial
government action and the investment of considerable public resources.
Holmes and Sunstein (1999) have made the case that all of the
first-generation civil rights require government to do more than
simply ”restrain the executive’s own arm.“ It seems
problematic to think that a significant distinction can be drawn
between first and second-generation rights on the ground that the
former, but not the latter, simply require that government refrain
from interfering with the actions of persons. Moreover, even if some
viable distinction could be drawn along those lines, it would not
follow that second-generation rights should be excluded from the
category of civil rights. The reason is that the relevant standard for
inclusion as a civil right is whether a claim is part of the package
of rights constitutive of free and equal citizenship. There is no
reason to think that only those claims that can be ”readily
secured by legislation“ belong to that package. And the
increasingly dominant view is that welfare rights are essential to
adequately satisfying the conditions of free and equal citizenship
(Marshall 1965; Waldron 1993; Sunstein 2001).

In the United States, however, the law does not treat issues of
economic well-being per se as civil rights matters. Only insofar as
economic disadvantage is linked to race, gender or some other
traditional category of antidiscrimination law is it considered to be
a question of civil rights. In legal terms, poverty is not a
”suspect classification.“ By contrast, welfare rights are
protected as a matter of constitutional principle in other
democracies. For example, section 75 of the
 Danish Constitution
 provides that ”any person unable to support himself or his
dependents shall, where no other person is responsible for his or
their maintenance, be entitled to receive public assistance.“


A third generation of claims has received considerable attention in
recent years, what may be broadly termed ”rights of cultural
membership.“ These include language rights for members of
cultural minorities and the rights of indigenous peoples to preserve
their cultural institutions and practices and to exercise some measure
of political autonomy. There is some overlap with the first-generation
rights, such as that of religious liberty, but rights of cultural
membership are broader and more controversial.

Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(see Other Internet Resources) declares that third-generation rights
ought to be protected:

In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities
exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the
right, in community with the other members of their group, to enjoy
their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, or to
use their own language.


Similarly, the
 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
 protects the language rights of minorities, and section 27 provides
that ”This Charter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent
with the preservation and enhancement of the multicultural heritage of
Canadians.“ In the United States, there is no analogous
protection of language rights or multiculturalism, although
constitutional doctrine does recognize native Indian tribes as
”domestic dependent nations“ with some attributes of
political self-rule, such as sovereign immunity
 (Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe).
 

There is substantial philosophical controversy over the legitimacy and
scope of rights of cultural membership. Kymlicka has argued that the
liberal commitment to protect the equal rights of individuals requires
society to protect such rights, suitably defined (1989; 1994; 1995).
He distinguishes among three sorts of rights that have been claimed as
part of this third generation by various groups whose culture differs
from the dominant culture of a country: (1) rights of self-government,
involving a claim to a degree of political autonomy to be exercised
through the minority culture’s own of institutions, (2)
polyethnic rights, involving special claims by members of the minority
culture to facilitate their integration into mainstream institutions
and practices, and (3) representational rights, involving a special
claim of the minority culture to have its members serve in
legislatures and other political bodies of the broader society (1995:
27–33). Kymlicka argues that these three sorts of group rights
can, in principle, be justified for those populations that he
designates as ”national minorities,“ such as native
Americans in the United States and the Québécois and
Aboriginals in Canada. A national minority is ”an
intergenerational community, more or less institutionally complete,
occupying a given territory or homeland, [and] sharing a distinct
language and history“(18). Kymlicka contends that
”granting special representational rights, land claims, or
language rights to a [national] minority … can be seen as
putting … [it] on a more equal footing [with the majority], by
reducing the extent to which the smaller group is vulnerable to the
larger“ (36–37). Such special rights do not involve
granting to the national minority the authority to take away any of
the civil rights of its members. Rather, the rights are
”external protections,“ providing the group with powers
and immunities with which it can protect its culture against the
potentially harmful decisions of the broader society (35).

According to Kymlicka, In contrast to national minorities (and
refugees), most immigrants have left their original cultures
voluntarily and so are entitled only to a much more limited set of
group rights. These ”polyethnic rights“are claims to have
certain adjustments or accommodations made in the prevailing laws and
regulations so as give individuals access to the social mainstream.
Thus, Kymlicka thinks that Orthodox Jews in the U.S. Armed Forces
should have the legal right to wear a yarmulke while on duty and
Canadian Sikhs have a legitimate claim to be exempt from motorcycle
helmet laws (31).

Waldron (1995) criticizes Kymlicka for exaggerating the importance to
the individual of membership in her particular culture and for
underestimating the mutability and interpenetration of cultures.
Kymlicka emphasizes that individual freedom requires some cultural
context that constitutes the meaningful options from which the
individual can choose her path in life. However, Waldron responds that
such freedom does not require the preservation of the particular
context in which the individual finds herself. Liberal individuals
must be prepared to evaluate their culture and to distance themselves
from it.

Kukathas criticizes Kymlicka for implying that the liberal commitment
to the protection of individual rights is insufficient to treat the
interests of minorities with equal consideration. Kukathas contends
that ”we need to reassert the importance of individual liberty
or individual rights and question the idea that cultural minorities
have collective rights“ (1995: 230). But the system of uniform
legal rules that he endorses would keep the state from intervening
even when a minority culture inflicts significant harm on its more
vulnerable members, e.g., when cultural norms strongly discourage
females from seeking the same educational and career opportunities as
males.

Perhaps the most criticized part of Kymlicka’s account is his
distinction between national minorities and immigrants. Many critics
agree with Choudhry that ”in the majority of cases the decision
to immigrate is not free“ (64) due entrenched features of the
global economy and other factors beyond the control of immigrants. But
Patten defends a qualified form of Kymlicka’s distinction, arguing
that, in light of the benefits received by immigrants and a moral
prerogative that states enjoy to pursue their own national
projects,“a modest prioritizing of the claims of national minorities
over those of immigrants is reasonable and permissible”
(295-96).

However, Patten holds that Kymlicka’s approach is deficient when it
comes to cultural minorities — including immigrants —who
are geographically-dispersed and lack institutions that could serve as
the basis for their collective self-government. Contra
Kymlicka, Patten argues that, as a matter of justice, such persons
have a right that their cultural practices enjoy a level of
recognition and accommodation from the state that is equal to what the
majority culture enjoys. This right derives from a liberal state’s
“obligation to extend a fair opportunity for self-determination to
all its citizens,” (29) an obligation entailing that the state
“has the responsibility to be neutral toward the various conceptions
of the good that are affirmed by its citizens” (27). The appropriate
form of neutrality (what Patten calls “neutrality of treatment”)
is achieved when the state provides comparable facilities, resources,
and opportunities to the members of cultural minority groups so that
they are neither disadvantaged nor advantaged, relative to those in
the cultural majority, when it comes to pursuing identity-related
aspects of their conceptions of the good. Patten explains
identity-related features as ones that are not simply preferences but
help to define a person’s sense of who she is and hold a place of
central importance in a person’s system of ends.

According to Patten, among the areas in which a state might be called
upon to extend special rights to cultural minorities are language,
holidays, and the arrangement of substate political divisions. For
example, neutrality of treatment might require the state to supply its
services, such as assistance with tax preparations or information
regarding health matters, in the languages of cultural minorities.
Although such accommodations would go well beyond what Kymlicka has
endorsed, Patten agrees with Kymlicka that the underlying aim of
cultural rights is not to ensure the survival of a culture. As Patten
puts it, such rights “are not rights to cultural preservation”
(29). Once a framework of fair opportunity is established, whatever
cultural outcome that emerges is just, even if some cultures
“struggle or . . . disappear altogether” (29). 

Notwithstanding the differences, the positions of Patten and Kymlicka
occupy a middle ground between views that are largely antagonistic to
the idea of cultural rights and views that embrace such rights on the
ground that the survival of cultures has an intrisic importance,
irreducible to the interests of individuals. Barry takes the former,
antagonistic view, while Taylor takes the latter. 

Barry (2001) asserts that ”there are certain rights against
oppression, exploitation, and injury, to which every single human
being is entitled to lay claim, and…appeals to cultural
diversity and pluralism under no circumstances trump the value of
basic liberal rights“ (132–33). The legal system should
protect those rights by impartially imposing the same rules on all
persons, regardless of their cultural or religious membership. Barry
allows for a few exceptions, such as the accommodation of a Sikh boy
whose turban violated school dress regulations, but thinks that the
conditions under which such exceptions will be justified ”are
rarely satisfied“ (2001: 62).

At the other end of the spectrum, Taylor (1994) argues for a form of
communitarianism that attaches intrinsic importance to the survival of
cultures. In his view, differential treatment under the law for
certain practices is sometimes justifiable on the ground that such
treatment is important for keeping a culture alive. Taylor goes as far
as to claim that cultural survival can sometimes trump basic
individual rights, such as freedom of speech. Accordingly, he defends
legal restrictions on the use of English in Quebec, invoking the
survival of Quebec’s French culture.

However, it is unclear why intrinsic value should attach to cultural
survival as such. Following John Dewey (1939), Kymlicka (1995) rightly
emphasizes that liberty would have little or no value to the
individual apart from the life-options and meaningful choices provided
by culture. But both of them, as well as Barry and Patten, reasonably
contend that human interests are ultimately the interests of
individual human beings. In light of that contention, it would seem
that a culture that could not gain the uncoerced and undeceived
adherence of enough individuals to survive would have no moral claim
to its continuation. Legal restrictions on basic liberties that are
designed to perpetuate a given culture have the cart before the horse:
persons should have their basic liberties protected first, as those
protections serve the most important human interests. Only when those
interests are protected can we then say that a culture should survive,
not because the culture is intrinsically valuable, but rather because
it has the uncoerced adherence of a sufficient number of persons.
2. Blacks and Native Americans: Integration and Self-Rule

The treatment of blacks under slavery and Jim Crow presents a history
of injustice and cultural annihilation that is similar in some
respects to the treatment of Native Americans. However, civil rights
principles played very different roles in the struggle of these two
oppressed groups.

Civil rights principles demand that individuals from a disadvantaged
group have an opportunity for inclusion in the mainstream institutions
of society on an equal basis with the individuals who are already
treated as full citizens. However, in certain situations, such
principles might require that the disadvantaged group be given a right
to govern its own affairs, as Kymlicka’s account shows. This
right of political self-determination has a separatist aspect, even
though something less than complete sovereignty is involved. In
general, the guiding aim of the civil rights movement of American
blacks was equal inclusion, while Native American activists sought
political self-determination.
2.1 Integration and Black Nationalism

The fact that American blacks lacked any territory of their own on
which they could rule themselves favored the inclusion strategy,
although arguments were made that there was sufficient geographical
concentration of blacks in certain parts of the South (the so-called
”Black Belt“) for the African-Americans there to form
their own self-governing nation. Thus, shortly after World War II,
Harry Haywood advocated black political self-determination on the
ground that the only way to solve ”the issue of Negro
equality“ was through their ”full development as a
nation“ (1948: 143). But there was stronger support among
American blacks for a strategy that focused on the demand for
inclusion on equal terms with whites in the body politic of the United
States. The civil war amendments, and the civil rights laws that
accompanied them, promised such inclusion, and, in their struggle to
defeat Jim Crow, blacks repeatedly called upon white Americans live up
to the promise. Integration into the mainstream institutions of
society, rather than separate nationhood, was the goal of most
American blacks, as shown by the widespread support among blacks for
their civil rights movement.

For America’s blacks during the 1950s and 60s, the only
attractive alternative to the movement’s guiding goal of
inclusion was a form of black nationalism, the main aim of which was
obtaining increased resources from the broader society for black
institutions and communities. Black self-government along the lines
suggested by Haywood did not seem politically possible to most blacks
during the civil rights era, but resources for strengthening black
businesses and schools and improving black housing was a quite
reasonable demand to make on whites. And so many black nationalists
argued that, unless and until black communities and their institutions
were strengthened, the promise of racial justice through integration
and equal opportunity would prove hollow (Ture and Hamilton
1967/1992). Accordingly, black nationalists criticized civil rights
leaders for pursuing a strategy to achieve racial equality that was
bound to fail. 

Valls has recently developed a ”liberal black nationalism“
(2010: 479) by adapting Kymlicka’s account of group rights and
arguing that, because American blacks are kind of national minority
victimized by historical injustice at the hands of the white
population, ”justice demands the support of black institutions
and communities by the broader society“ (474). After this
support is forthcoming, Valls contends, individual blacks will be in
position to make a free and fair choice as whether, and to what
degree, to participate in black institutions and to live in black
communities or to become integrated into racially-mixed areas of
society. But Elizabeth Anderson has argued, against black nationalism,
that segregation is a ”fundamental cause of social inequality
and undemocratic practices,“ (2010: 2) and
”[c]omprehensive racial integration is a necessary condition for
a racially just future“ (189). Anderson’s argument entails
that Vall’s form of black nationalism is self-defeating:
segregation itself works to prevent the white support for black
communities and institutions for which such nationalism calls.

However, Shelby argues that Anderson has failed to appreciate the key
reasons why blacks prefer to live in mainly black neighborhoods:
“the main concern is to elude interpersonal discrimination, racist
treatment, and hostile attitudes,” supplemented by a desire “to
avoid interracial conflict” (269). Seen in this light, black
residential self-segregation is a form of “black solidarity” and
“a component of an ethic of resistance to injustice” (271).
Additionally, Shelby contends that Anderson “gives too little
weight” to the value of the neighborhood-based social networks that
economically disadvantaged blacks have in their segregated
neighborhoods; those networks often provide “child care,
transportation, and employment information and referral” (275), and
it is unclear that giving up the networks and moving to more affluent,
white areas would be sensible, especially because, by Anderson’s own
assessment, anti-black prejudice is pervasive among whites (Shelby:
276). Shelby agrees with Anderson “that justice requires that
obstacles to integration be removed so that individuals have the
option to integrate,” but he does question the view “that
justice requires that individuals actually integrate” (277
emphasis in original).

At the same time, one should keep in mind that Shelby’s disagreement
with Anderson is focused on residential integration and does not
extend to her insistence that justice requires integration in
workplaces and political institutions. Additionally, one should take
note of Miller’s argument that, in an ethnically and racially
diverse society, integration appears to be the best way of fostering
generalized trust across groups and that such trust is an important
variable determining the level of support that persons give to
treating out-group members in accordance with principle of social
justice (2013: 87-91).
2.2 Political Self-Rule and Native Americans

In contrast to the civil rights movement of American blacks, Native
Americans sought to mitigate the injustices perpetrated against them
mainly by pursuing political self-determination, in the form of tribal
self-rule. Even after the brutal tribal removals of the early 19th
century and the efforts at the end of that century to destroy tribal
control of lands through individual allotments, tribes still retained
some territorial basis on which a measure of self-rule was possible.
And during the black civil rights movement of the 1950s and 60s, there
was tension between Native Americans and blacks due to their different
attitudes toward self-determination and civil rights. Some Native
Americans looked askance at the desire of blacks for inclusion and
integration into white society, and they thought that the desire was
hopelessly naïve (Deloria, 1988: 169–70). Such Native
Americans were more in tune with radical black nationalists who
favored Haywood’s call for blacks to govern themselves
politically in those jurisdictions where they were concentrated.

In 1968, Congress enacted an Indian Civil Rights Act (ICRA). The act
extended the reach of certain individual constitutional rights against
government to intratribal affairs. Tribal governments would for the
first time be bound by constitutional principles concerning free
speech, due process, cruel and unusual punishment, and equal
protection, among others. Freedom of religion was omitted from the law
as a result of the protests of the Pueblo, whose political
arrangements were theocratic, but the law was a major incursion on
tribal self-determination, nonetheless (Norgren and Shattuck, 1993:
169).

A married pueblo woman brought suit in federal court, claiming that
the tribe’s marriage ordinances constituted sex discrimination
against her and other women of the tribe, thus violating the ICRA.
(Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez) The ordinances excluded from tribal
membership the children of a Pueblo woman who married outside of the
tribe, while the children of men who married outsiders were counted as
members. Martinez had initially sought relief in tribal forums, to no
avail, before turning to the federal courts. The Supreme Court held
that federal courts did not have jurisdiction to hear the case: the
substantive provisions of the ICRA did apply to the Pueblo, but the
inherent sovereign powers of the tribe meant that the tribal
government had exclusive jurisdiction in the case. The ruling has been
both questioned and defended by feminist legal scholars (MacKinnon,
1987; Valencia-Weber 2004).

Unlike U.S. law, the Canadian Indian Act provides that men and women
are to be treated equally when it comes to the band membership of
their children (Johnston, 1995: 190). This law and the Santa Clara
case raise the general issue of whether and when it is justifiable for
a liberal state to impose liberal principles on illiberal (or not
fully liberal) political communities that had been involuntary
incorporated into the larger state. Addressing this issue, Kymlicka
(1995) argues that “there is relatively little scope for
legitimate coercive interference” because efforts to impose
liberal principles tend to be counterproductive, provoking the charge
that they amount to “paternalistic colonialism.” Moreover,
“liberal institutions can only really work if liberal beliefs
have been internalized.” Kymlicka concludes, then, that liberals
on the outside of an illiberal culture should support the efforts of
those insiders who seek reform but should generally stop short of
coercively imposing liberal principles (1995: 167). At the same time,
Kymlicka acknowledges that there are cases in which a liberal state is
clearly permitted to impose its laws, citing with approval the
decision in a case that involved the application of Canadian law to a
tribe that had kidnapped a member and forced him to undergo an
initiation ceremony (44). 

Applying Kymlicka’s general line of thinking might prove
contentious in many cases. Consider Santa Clara. His arguments could
be used to support the decision in that case: the exercise of
jurisdiction might be deemed “paternalistic colonialism.”
But one might argue, instead, that jurisdiction is needed to vindicate
the basic liberal right of gender equality. However, it does seem
that, if a wrong akin to kidnapping or worse is required before
federal courts can legitimately step in, then the Santa Clara case
falls short of meeting such a requirement. The argument might then
shift to whether the requirement imposes an excessively high hurdle
for the exercise of federal jurisdiction. Accordingly,
Kymlicka’s approach might not settle the disagreement over Santa
Clara, but it does provide a very reasonable normative framework in
terms of which liberal thought can address the difficult issues
presented by the case and, more generally, by the problem of extending
liberal principles to Native American tribes. 
3. Free and Equal Citizenship

Civil rights are those rights that constitute free and equal
citizenship in a liberal democracy. Such citizenship has two main
dimensions, both tied to the idea of autonomy. Accordingly, civil
rights are essentially connected to securing the autonomy of the
citizen. 
2.1 Public and Private Autonomy

To be a free and equal citizen is, in part, to have those legal
guarantees that are essential to fully adequate participation in
public discussion and decisionmaking. A citizen has a right to an
equal voice and an equal vote. In addition, she has the rights needed
to protect her “moral independence,” that is, her ability
to decide for herself what gives meaning and value to her life and to
take responsibility for living in conformity with her values (Dworkin,
1995: 25). Accordingly, equal citizenship has two main dimensions:
“public autonomy,” i.e., the individual’s freedom to
participate in the formation of public opinion and society’s
collective decisions; and “private autonomy,” i.e., the
individual’s freedom to decide what way of life is most worth
pursuing (Habermas: 1996). The importance of these two dimensions of
citizenship stem from what Rawls calls the “two moral
powers” of personhood: the capacity for a sense of justice and
the capacity for a conception of the good (1995: 164; 2001: 18). A
person stands as an equal citizen when society and its political
system give equal and due weight to the interest each citizen has in
the development and exercise of those capacities.
2.2 Ancient and Modern Citizenship

The idea of equal citizenship can be traced back to Aristotle’s
political philosophy and his claim that true citizens take turns
ruling and being ruled (1984: 1252a16). In modern society, the idea
has been transformed, in part by the development of representative
government and its system of elections (Manin 1997). For modern
liberal thought, citizenship is no longer a matter of having a direct
and equal share in governance, but rather consists in a legal status
that confers a certain package of rights that guarantee to an
individual a voice, a vote, and a zone of private autonomy. The other
crucial differences between modern liberalism and earlier political
theories concern the range of human beings who are regarded as having
the capacity for citizenship and the scope of private autonomy to
which each citizen is entitled as a matter of basic right. Modern
liberal theory is more expansive on both counts than its ancient and
medieval forerunners.

It is true that racist and sexist ideas plagued liberal theory for
much of its modern history (e.g., see Eze 1997 and Mills 2005 on
Kant’s racism). However, two crucial liberal ideas have made
possible an internal critique of racism, sexism, and other
illegitimate forms of hierarchy. The first is that society is
constructed by humans, a product of human will, and is not some
preordained natural or God-given order. The second is that social
arrangements need to be justified before the court of reason to each
individual who lives under them and who is capable of reasoning. The
conjunction of these ideas made possible an egalitarianism that was
not available to ancient and medieval political thought, although this
liberal egalitarianism emerged haltingly out of the racist and sexist
presuppositions that infused much liberal theorizing and that, even if
in modified forms, still shape the mentality of substantial portions
of the population in liberal democratic states.

Many contemporary theorists have argued that taking liberal
egalitarianism to its logical conclusion requires the liberal state to
pursue a program of deliberately reconstructing informal social norms
and cultural meanings. They contend that social stigma and denigration
still operate powerfully to deny equal citizenship to groups such as
blacks, women, and gays. Accordingly, Kernohan has argued that
“the egalitarian liberal state should play an activist role in
cultural reform” (1998: xi), and Koppelman has taken a similar
position: “the antidiscrimination project seeks to reconstruct
social reality to eliminate or marginalize the shared meanings,
practices and institutions that unjustifiably single out certain
groups of citizens for stigma and disadvantage” (1996: 8). This
position is deeply at odds with at least some of the ideas that lie
behind the advocacy of third-generation civil rights. Those rights
ground claims of cultural survival, whether or not a culture’s
meanings, practices and institutions stigmatize and disadvantage the
members of some ascriptively-defined group. The egalitarian proponents
of cultural reconstruction can be understood as advocating a different
kind of “third-generation” for the civil rights movement:
one in which the state, having attacked legal, political and economic
barriers to equal citizenship, now takes on cultural obstacles.

A cultural-reconstruction phase of the civil rights movement would run
contrary to Kukathas’s argument that it is too dangerous to
license the state to intervene against cultures that engage in social
tyranny (2001). It also raises questions about whether state-supported
cultural reconstruction would violate basic liberties, such as freedom
of private association. The efforts of New Jersey to apply
antidiscrimination law to the Boy Scouts, a group whose national
organization discriminated against gays until 2015 (Boy Scouts: 2015),
illustrates the potential problems. The Supreme Court invalidated the
state’s efforts on grounds of free association
 (Boys Scouts v. Dale).
 Nonetheless, it may be necessary to reconceive the scope and limits
of some basic liberties if the principle of free and equal citizenship
is followed through to its logical conclusions.
4. Voting Rights

Among the most effective and important pieces of legislation to come
out of the civil rights movement was the Voting Rights Act of 1965
(VRA). The act effected a “quiet revolution” (Davidson and
Grofman) in the political systems of southern states by greatly
reducing the legal power those states had traditionally possessed to
determine the rules by which their electoral systems operated. The
rules had been designed to ensure that whites maintained a monopoly on
political power by disenfranchising African Americans, notwithstanding
the demand of the Fifteenth Amendment that the right to vote not be
denied or abridged on the basis of race or color. Using a variety of
devices, southern jurisdictions had succeeded in denying the ballot to
the vast majority of African Americans. Those devices included
literacy and other knowledge tests, which were administered by local
registrars in a discriminatory manner. And in Giles v. Harris (1903),
the Supreme Court had effectively declared that the federal judiciary
was not the place to go for blacks who sought to dismantle the system
of disenfranchisement, with Justice Holmes writing for the Court that
“relief from a great political wrong, if done, as alleged, by
the people of a state and the state itself must be given by them or by
the legislative and political department of the government of the
United States” (488).

The VRA took a series of unprecedented steps in shifting the power to
regulate elections from the states to the national government. The
traditional understanding had been that, under the Constitution,
states had the exclusive and final power to determine the rules by
which their elections were held. The VRA overturned that
understanding, inserting federal power into the sovereign domain of
the states. Previous federal statutes addressing racial discrimination
in voting had respected that domain and had required the right to
vote, regardless of race or color, be vindicated on a case-by-case
basis by lawsuits brought by individual complainants. But by the
mid-1960’s Congress had determined that such an approach had proved
ineffective in addressing systemic violations of the Fifteenth
Amendment.

Section 2 of the VRA contained a nationwide ban on any voting
qualification or procedure that denied or abridged a citizen’s right
to vote on account of race or color. The act went on to provide
remedies to make the ban effective in jurisdictions that had been
particularly egregious in their violations of the Fifteenth Amendment.
The remedies applied to jurisdictions that met two conditions (the
“coverage formula”): 1) as of November 1964, the jurisdiction was
using a literacy test or some similar device to determine eligibility
to register, and 2) the proportion of eligible voters in the
jurisdiction who were actually registered on that date was below 50% ,
or the voter turnout there for that year’s presidential election was
below 50%. The remedies authorized for use against jurisdictions that
met the coverage formula included the invalidation of literacy tests
and other such devices, the appointment of federal examiners to
replace local registrars and to prepare and maintain the voting rolls,
and, under Section 5, the requirement to gain federal approval
(typically from the Attorney General) for any changes in rules
governing elections (“the preclearance requirement”). Seven
southern states fell under the coverage formula. Section 4 also
provided that otherwise covered jurisdictions could “bailout” of
federal oversight by showing that, in the previous five years, they
had not used the suspect devices with the purpose or effect of denying
the right to vote on racial grounds.“

The constitutionality of the key provisions of the VRA was challenged
by the states that fell under the coverage formula, but the Supreme
Court upheld the law in South Carolina v. Katzenbach (1966). The act
was then reauthorized several times, most recently in 2006. The
alterations sought to strengthen protections against what were called
“second- generation” barriers to racial equality in the electoral
process. The first generation had been the literacy tests and other
devices that were applied in discriminatory fashion to block blacks
from registering. The second generation consisted of various ways that
the political power of registered minority voters was diluted by
making it more difficult for them than for the white majority to elect
their favored candidates.

Consider the following example of vote dilution. In many counties in
the South, whites were in the overall majority but blacks were a
majority in certain parts of the county. The counties were divided
into districts, with each district electing a member of the county
board. First-generation discrimination ensured all-white boards by
blocking black registration in majority-black districts. When
first-generation devices were invalidated as a result of the VRA, many
southern counties switched from a district-based system to at-large
voting, so that the white majority in the county could continue to
elect an all-white board. The Supreme Court held that such changes
were subject to a preclearance review by federal authorities, who were
empowered to prohibit the changes. (Allen v. State Board of Elections
1969). However, in Shelby County v. Holder (2013), the Supreme Court
effectively struck down the coverage formula of Section 4, thereby
rendering impotent Section 5’s preclearance provision: with no
coverage formula, no jurisdictions could be picked out as ones needing
to receive federal approval for changing their electoral rules. The
formula had been last updated in the early 1970’s, and, writing for
the Court, Chief Justice Roberts found that the use of the formula had
become “irrational” in light of the “dramatic [racial]
progress” that had been made in the intervening decades (Slip
Opinion at 23-24). He pointed out that the jurisdictions covered by
the formula had rates of black voter registration and turnout as high,
and in some cases higher, than the rates for whites, and that
minorities now hold office “at unprecedented levels” (14) in those
states.

Justice Roberts did not deny the existence of second-generation
barriers, but he argued that Congress had failed to reshape the
coverage formula to track the parts of the country in which such
barriers were most prevalent at present. Accordingly, he did not see a
rational relationship between the formula and any remaining obstacles
to racial discrimination in voting. Moreover, he contended that
Section 5 constituted a “dramatic departure from the principle that
all states enjoy equal sovereignty” (1). In light of such a
departure from a principle that he regarded as “fundamental” (11),
Roberts concluded that Congress lacked the constitutional power to
impose the old coverage formula.

In her dissent, Justice Ginsburg emphasized the evidential record that
Congress had compiled prior to its 2006 reauthorization of the law.
That record led Congress to the conclusion that the old coverage
formula was adequate to capture those jurisdictions where
second-generation barriers were most prevalent. For example, the
record contained a study showing that covered areas were much more
likely to be successfully sued in Section 2 litigation than
jurisdictions that were not covered. Accordingly, Ginsburg judged that
“Congress had reasonably concluded that the coverage formula
continues to identify the jurisdictions of greatest concern”
(Ginsburg, J., dissenting, Slip Opinion at 20). She also construed the
“equal sovereignty” principle as applying only to the very limited
circumstances in which a new state was being admitted to the union:
the new state must not be accorded a lesser, or greater, degree of
sovereignty than the existing states.

Much of the critical discussion of Shelby County has focused on the
equal sovereignty principle, with many commentators rejecting
Roberts’s characterization of the principle as legally fundamental.
And it is true that his broad understanding of the principle does not
find much explicit legal precedent. However, the principle, understood
as he does, seems to be such a clear operating premise of American
federalism that it could be reasonably expected to go unformulated for
so long. Additionally, Roberts is correct to see section 5 of the VRA
as a “dramatic departure” (1) from the principle. As Bruce
Ackerman stresses, the VRA was a radical piece of legislation, akin to
a constitutional amendment in the way that it overturned long-settled
legal understandings. Nonetheless, Roberts’s argument remains
problematic due to his insistence that Congress reshape the coverage
formula in light of current realities regarding racial discrimination
in voting. Congress did examine the current situation and found that
no reformulation was needed because, notwithstanding the formula’s
references to registration and turnout from decades ago, it still
captured the jurisdictions with the most serious problems. This
finding is not prima facie implausible, and Roberts’s
second-guessing Congress’s judgment in the matter is difficult to
defend.

In arguing that the coverage formula needed reformulation, Roberts
pointed to the levels of black registration, turnout, and office
holding in recent years. Turnout and registration were at least as
high as for whites in covered jurisdictions, and office holding had
increased dramatically over the decades. However, the turnout and
registration figures do not speak to second-generation barriers, nor
does the comparison between black office holding now and forty-five
years ago. Whether or not those barriers have been largely taken down
cannot be determined from a baseline of 1970: the admittedly great
progress in office holding since then might only show how bad things
were in the covered jurisdictions in 1970 and not how close they are
now to having eliminated the effects of racial discrimination in their
electoral processes.
5. Criminal Justice and Racial Profiling

In recent years, the criminal justice system has become a focal point
in the discussion of civil rights in the United States. A number of
commentators have argued that the system amounts to a “new Jim
Crow,” reducing blacks to an inferior, caste-like status (Alexander
2012; for criticism of the Jim Crow analogy, see Forman 2012). Yet,
even apart from such arguments, civil rights concerns have been raised
about every dimension of criminal justice in the U.S., from the
investigation and arrest of suspects to the imposition of the death
penalty. And issues of racial equality with respect to criminal
justice are hardly limited to the U.S. (Clarke: 9-10). In France, for
example, race-based abuse perpetrated by the police is a matter of
serious public concern, and the office of Defender of Rights has found
that persons perceived as black or Arab are 20 times as likely to be
stopped by police as members of the general population (Bredeen and
Morenne). 

Among the most controversial tactics used by police in determining who
has committed a crime is racial (and ethnic) profiling. The tactic has
given rise to the charge that the use of the tactic violates the civil
rights of those whom it targets, and, in some cases, the courts have
agreed with the charge. In State v. Soto, for example, a New Jersey
court found that police traffic stops targeted blacks and amounted to
a “selective enforcement” (351) of the law and a violation of the
Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. Nonetheless, debate
continues over when, if ever, it is justifiable for police to use race
in deciding whom to stop and question. 

Risse and Zeckhauser formulate a philosophically sophisticated defense
of racial profiling. They argue that, even in a racist society like
the United State, such profiling is justifiable under conditions
plausibly thought to exist in a range of cases. Their argument
combines utilitarian and deontological considerations: the utilitarian
strand regards profiling as contributing to the public good of crime
control, while the deontological line of argument aims to rebut claims
that profiling is objectionably discriminatory and unfair to persons
whom it harms. 

Risse and Zeckhauser acknowledge that police abuse can be coupled with
profiling, but they insist that “abuse and profiling . . . are
different problems that must be assessed independently” (139;
emphasis in original). Profiling is “any police initiated-action
that relies on the race, ethnicity, or national origin and not merely
on the behavior of an individual” (136). Such action need not
involve any abusive police behavior, such as “rude words, demeaning
demands, physical force, or physical injury” (138). Abuse “must be
rectified independently” (139) of profiling. 

Some critics of profiling contend that it is wholly ineffective as a
crime control measure. Risse and Zeckhauser point out that if this
contention is true, then there is no issue: profiling is unjustifiable
on that premise. But they reason that, even if some forms of profiling
make no net contribution to crime control, it seems unlikely that all
forms fit that description, given “a significant correlation between
membership in certain racial groups and the tendency to commit certain
crimes” (132). 

Racial minorities feel aggrieved by profiling, and Risse and
Zeckhauser do not disregard that fact. However, they claim that the
grievance rests largely on “the underlying systematic racism”
(145) of society and that the harm done to minorities by profiling is
“small” (169) in comparison to that harm done by that underlying
racism. For example, African Americans would be “only slightly”
better off if profiling were eliminated, “keeping everything
else fixed” (149; emphasis in original). “[T]he harm attached
to profiling per se,” they explain, “is expressive”
(146; emphasis in original). Profiling is “a symbol of structural
disadvantage” (147) but “not the primary cause of . . . the sense
of hurt among minorities” (149). In the utilitarian calculus of
Risse and Zeckhauser, the harms that count against the benefits
flowing from more effective crime control are “comparatively
modest” (149), viz., symbolic harms plus the temporary
inconveniences of being stopped and questioned by the police. These
modest harms are, in their view, likely to be outweighed in a range of
cases by the benefits.

Additionally, Risse and Zeckhauser argue that racial profiling per se
is not objectionably discriminatory, because it has neither “the
intention or the effect of maintaining or establishing an
oppressive relationship” between the races (153; emphasis
in original). When it does not involve abuse, profiling has the
intention of crime control, and, because profiling “is itself
parasitic on an underlying oppressive relationship” (154) and does
(mainly) symbolic harm, it “does not contribute to [an] oppressive
relationship” (155). 

Critics of Risse and Zeckhauser argue that profiling is not only a
symbol of society’s underlying racism but that it contributes
materially to such racism as well. Thus, Lever contends that profiling
“encourages us to see black people as perpetrators” and that it
likely “discourages black people from living, traveling and working
in white neighborhoods” (2007: 23). Lever also challenges the idea
that police abuse is independent of profiling; she suggests that
“racial profiling exacerbates problems of police abuse” because
such profiling “conveys a message that black people are . . .
dangerous” (24). And one could also argue against Risse and
Zeckhauser that it is reasonable to hold that abuse is a predictable
consequence of the combination of profiling and society’s underlying
racism, because the racist belief that blacks in general are
especially likely to be lawbreakers is hardly foreign to police and
can be reasonably expected to prime police to resort to excessive
force and other forms of abuse when dealing with blacks. 

Lippert-Rasmussen criticizes Risse and Zeckhauser for failing to take
account of the fact that patterns and rates of crime among blacks are
not independent of the wrongful behavior of whites in society at large
toward blacks. If racial profiling is an effective law-enforcement
practice because blacks disproportionately commit crimes of a certain
sort, that fact might be the product of the unjustified,
discriminatory conduct of whites, and if blacks reject profiling, it
would seem that whites could not then justify the practice by
appealing to its efficacy. Instead, whites could and should forego
profiling and, instead, cease engaging in their wrongful behavior.


In replying to Lever and Lippert-Rasmussen, Risse notes that “[i]t
may be true that, given current conditions, it is impossible to use
race [in criminal profiling] . . . without encountering massive
problems of police abuse” (2007: 4). But critics of profiling will
say that even this point understates the matter: profiling predictably
generates racist abuses by providing an opportunity for racist beliefs
to operate in law enforcement and by encouraging such beliefs to
operate there. And this situation is not simply a matter of “current
conditions,” as though in the next few years the matter could well
be different. As Risse writes in responding to Lippert-Rasmussen, the
behavioral patterns of “people [who] have been socialized in a
racist society . . . will be hard to change” (2007: 8). 

Risse emphasizes that his view would justify racial profiling only
when such profiling contributes to the provision of the important
public good of personal safety. In his estimation, at least some of
the forms that profiling has taken fail to meet that conditions, e.g.,
random traffic stops of blacks driving in white neighborhoods. His
point is that it is a mistake to think that all forms of racial
profiling are like such traffic stops and to categorically reject
profiling on the assumption that the traffic-stop example can stand in
for every form of racial profiling. 

Reiman agrees that some forms of racial profiling can make a
significant contribution to overall safety, but he also supports
Lever’s view that racial profiling in a racist society is likely to
exacerbate racism and increase the violation of the rights of those
victimized by racism. While he holds that “profiling is not
intrinsically racist” (17), Reiman argues that Risse and Zeckhauser
have not set the bar sufficiently high for profiling to be justified.
He contends that, in light of its likely exacerbation of existing
racism, “racial profiling [must] be used only for grave crimes and
only where there is abundant evidence of its likelihood of
significantly increasing apprehension of perpetrators of such
crimes” (17). This view is in conformity with Lever’s position
that profiling should only be “an exceptional measure” (2005: 109)
in the work of police. 

The Risse- Zeckhauser argument is consistent with the idea,
undoubtedly accepted by many critics of profiling, that racial
injustice is severe and widespread in a society like the U.S.
Disagreement arises, however, over the extent of the harms brought
about by those forms of racial profiling that have value in catching
offenders and reducing crime. But the deeper disagreement is over how
the harms in question are to be factored into the determination of
when profiling is acceptable. Risse and Zeckhauser hold that the harms
are to be balanced against, and so can be outweighed by, the benefits
of more effective law enforcement. Critics, on the other hand, do not
regard the benefits of profiling as morally innocent gains, to be
impersonally weighed in a utilitarian calculus. Rather, the critics
see whatever law-enforcement benefits there may be as tainted by the
way in which profiling, even when non-abusive, is linked to racism:
the benefits should be morally discounted, or put another way, they
should not simply outweigh the harms but should do so by an especially
large margin if a given form of profiling is to be justifiable. 
6. Marriage Equality

Among the most highly contested civil rights issues of recent years
has been the question of whether marriage laws should be extended to
include same-sex couples. Over the past two decades, a number of
countries have liberalized their laws to enable such couples to become
married, despite the opposition of those who think that it is morally
or theologically unjustified to alter the traditional understanding of
marriage as the union of a man and a woman. The countries that
currently recognize same-sex marriages include the Netherlands,
Belgium, Canada, South Africa, Spain, Norway, Sweden, Mexico,
Portugal, Iceland, Argentina, Denmark, Brazil, France, England, New
Zealand, and the United States. In most of these countries, nationwide
same-sex marriage was brought about by legislation. But in the United
States, the Supreme Court ruling in Obergefell v. Hodges extended
same-sex marriage from ten states to all fifty.

Most scholars working in the areas of philosophy and legal theory
endorse a principle of equal treatment for same-sex and heterosexual
couples and argue that equal treatment requires that same-sex
marriages be legalized (Wardle 1996 and Eskridge 1996). However, there
are dissenting voices in the literature, rejecting marriage equality.
These voices do not argue in favor the traditional practice of
criminalizing same-sex relations, although some contend that such
relations are “manifestly unworthy of the human being and immoral”
(Finnis 1996: 14). But they all argue that extending marriage to
same-sex couples flouts important values and principles. 

Many advocates of a right to same-sex marriage argue that abridging a
person’s right to marry on the basis of sexual orientation is
objectionable for the same reasons that abridging that right on the
basis of race cannot be justified: both forms of restriction are
arbitrary deprivations of a fundamental civil right (Koh et al.: 18-19
and 42). However, such an argument proceeds too quickly. In the eyes
of opponents, the analogy between race and sexual orientation is
inapt: the considerations they invoke against same-sex marriage, such
as the interests of children or the distinctive nature of heterosexual
intercourse, do not apply to interracial marriages. Accordingly,
arguments about same-sex marriage must engage with those
considerations.

Finnis (1996), Lee (1997) and George (1997) make their case against
same-sex marriage by invoking natural law. However, unlike traditional
versions of natural law theory, their version does not rest on any
explicit theological or metaphysical claims. Rather, it invokes
independent principles of practical reasoning that articulate the
basic reasons for action. Such reasons are the fundamental goods that
action is capable of realizing and, for Finnis, Lee and George,
include “marriage, the conjuntio of man and woman” (Finnis 1996:
4). Homosexual conduct, masturbation, and all extra-marital sex aim
strictly at “individual gratification” and can be no part of any
“common good.” Such actions “harm the character” of those
voluntarily choosing them (Lee and George, 1997: 135), and, in taking
the actions, the individual becomes a slave to his passions, allowing
his reason to be overridden by his raw desire for sensuous pleasure.


On Finnis’s account, when consensual sexual conduct is private,
government may not outlaw it, but government “can rightly judge that
it has a compelling interest in denying that ‘gay lifestyles’ are
a valid and humanly acceptable choice and form of life” (1996: 17).
And for Finnis, Lee and George, equal treatment of same-sex and
heterosexual relations is out of the question due to the morally
defective character of same-sex relations. 

Macedo responds to Finnis by arguing that “all of the goods that can
be shared by sterile heterosexual couples can also be shared by
committed homosexual couples” (1996: 39). Macedo points out that
Finnis does not condemn sexual intercourse by sterile heterosexual
couples. But Finnis replies that there is a relevant difference
between homosexual couples and sterile heterosexual ones: the latter
but not the former are united “biologically” when they have
intercourse. Lee and George make essentially the same point: only
heterosexual couples can “truly become one body, one organism”
(1997: 150). But Macedo points out that, biologically, it is not the
man and woman who unite but the sperm and the egg (1996: 37). It can
be added that the “biological unity” argument seems to run
contrary to Finnis’s claim that his position “does not seek to
infer normative conclusions from non-normative (natural-fact)
premises” (1997: 16). More importantly, Macedo and Koppelman make
the key point that the human good realized in intimate relations is a
function of “mutual commitment and stable engagement” (Macedo,
1996: 40) and that same-sex couples can achieve “the precise kind of
human good” that is available to heterosexual ones (Koppelman, 1997:
1649). Accordingly, equal treatment under the law for same-sex
couples, including the recognition of same-sex marriage, would remove
unjustifiable obstacles faced by same-sex couples to the achievement
of that human good. 

Corvino explains one of the central human goods provided by marriage
in this way: marriage involves two individuals mutually and publicly
committing to be the “Number One Person” for the other in sharing
the benefits and alleviating the burdens that life brings (Corvino and
Gallagher: 15). Sterile heterosexual couples and those unable to have
sexual relations for physical reasons are rightly permitted to marry
to secure that good, and Corvino argues that “once the state
provides marriage as an option for different-sex partners, even if
they cannot or choose not to have children; . . . [and] even if they
are incapable of coitus, . . . but then denies [marriage] to same-sex
couples, it is treating citizens unequally” (89–90). 

Gallagher rejects Corvino’s view, contending that “[t]he critical
public or ‘civil’ task of marriage is to regulate sexual
relationships between men and women in order to reduce the likelihood
that children . . . will face the burdens of fatherlessness, and
increase the likelihood that there will be a next generation that will
be raised by their mothers and fathers in one family, where both
parents are committed to each other and to their children” (Corvino
and Gallagher: 96). She argues that “gay marriage is a profound
change to the meaning of the word ‘marriage’. . . . [b]ecause] it
disconnects marriage from its grounding in the human reality that
male-female sexual relationships are different from other kinds of
relationships” (101). 

However, Gallagher is not correct to claim that Corvino’s view rests
on the premise that “a union of two men or two women is just the
same as a union of husband and wife” (132). The question is whether
the two sorts of union are relevantly similar with respect to values
that marriage serves. Corvino claims that, with respect to at least
one important value, viz., providing support for couples who want to
undertake a mutual and public commitment to be each other’s
“Number One Person,” there is no relevant difference. Gallagher
weakens her own view when she writes that “gay marriage is wrong
first and foremost not because of its consequences but because it is a
lie” (178), specifically, the lie that same-sex couples “are like
man and wife” (177). Rather, in light of her emphasis on how
marriage protects children (109-115), she should argue that regulating
sexual relations between men and women in the interest of children is
the most important social purpose of marriage and that marriage
equality threatens the capacity of marriage to serve that function;
she should not deny that marriage has other, socially valuable
functions. 

Corvino affirms that marriage has an important child-protection
function, while rejecting the idea that it is the sole function (192).
His key disagreements with Gallagher are over the importance of those
other functions and whether there is adequate reason to think that
marriage equality threatens the child-protection function. Corvino
argues that denying same-sex couples access to the human goods that
marriage can provide to them is no small matter for those couples and
that Gallagher vastly underestimates what such access means to them
(198). Given how persistently and vigorously same-sex couples have
fought for marriage equality, it is difficult to disagree with Corvino
on the matter. 

Citing studies suggesting that male same-sex couples have a relatively
weak commitment to sexual fidelity and are relatively unconcerned
about their partner having sex outside of the relationship, Gallagher
argues that same-sex marriage would dilute the commitment to fidelity
among heterosexual couples, thereby undermining an essential marital
norm. And, with the fidelity norm seriously weakened, heterosexual
marriages would become more unstable and the interests of children
would be harmed.

In Corvino’s judgment, however, Gallagher’s argument rests
on an ”implausible empirical claim about same-sex couples’
power to topple majority norms“ (195). Gay marriages would be
only a tiny fraction of all marriages, and gay marriages between men
who are indifferent to fidelity would be an even smaller fraction. One
could add to Corvino’s criticism that, even if Gallagher’s
claim is not implausible, it does seem to be little more than
speculation, and it is problematic to deny a civil right on such
speculative grounds to a portion of the adult population that has made
it clear that, contra Gallagher, the right is very important
to them. Gallagher might respond that the stakes for society are high,
claiming that the well-being of future generations hang in the
balance. But essentially the same claims have been made by defenders
of traditional marriage about every liberalization of the law of
marriage, from the dismantling of coverture (which had placed a
married woman almost entirely under the legal power of her husband) to
the present controversy over same-sex marriage.

Girgis, Anderson, and George argue that the defense of same-sex
marriage rests on a faulty understanding of marriage, what they call
“the revisionist view” (4). Such a view derives from the sexual
revolution of the 1960’s and rejects the understanding that had
prevailed in almost every society until then, “the conjugal view”
(3).

On the conjugal view, marriage is a permanent commitment, “ordered
to procreation and family life” (7) and constituting a
“comprehensive union” of a man and a woman. The union joins
spouses “in body as well as in mind” and is “sealed by sexual
intercourse” (3). Such a union is “a basic human good, a
distinctive way of thriving” (35). And “there is something
special” about a marital couple’s sexual intercourse, because it
constitutes the “highest kind of bodily unity” (26), a unity not
available in any other relationship. In having intercourse, the
marital partners “do not merely touch or interlock” but unite in a
way that “has generative significance” and “physically embodies
their specific, marital commitment” (36).

By contrast, the revisionist view regards marriage as essentially a
matter of “emotional union and cohabitation” (8). Sex can enhance
the emotional connections but is not essential to the marital union,
and when the emotions cool, the partners might reasonably seek to end
the union.

Girgis et al. claim that the revisionist view warps our grasp of what
marriage is. They dismiss Corvino’s idea that marriage is a matter
of having a “Number One Person,” arguing that it “cannot
distinguish marriage from simple companionship” (15). Nor can the
revisionist view explain why the state should be involved in
regulating marriage or account for the central marital norms of
permanence and sexual exclusivity.

Corvino can respond that his defense of marriage equality does not
rest on the revisionist view, even though he does reject the conjugal
view. Rather, Corvino is suggesting a way of understanding marriage
that gives same-sex partners access to those substantial goods of
marriage that are not tied to heterosexual intercourse. Security in a
stable relationship that is publicly and legally ratified as lasting
and exclusive is among those goods. The liberty to break off a
relationship when emotions “cool” is no part of Corvino’s
understanding of marriage. And although it is true that companionship
and friendship can provide a “Number One Person,” they cannot do
so with the same level of assurance that a legally ratified marriage
can do so.

Girgis et al. might reject Corvino’s view on the ground that it
rests on mere psychological considerations related to such matters as
how secure people feel and how likely they are to end a relationship
if it is sexually open, whereas their view rests on a priori
principles concerning objective human goods. However, Corvino can
respond that his understanding of marriage invokes human goods that
are no less objective than Girgis’s “comprehensive union.”
Additionally, Corvino might note that, even assuming that heterosexual
intercourse unites male and female partners, his argument proceeds
without recourse to such contestable claims as the quasi-metaphysical
thesis that such intercourse between married partners is “the
highest” form of bodily unity and that other sorts of sexual
activity are a “mere” touching or interlocking of bodily
parts.

Girgis et al. think that the conjugal account of marriage reflects its
true nature, but this position appears to have been rejected by most
democratic societies since the liberalization of marriage laws and
norms that began with nineteenth-century criticisms of the law of
coverture. Blackstone summarized the law as it had been through the
18th century: “By marriage, the husband and wife are one person in
law: that is, the very being or legal existence of the woman is
suspended during the marriage, or at least is incorporated and
consolidated into that of the husband” (441). Over the course of a
century and more, coverture was limited and eventually eliminated in
favor of marriage equality between husband and wife, though
traditionalists repeatedly argued that such changes violated the
essence of marriage as “a union of person in husband and wife”
(441). Subsequent changes in the social understanding of marriage were
reflected in the rejection of the requirement of sexual intercourse
for the consummation of marriage and in the spread of no-fault divorce
laws. Given that such radical changes in the understanding of marriage
have already taken place and been inscribed in law, it is unclear how
law and society can now consistently or justly exclude same-sex
couples from forming a marital bond.
7. Disability

During the 1970s and 80s, persons with disabilities increasingly
argued that they were treated as second-class citizens by law and
society. They organized into a civil rights movement that pressed for
legislation that would help secure for them the status of equal
citizens. Protection against discrimination based on disability was
written into the
 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
 and
 The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
 The disability rights movement in the U.S. culminated with the
passage of the
 Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990
 (ADA). The ADA has served as a model for legislation in countries
such as Australia, India and Israel

The disability rights movement began with the idea that discrimination
on the basis of disability was not different in any morally important
way from discrimination based on race. The aim of the movement was to
enshrine in law the same kind of antidiscrimination principle that
protected persons based on their race. But some theorists have
questioned how well the analogy holds. They point out that applying
the antidiscrimination norm to disability, for example, by installing
ramps for access to buildings or offering special education programs,
requires taking account of physical or mental differences among
people. This seems to be treatment based on a person’s physical
or mental features, apparently the exact opposite of the ideal of
”colorblindness“ behind the traditional antidiscrimination
principle.

Even race-based affirmative action does not really seem to be parallel
to antidiscrimination policies that take account of disability.
Advocates of affirmative action assert that the social ideal is for
persons not to be treated on the basis of their race or color at all.
Race-conscious policies are seen as instruments that will move society
toward that ideal (Wasserstrom, 2001).

In contrast, policies designed to counter discrimination based on
disability are not sensibly understood as temporary measures or steps
toward a goal in which people are not treated based on their
disabilities. The policies permanently enshrine the idea that in
designing buildings or buses or constructing some other aspect of our
physical-social environment, we must be responsive to the disabilities
people have in order for the disabled to have ”fair equality of
opportunity“ (Rawls, 2001: 43–44). The need for a
permanent ”accommodation“ of persons with disabilities
seems to mark an important difference in how the antidiscrimination
norm should be understood in the context of disability, as opposed to
the context of race.

However, it is important to recognize that, at the level of
fundamental principle, the reasons why disability-based discrimination
is morally objectionable and even unjust are essentially the same as
the reasons why racial discrimination is so. At the individual level,
disadvantageous treatment of the disabled is often rooted in ill-will,
disregard, and moral arbitrariness. At the systemic level, such
treatment creates a social pattern of disadvantage that reduces the
disabled to second-class status. In those two respects, the grounds of
civil rights law are no different when it comes to the disabled.

Another way in which disability is thought to be fundamentally
different from race concerns the special needs that the disabled often
have that make life more costly for them. These extra costs would
exist even if the socially-constructed physical environment were built
to provide the disabled with fair equality of opportunity and their
basic civil and political liberties were secured. In order to function
effectively, disabled persons may need to buy medications or therapies
or other forms of assistance that the able-bodied do not need for
their functioning. And there does not seem to be any parallel in
matters of race to the special needs of some of those who are
disabled. The driving idea of the civil rights movement was that
blacks did not have any special needs: all they needed was to have the
burdens of racism lifted from them and, once that was accomplished,
they would flourish or fail like everyone else in society.

However, Silvers (1998) argues that the parallel between race and
disability still holds: all the disabled may claim from society as a
matter of justice is that they have fair equality of opportunity and
the same basic civil rights as everyone else. Any special needs that
the disabled may have do not provide the grounds of any legitimate
claims of justice. On the other hand, Kittay (2000) argues that the
special needs of the disabled are a matter of basic justice. She
focuses on the severely mentally disabled, for whom fair opportunity
in the labor markets and political rights in the public sphere will
have no significance, and on the families that have the responsibility
of caring for the severely disabled. Pogge (2000) also questions
Silvers’ view, suggesting that it is implausible to deny that
justice requires that society provide resources for meeting the needs
of the severely disabled. Still, it may be the case that some version
of Silvers’ approach may be justifiable when it comes to
disabled persons who have the capacity ”to participate fully in
the political and civic institutions of the society and, more broadly,
in its public life“ (Pogge, 2000: 45). In the case of such
persons, the basic civil right to equal citizenship would require that
they have the equal opportunity to participate in such institutions,
regardless of their disability. Although there may be some aspects of
the racial model that cannot be applied to persons with severe forms
of mental disability, the principles behind the American civil rights
struggles of the 1950s and 60s remain crucial normative resources for
understanding and combating forms of unjust discrimination that have
only more recently been addressed by philosophers and by society more
broadly.
8. Legal Cases and Statutes

Allen v. State Board of Elections 89 S.Ct. 817 (1969).
Americans With Disabilities Act. 42 U.S.C.
§§12101–12213 (1999).
Boy Scouts v. Dale 530 U.S. 640 (2000).
Civil Rights Act of 1866. 42 U.S.C §1981 (1999).
Civil Rights Act of 1964. 42 U.S.C. §§2000e et seq.
Ex Parte Crow Dog 109 U.S. 556 (1883).
Giles v. Harris 189 U.S. 475 (1903).
Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968. 28 U.S.C.
§§1301–1303.
Obergefell v. Hodges 576 U.S. ___ (2015).
Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe
498 U.S. 505 (1991).
Pregnancy Discrimination Act 42 U.S.C. §2000 (e)(k).
Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez 436 U.S. 49 (1978).
Shelby County v. Holder 570 U.S. ___ (2013).
South Carolina v. Katzenbach 383 U.S. 301 (1966).
State v Soto 734 A.2d 350.
Voting Rights Act 42 U.S.C. §§1973–1973aa-6.