Cognitive science is the interdisciplinary study of mind and
intelligence, embracing philosophy, psychology, artificial
intelligence, neuroscience, linguistics, and anthropology. Its
intellectual origins are in the mid-1950s when researchers in several
fields began to develop theories of mind based on complex
representations and computational procedures. Its organizational
origins are in the mid-1970s when the Cognitive Science Society was
formed and the journal Cognitive Science began. Since then,
more than one hundred universities in North America, Europe, Asia, and
Australia have established cognitive science programs, and many others
have instituted courses in cognitive science.
 
1. History


Attempts to understand the mind and its operation go back at least
to the Ancient Greeks, when philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle
tried to explain the nature of human knowledge. The study of mind
remained the province of philosophy until the nineteenth century, when
experimental psychology developed. Wilhelm Wundt and his students
initiated laboratory methods for studying mental operations more
systematically. Within a few decades, however, experimental psychology
became dominated by
 behaviorism,
 a view
that virtually denied the existence of mind. According to behaviorists
such as J. B. Watson, psychology should restrict itself to examining
the relation between observable stimuli and observable behavioral
responses. Talk of consciousness and mental representations was
banished from respectable scientific discussion. Especially in North
America, behaviorism dominated the psychological scene through the
1950s.

Around 1956, the intellectual landscape began to change
dramatically. George Miller summarized numerous studies which showed
that the capacity of human thinking is limited, with short-term memory,
for example, limited to around seven items. He proposed that memory
limitations can be overcome by recoding information into chunks, mental
representations that require mental procedures for encoding and
decoding the information. At this time, primitive computers had been
around for only a few years, but pioneers such as John McCarthy, Marvin
Minsky, Allen Newell, and Herbert Simon were founding the field of
 artificial intelligence.
 In addition, Noam Chomsky rejected behaviorist assumptions about
language as a learned habit and proposed instead to explain language
comprehension in terms of mental grammars consisting of rules. The six
thinkers mentioned in this paragraph can be viewed as the founders of
cognitive science.    
2. Methods
 Cognitive science has unifying theoretical ideas, but we have to
appreciate the diversity of outlooks and methods that researchers in
different fields bring to the study of mind and intelligence. Although
cognitive psychologists today often engage in theorizing and
computational modeling, their primary method is experimentation with
human participants. People, often undergraduates satisfying course
requirements, are brought into the laboratory so that different kinds
of thinking can be studied under controlled conditions. For example,
psychologists have experimentally examined the kinds of mistakes
people make in deductive reasoning, the ways that people form and
apply concepts, the speed of people thinking with mental images, and
the performance of people solving problems using analogies. Our
conclusions about how the mind works must be based on more than
“common sense” and introspection, since these can give a
misleading picture of mental operations, many of which are not
consciously accessible. Increasingly, psychologists draw their
experimental participants from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk and from
culturally diverse sources.  Psychological experiments that carefully
approach mental operations from diverse directions are therefore
crucial for cognitive science to be scientific. Experimentation is also
a methodology employed by
 experimental philosophy.



Although theory without experiment is empty, experiment without
theory is blind. To address the crucial questions about the nature of
mind, the psychological experiments need to be interpretable within a
theoretical framework that postulates mental representations and
procedures. One of the best ways of developing theoretical frameworks
is by forming and testing computational models intended to be analogous
to mental operations. To complement psychological experiments on
deductive reasoning, concept formation, mental imagery, and analogical
problem solving, researchers have developed computational models that
simulate aspects of human performance. Designing, building, and
experimenting with computational models is the central method of
artificial intelligence (AI), the branch of computer science concerned
with intelligent systems. Ideally in cognitive science, computational
models and psychological experimentation go hand in hand, but much
important work in AI has examined the power of different approaches to
knowledge representation in relative isolation from experimental
psychology.
 While some linguists do psychological experiments or develop
computational models, most currently use different methods. For
linguists in the Chomskian tradition, the main theoretical task is to
identify grammatical principles that provide the basic structure of
human languages. Identification takes place by noticing subtle
differences between grammatical and ungrammatical utterances. In
English, for example, the sentences “She hit the ball” and
“What do you like?” are grammatical, but “She the
hit ball” and “What does you like?” are not. A
grammar of English will explain why the former are acceptable but not
the latter. An alternative approach, cognitive linguistics, puts less
emphasis on syntax and more on semantics and concepts.


Like cognitive psychologists, neuroscientists often perform
controlled experiments, but their observations are very different,
since neuroscientists are concerned directly with the nature of the
brain. With nonhuman subjects, researchers can insert electrodes and
record the firing of individual neurons. With humans for whom this
technique would be too invasive, it is now common
to use magnetic and positron scanning devices to observe what is
happening in different parts of the brain while people are doing
various mental tasks. For example, brain scans have identified the
regions of the brain involved in mental imagery and word
interpretation. Additional evidence about brain functioning is gathered
by observing the performance of people whose brains have been damaged
in identifiable ways. A stroke, for example, in a part of the brain
dedicated to language can produce deficits such as the inability to
utter sentences. Like cognitive psychology, neuroscience is often
theoretical as well as experimental, and theory development is
frequently aided by developing computational models of the behavior of
groups of neurons.


Cognitive anthropology expands the examination of human thinking to
consider how thought works in different cultural settings. The study of
mind should obviously not be restricted to how English speakers think
but should consider possible differences in modes of thinking across
cultures. Cognitive science is becoming increasingly aware of the need
to view the operations of mind in particular physical and social
environments. For cultural anthropologists, the main method is
ethnography, which requires living and interacting with members of a
culture to a sufficient extent that their social and cognitive systems
become apparent. Cognitive anthropologists have investigated, for
example, the similarities and differences across cultures in words for
colors.


Traditionally, philosophers do not perform systematic empirical
observations or construct computational models, although there has
been a recent rise in work in experimental philosophy.  But philosophy
remains important to cognitive science because it deals with
fundamental issues that underlie the experimental and computational
approach to mind. Abstract questions such as the nature of
representation and computation need not be addressed in the everyday
practice of psychology or artificial intelligence, but they inevitably
arise when researchers think deeply about what they are doing.
Philosophy also deals with general questions such as the relation of
mind and body and with methodological questions such as the nature of
explanations found in cognitive science. In addition, philosophy
concerns itself with normative questions about how people should think
as well as with descriptive ones about how they do. Besides the
theoretical goal of understanding human thinking, cognitive science
can have the practical goal of improving it, which requires normative
reflection on what we want thinking to be. Philosophy of mind does not
have a distinct method, but should share with the best theoretical
work in other fields a concern with empirical results.


In its weakest form, cognitive science is just the sum of the fields
mentioned: psychology, artificial intelligence, linguistics,
neuroscience, anthropology, and philosophy. Interdisciplinary work
becomes much more interesting when there is theoretical and
experimental convergence on conclusions about the nature of mind. For
example, psychology and artificial intelligence can be combined through
computational models of how people behave in experiments. The best way
to grasp the complexity of human thinking is to use multiple methods,
especially psychological and neurological experiments and computational
models. Theoretically, the most fertile approach has been to understand
the mind in terms of representation and computation.
3. Representation and Computation


The central hypothesis of cognitive science is that thinking can
best be understood in terms of representational structures in the mind
and computational procedures that operate on those structures. While
there is much disagreement about the nature of the representations and
computations that constitute thinking, the central hypothesis is
general enough to encompass the current range of thinking in cognitive
science, including
 connectionist
theories which model thinking using artificial neural networks.


Most work in cognitive science assumes that the mind has
 mental representations
 analogous
to computer data structures, and computational procedures similar to
computational algorithms. Cognitive theorists have proposed that the
mind contains such mental representations as logical propositions,
rules, concepts, images, and analogies, and that it uses mental
procedures such as deduction, search, matching, rotating, and
retrieval. The dominant mind-computer analogy in cognitive science has
taken on a novel twist from the use of another analog, the brain.


Connectionists have proposed novel ideas about representation and
computation that use neurons and their connections as inspirations for
data structures, and neuron firing and spreading activation as
inspirations for algorithms. Cognitive science then works with a
complex 3-way analogy among the mind, the brain, and computers. Mind,
brain, and computation can each be used to suggest new ideas about the
others. There is no single computational model of mind, since different
kinds of computers and programming approaches suggest different ways in
which the mind might work. The computers that most of us work with
today are serial processors, performing one instruction at a time, but
the brain and some recently developed computers are parallel
processors, capable of doing many operations at once.


A major trend in current cognitive science is the integration of
neuroscience with many areas of psychology, including cognitive,
social, developmental, and clinical.  This integration is partly
experimental, resulting from an explosion of new instruments for
studying the brain, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging,
transcranial magnetic stimulation, and optogenetics.  The integration
is also theoretical, because of advances in understanding how large
populations of neurons can perform tasks usually explained with
cognitive theories of rules and concepts.
4. Theoretical Approaches


Here is a schematic summary of current theories about the nature of
the representations and computations that explain how the mind
works.
4.1 Formal logic

Formal logic
 provides some
powerful tools for looking at the nature of representation and
computation. Propositional and predicate calculus serve to express many
complex kinds of knowledge, and many inferences can be understood in
terms of logical deduction with inferences rules such as modus ponens.
The explanation schema for the logical approach is:
Explanation target:

Why do people make the inferences they do?

Explanatory pattern:

People have mental representations similar to sentences in
predicate logic.
People have deductive and inductive procedures that operate on
those sentences.
The deductive and inductive procedures, applied to the sentences,
produce the inferences.




It is not certain, however, that logic provides the core ideas about
representation and computation needed for cognitive science, since more
efficient and psychologically natural methods of computation may be
needed to explain human thinking.
4.2 Rules


Much of human knowledge is naturally described in terms of rules of
the form IF … THEN …, and many kinds of thinking such as
planning can be modeled by rule-based systems. The explanation schema
used is:
Explanation target:

Why do people have a particular kind of intelligent behavior?

Explanatory pattern:

People have mental rules.
People have procedures for using these rules to search a space of
possible solutions, and procedures for generating new rules.
Procedures for using and forming rules produce the behavior.




Computational models based on rules have provided detailed
simulations of a wide range of psychological experiments, from
cryptarithmetic problem solving to skill acquisition to language use.
Rule-based systems have also been of practical importance in suggesting
how to improve learning and how to develop intelligent machine
systems.
4.3 Concepts


Concepts, which partly correspond to the words in spoken and written
language, are an important kind of mental representation. There are
computational and psychological reasons for abandoning the classical
view that concepts have strict definitions. Instead, concepts can be
viewed as sets of typical features. Concept application is then a
matter of getting an approximate match between concepts and the world.
Schemas and scripts are more complex than concepts that correspond to
words, but they are similar in that they consist of bundles of features
that can be matched and applied to new situations. The explanatory
schema used in concept-based systems is:
Explanatory target:

Why do people have a particular kind of intelligent behavior?

Explanation pattern:

People have a set of concepts, organized via slots that establish
kind and part hierarchies and other associations.
People have a set of procedures for concept application, including
spreading activation, matching, and inheritance.
The procedures applied to the concepts produce the behavior.
Concepts can be translated into rules, but they bundle information
differently than sets of rules, making possible different computational
procedures.


4.4 Analogies


Analogies play an important role in human thinking, in areas as
diverse as problem solving, decision making, explanation, and
linguistic communication. Computational models simulate how people
retrieve and map source analogs in order to apply them to target
situations. The explanation schema for analogies is:
Explanation target:

Why do people have a particular kind of intelligent behavior?

Explanatory pattern:

People have verbal and visual representations of situations that
can be used as cases or analogs.
People have processes of retrieval, mapping, and adaptation that
operate on those analogs.
The analogical processes, applied to the representations of
analogs, produce the behavior.




The constraints of similarity, structure, and purpose overcome the
difficult problem of how previous experiences can be found and used to
help with new problems. Not all thinking is analogical, and using
inappropriate analogies can hinder thinking, but analogies can be very
effective in applications such as education and design.
4.5 Images


Visual and other kinds of images play an important role in human
thinking. Pictorial representations capture visual and spatial
information in a much more usable form than lengthy verbal
descriptions. Computational procedures well suited to visual
representations include inspecting, finding, zooming, rotating, and
transforming. Such operations can be very useful for generating plans
and explanations in domains to which pictorial representations apply.
The explanatory schema for visual representation is:
Explanation target:

Why do people have a particular kind of intelligent behavior?

Explanatory pattern:

People have visual images of situations.
People have processes such as scanning and rotation that operate on
those images.
The processes for constructing and manipulating images produce the
intelligent behavior.




Imagery can aid learning, and some metaphorical aspects of language
may have their roots in imagery. Psychological experiments suggest
that visual procedures such as scanning and rotating employ imagery,
and neurophysiological results confirm a close physical link between
reasoning with mental imagery and perception.  Imagery is not just
visual, but can also operate with other sensory experiences such as
hearing, touch, smell, taste, pain, balance, nausea, fullness, and
emotion.
4.6 Connectionism


Connectionist networks consisting of simple nodes and links are very
useful for understanding psychological processes that involve parallel
constraint satisfaction. Such processes include aspects of vision,
decision making, explanation selection, and meaning making in language
comprehension. Connectionist models can simulate learning by methods
that include Hebbian learning and backpropagation. The explanatory
schema for the connectionist approach is:
Explanation target:

Why do people have a particular kind of intelligent behavior?

Explanatory pattern:

People have representations that involve simple processing units
linked to each other by excitatory and inhibitory connections.
People have processes that spread activation between the units via
their connections, as well as processes for modifying the
connections.
Applying spreading activation and learning to the units produces
the behavior.




Simulations of various psychological experiments have shown the
psychological relevance of the connectionist models, which are,
however, only very rough approximations to actual neural networks. 


4.7 Theoretical neuroscience


Theoretical neuroscience is the attempt to develop mathematical and
computational theories and models of the structures and processes of
the brains of humans and other animals.  It differs from connectionism
in trying to be more biologically accurate by modeling the behavior of
large numbers of realistic neurons organized into functionally
significant brain areas.  Computational models of the
brain have become biologically richer, both with respect to employing
more realistic neurons such as ones that spike and have chemical
pathways, and with respect to simulating the interactions among
different areas of the brain such as the hippocampus and the
cortex. These models are not strictly an alternative to computational
accounts in terms of logic, rules, concepts, analogies, images, and
connections, but should mesh with them and show how mental functioning
can be performed at the neural level. The explanatory schema for
theoretical neuroscience is:
Explanation target:

How does the brain carry out functions such as cognitive tasks?

Explanatory pattern:
 The brain has neurons organized by synaptic connections into
populations and brain areas.
The neural populations have spiking patterns that are transformed
via sensory inputs and the spiking patterns of other neural
populations.
Interactions of neural populations carry out functions including
cognitive tasks.

 From the perspective of theoretical neuroscience, mental
representations are patterns of neural activity, and inference is
transformation of such patterns.  
4.8 Bayesian


Bayesian models are prominent in cognitive science,
with applications to such psychological phenomena as learning, vision,
motor control, language, and social cognition.  They have also had
effective applications in robotics.  The Bayesian approach assumes
that cognition is approximately optimal in accord with probability
theory, especially Bayes’ theorem, which says that the probability of
a hypothesis given evidence is equal to the result of multiplying the
prior probability of the hypothesis by the conditional probability of
the evidence given the hypothesis, all divided by the probability of
the evidence.  The explanatory schema for Bayesian cognition is:
Explanation target:

How does the mind carry out functions such as inference?

Explanatory pattern:

The mind has representations for statistical correlations and
conditional probabilities. 
The mind has the capacity for probabilistic computations such as
applications of Bayes’ theorem.
Applying probabilistic computations to statistical representations
accomplishes mental tasks such as inference. 


 Although Bayesian methods have had impressive applications to a
wide range of phenomena, their psychological plausibility is debatable
because of assumptions about optimality and computations based on
probability theory.  
4.9 Deep learning

Artificial intelligence has been a central part of cognitive since the
1950s, and the most dramatic recent advances in AI have come from the
approach of deep learning, which has produced major breakthroughs in
fields that include game playing, object recognition, and
translation. Deep learning builds on ideas from connectionism and
theoretical neuroscience, but uses neural networks with more layers
and improved algorithms, benefitting from faster computers and large
data bases of examples. Another important innovation is combining
learning from examples with reinforcement learning, resulting by 2016
in the world’s leading Go player, AlphaGo. Ideas from deep learning
are spreading back into neuroscience and also beginning to influence
research in cognitive psychology. The explanatory schema for deep
learning is:
Explanation target:

How does the brain carry out functions such as cognitive tasks?

Explanatory pattern:

The brain has large numbers of neurons organized into 6–20 layers. 
The brain has powerful mechanisms for learning from examples and
for learning actions that are reinforced by their successes.
Applying learning mechanisms to layered neural networks makes them
capable of human and sometimes even super-human performance.  



Although deep learning has produced dramatic improvements in some AI
systems, it is not clear how it can be applied to aspects of human
thought that include imagery, emotion, and analogy. 
5. Philosophical Relevance


Some philosophy, in particular naturalistic philosophy of mind, is
part of cognitive science. But the interdisciplinary field of cognitive
science is relevant to philosophy in several ways. First, the
psychological, computational, and other results of cognitive science
investigations have important potential applications to traditional
philosophical problems in epistemology, metaphysics, and ethics.
Second, cognitive science can serve as an object of philosophical
critique, particularly concerning the central assumption that thinking
is representational and computational. Third and more constructively,
cognitive science can be taken as an object of investigation in the
philosophy of science, generating reflections on the methodology and
presuppositions of the enterprise.
5.1 Philosophical Applications


Much philosophical research today is naturalistic, treating
philosophical investigations as continuous with empirical work in
fields such as psychology. From a naturalistic perspective, philosophy
of mind is closely allied with theoretical and experimental work in
cognitive science. Metaphysical conclusions about the nature of mind
are to be reached, not by a priori speculation, but by informed
reflection on scientific developments in fields such as psychology,
neuroscience, and computer science. Similarly, epistemology is not a
stand-alone conceptual exercise, but depends on and benefits from
scientific findings concerning mental structures and learning
procedures. Ethics can benefit by using greater understanding of the
psychology of moral thinking to bear on ethical questions such as the
nature of deliberations concerning right and wrong. Here are some
philosophical problems to which ongoing developments in cognitive
science are highly relevant. Links are provided to other relevant
articles in this Encyclopedia.

Innateness. To
what extent is knowledge innate or acquired by experience? Is human
behavior shaped primarily by nature or nurture?
Language of thought.
Does the human brain operate with a language-like code or with a more
general
 connectionist  architecture?
What is the relation between symbolic cognitive models using rules and
concepts and sub-symbolic models using neural networks?
Mental imagery.
 Do human
minds think with visual and other kinds of imagery, or only with
language-like representations?
Folk psychology.
 Does a
person’s everyday understanding of other people consist of having a
theory of mind, or of merely being able to simulate them?
Meaning. How do
 mental representations
 acquire meaning or
 mental content?
 To what extent does
the meaning of a representation depend on its relation to other
representations, its relation to the world, and its relation to a
community of thinkers?
Mind-brain identity.
 Are
mental states brain states? Or can they be
 multiply realized
 by other
material states? What is the relation between psychology and
neuroscience? Is
 materialism
true?
Free will.
 Is human action free
or merely caused by brain events?
Moral psychology.
 How do minds/brains make ethical judgments?
The meaning of life.
 How can minds construed naturalistically as brains find value and meaning?
Emotions.
 What are emotions, and what role do they play in thinking? 
Mental disorder.
What are mental disorders, and how are psychological and neural
processes relevant to their explanation and treatment? 
Perception and reality.
 How do minds/brains form and evaluate representations of the external 
world?
Social science.
 How do explanations of the operations of minds interact with explanations
of the operations of groups and societies? 



Additional philosophical problems arise from examining the
presuppositions of current approaches to cognitive science.
5.2 Critique of Cognitive Science


The claim that human minds work by representation and computation is
an empirical conjecture and might be wrong. Although the
 computational-representational
approach to cognitive science has been successful in explaining many
aspects of human problem solving, learning, and language use, some
philosophical critics have claimed that this approach is fundamentally
mistaken.  Critics of cognitive science have offered such challenges
as:

The
 emotion
 challenge: Cognitive science
neglects the important role of emotions in human thinking.
The
 consciousness
challenge: Cognitive science ignores the importance of consciousness in
human thinking.
The world challenge: Cognitive science disregards the significant
role of physical environments in human thinking, which is embedded in
and extended into the world.  
The body challenge: Cognitive science neglects the contribution of
embodiment to human thought and
action.
The dynamical systems challenge: The mind is a dynamical system,
not a computational system.
The social challenge: Human thought is inherently social in ways
that cognitive science ignores.
The mathematics challenge: Mathematical results show that human
thinking cannot be computational in the standard sense, so the brain
must operate differently, perhaps as a quantum computer.



The first five challenges are increasingly addressed by advances that
explain emotions, consciousness, action, and embodiment in terms of
neural mechanisms.  The social challenge is being met by the
development of computational models of interacting agents. The
mathematics challenge is based on misunderstanding
of Gödel’s theorem and on
exaggeration of the relevance of quantum theory to neural
processes.  
5.3 Philosophy of Cognitive Science


Cognitive science raises many interesting methodological questions
that are worthy of investigation by philosophers of science. What is
the nature of representation? What role do computational models play
in the development of cognitive theories? What is the relation among
apparently competing accounts of mind involving symbolic processing,
neural networks, and dynamical systems? What is the relation among the
various fields of cognitive science such as psychology, linguistics,
and neuroscience? Are psychological phenomena subject to reductionist
explanations via neuroscience? Are levels of explanation best
characterized in terms of ontological levels (molecular, neural,
psychological, social) or methodological ones (computational,
algorithmic, physical)?


The increasing prominence of neural explanations in cognitive, social,
developmental, and clinical psychology raises important philosophical
questions about explanation
and reduction.  Anti-reductionism,
according to which psychological
explanations are completely independent of neurological ones, is
becoming increasingly implausible, but it remains controversial to
what extent psychology can be reduced to neuroscience and molecular
biology.  Crucial
to answering questions about the nature of reduction are answers to
questions about the nature of explanation.  Explanations in
psychology, neuroscience, and biology in general are plausibly viewed
as descriptions of
 mechanisms, 
which are combinations of connected parts that
interact to produce regular changes.
In psychological explanations, the parts are mental representations
that interact by computational procedures to produce new
representations.  In neuroscientific explanations, the parts are
neural populations that interact by electrochemical processes to
produce new neural activity that leads to actions.  If progress in
theoretical neuroscience continues, it should become possible to tie
psychological to neurological explanations by showing how mental
representations such as concepts are constituted by activities in
neural populations, and how computational procedures such as spreading
activation among concepts are carried out by neural processes.


The increasing integration of cognitive psychology with neuroscience
provides evidence for the 
mind-brain identity theory according
to which mental processes are neural,
representational, and computational.  Other philosophers dispute such
identification on the grounds that minds are embodied in biological
systems and extended into the world.  However, moderate claims about
embodiment are consistent with the identity theory because brain
representations operate in several modalities (e.g. visual and motor)
that enable minds to deal with the world. Another materialist
alternative to mind-brain identity comes from recognizing that
explanations of mind employ molecular and social mechanisms as well as
neural and representational ones.