In most countries of the world, the “information
revolution” has altered many aspects of life significantly:
commerce, employment, medicine, security, transportation,
entertainment, and on and on. Consequently, information and
communication technology (ICT) has affected – in both good ways
and bad ways – community life, family life, human relationships,
education, careers, freedom, and democracy (to name just a few
examples). “Computer and information ethics”, in the
present essay, is understood as that branch of applied ethics which
studies and analyzes such social and ethical impacts of ICT.


The more specific term “computer ethics” has been used, in
the past, in several different ways. For example, it has been used to
refer to applications of traditional Western ethics theories like
utilitarianism, Kantianism, or virtue ethics, to ethical cases that
significantly involve computers and computer networks. “Computer
ethics” also has been used to refer to a kind of professional
ethics in which computer professionals apply codes of ethics and
standards of good practice within their profession. In addition, names
such as “cyberethics” and “Internet ethics”
have been used to refer to computer ethics issues associated with the
Internet.


During the past several decades, the robust and rapidly growing field
of computer and information ethics has generated university
courses, research professorships, research centers, conferences,
workshops, professional organizations, curriculum materials, books and
journals.
 
1. Founding Computer and Information Ethics


In the mid 1940s, innovative developments in science and philosophy
led to the creation of a new branch of ethics that would later be
called “computer ethics” or “information
ethics”. The founder of this new philosophical field was the
American scholar Norbert Wiener, a professor of mathematics and
engineering at MIT. During the Second World War, together with
colleagues in America and Great Britain, Wiener helped to develop
electronic computers and other new and powerful information
technologies. While engaged in this war effort, Wiener and colleagues
created a new branch of applied science that Wiener named
“cybernetics” (from the Greek word for the pilot of a
ship). Even while the War was raging, Wiener foresaw enormous social
and ethical implications of cybernetics combined with electronic
computers. He predicted that, after the War, the world would undergo
“a second industrial revolution” – an
“automatic age” with “enormous potential for good
and for evil” that would generate a staggering number of new
ethical challenges and opportunities. 


When the War ended, Wiener wrote the book Cybernetics (1948)
in which he described his new branch of applied science and identified
some social and ethical implications of electronic computers. Two
years later he published The Human Use of Human Beings
(1950), a book in which he explored a number of ethical issues that
computer and information technology would likely generate. The issues
that he identified in those two books, plus his later book God and
Golem, Inc. (1963), included topics that are still important
today: computers and security, computers and unemployment,
responsibilities of computer professionals, computers for persons with
disabilities, information networks and globalization, virtual
communities, teleworking, merging of human bodies with machines, robot
ethics, artificial intelligence, computers and religion, and a number
of other subjects. (See Bynum 2000, 2004, 2005, 2008a, 2008b.) 


Although he coined the name “cybernetics” for his new
science, Wiener apparently did not see himself as also creating a new
branch of ethics. As a result, he did not coin a name like
“computer ethics” or “information
ethics”. These terms came into use decades later. (See the
discussion below.) In spite of this, Wiener’s three relevant
books (1948, 1950, 1963) do lay down a powerful foundation, and do use
an effective methodology, for today’s field of computer and
information ethics. His thinking, however, was far ahead of other
scholars; and, at the time, many people considered him to be an
eccentric scientist who was engaging in flights of fantasy about
ethics. Apparently, no one – not even Wiener himself –
recognized the profound importance of his ethics achievements; and
nearly two decades would pass before some of the social and ethical
impacts of information technology, which Wiener had predicted in the
late 1940s, would become obvious to other scholars and to the general
public. 


In The Human Use of Human Beings, Wiener explored some likely
effects of information technology upon key human values like life,
health, happiness, abilities, knowledge, freedom, security, and
opportunities. The metaphysical ideas and analytical methods that
he employed were so powerful and wide-ranging that they could be used
effectively for identifying, analyzing and resolving social and
ethical problems associated with all kinds of information technology,
including, for example, computers and computer networks; radio,
television and telephones; news media and journalism; even books and
libraries. Because of the breadth of Wiener’s concerns and the
applicability of his ideas and methods to every kind of information
technology, the term “information ethics” is an apt name
for the new field of ethics that he founded. As a result, the term
“computer ethics”, as it is typically used today, names
only a subfield of Wiener’s much broader
 concerns.


In laying down a foundation for information ethics, Wiener developed a
cybernetic view of human nature and society, which led him to an
ethically suggestive account of the purpose of a human life. Based
upon this, he adopted “great principles of justice”, which
he believed all societies ought to follow. These powerful ethical
concepts enabled Wiener to analyze information ethics issues of all
kinds.
1.1 A cybernetic view of human nature


Wiener’s cybernetic understanding of human nature stressed the
physical structure of the human body and the remarkable potential for
learning and creativity that human physiology makes possible. While
explaining human intellectual potential, he regularly compared the
human body to the physiology of less intelligent creatures like
insects:

Cybernetics takes the view that the structure of the machine or of
the organism is an index of the performance that may be expected from
it. The fact that the mechanical rigidity of the insect is such
as to limit its intelligence while the mechanical fluidity of the
human being provides for his almost indefinite intellectual expansion
is highly relevant to the point of view of this book.
… man’s advantage over the rest of nature is that he has
the physiological and hence the intellectual equipment to adapt
himself to radical changes in his environment. The human species is
strong only insofar as it takes advantage of the innate, adaptive,
learning faculties that its physiological structure makes
possible. (Wiener 1954, pp. 57–58, italics in the original)




Given the physiology of human beings, it is possible for them to take
in a wide diversity of information from the external world, access
information about conditions and events within their own bodies, and
process all that information in ways that constitute reasoning,
calculating, wondering, deliberating, deciding and many other
intellectual activities. Wiener concluded that the purpose of a human
life is to flourish as the kind of information-processing organisms
that humans naturally are:


I wish to show that the human individual, capable of vast learning and
study, which may occupy almost half of his life, is physically
equipped, as the ant is not, for this capacity. Variety and
possibility are inherent in the human sensorium – and are indeed
the key to man’s most noble flights – because variety and
possibility belong to the very structure of the human
organism. (Wiener 1954, pp. 51–52)


1.2 Wiener’s underlying metaphysics


Wiener’s account of human nature presupposed a metaphysical view of
the universe that considers the world and all the entities within it,
including humans, to be combinations of matter-energy and
information. Everything in the world is a mixture of both of these,
and thinking, according to Wiener, is actually a kind of
information processing. Consequently, the brain


does not secrete thought “as the liver does bile”, as the
earlier materialists claimed, nor does it put it out in the form of
energy, as the muscle puts out its activity. Information is
information, not matter or energy. No materialism which does not admit
this can survive at the present day. (Wiener 1948,
p. 155)




According to Wiener’s metaphysical view, everything in the universe
comes into existence, persists, and then disappears because of the
continuous mixing and mingling of information and
matter-energy. Living organisms, including human beings, are actually
patterns of information that persist through an ongoing exchange of
matter-energy. Thus, he says of human beings,


 We are but whirlpools in a river of ever-flowing water. We are not
stuff that abides, but patterns that perpetuate themselves. (Wiener
1954, p. 96)
…

 The individuality of the body is that of a flame…of a form
 rather than of a bit of substance. (Wiener 1954, p. 102)



Using the language of today’s “information age”
(see, for example, Lloyd 2006 and Vedral 2010) we would say that,
according to Wiener, human beings are “information
objects”; and their intellectual capacities, as well as their
personal identities, are dependent upon persisting patterns of
information and information processing within the body, rather than on
specific bits of matter-energy.
1.3 Justice and human flourishing


According to Wiener, for human beings to flourish they must be free to
engage in creative and flexible actions and thereby maximize their
full potential as intelligent, decision-making beings in charge of
their own lives. This is the purpose of a human life. Because people
have various levels and kinds of talent and possibility, however, one person’s
achievements will be different from those of others. It is possible,
nevertheless, to lead a good human life – to flourish – in an
indefinitely large number of ways; for example, as a diplomat,
scientist, teacher, nurse, doctor, soldier, housewife, midwife,
musician, tradesman, artisan, and so on.


This understanding of the purpose of a human life led Wiener to adopt
what he called “great principles of justice” upon which
society should be built. He believed that adherence to those
principles by a society would maximize a person’s ability to flourish
through variety and flexibility of human action. Although Wiener
stated his “great principles”, he did not assign names to
them. For purposes of easy reference, let us call them “The
Principle of Freedom”, “The Principle of Equality”
and “The Principle of Benevolence”. Using Wiener’s own
words yields the following list of “great principles”
(1954, pp. 105–106):


The Principle of Freedom 
 Justice requires “the liberty of each human being to develop in
 his freedom the full measure of the human possibilities embodied in
 him.” 

The Principle of Equality 
 Justice requires “the equality by which what is just for A and
 B remains just when the positions of A and B are
 interchanged.”

The Principle of Benevolence  Justice requires
 “a good will between man and man that knows no limits short of
 those of humanity itself.”



Given Wiener’s cybernetic account of human nature and society, it
follows that people are fundamentally social beings, and that they can
reach their full potential only when they are part of a community of
similar beings. Society, therefore, is essential to a good human
life. Despotic societies, however, actually stifle human
freedom; and indeed they violate all three of the “great
principles of justice”. For this reason, Wiener explicitly
adopted a fourth principle of justice to assure that the first three
would not be violated. Let us call this additional principle
“The Principle of Minimum Infringement of Freedom”:

The Principle of Minimum Infringement of Freedom  
 “What compulsion the very existence of the community and the   state may
 demand must be exercised in such a way as to produce no unnecessary
 infringement of freedom” (1954, p. 106).
1.4 A refutation of ethical relativism


If one grants Wiener’s account of a good society and of human nature,
it follows that a wide diversity of cultures – with
different customs, languages, religions, values and practices –
could provide a context in which humans can flourish. Sometimes
ethical relativists use the existence of different cultures as proof
that there is not – and could not be – an underlying
ethical foundation for societies all around the globe. In response to
such relativism, Wiener could argue that, given his understanding of
human nature and the purpose of a human life, we can embrace and
welcome a rich variety of cultures and practices while still
advocating adherence to “the great principles of
justice”. Those principles offer a cross-cultural foundation
for ethics, even though they leave room for immense cultural
diversity. The one restriction that Wiener would require in any
society is that it must provide a context where humans can realize
their full potential as sophisticated information-processing agents,
making decisions and choices, and thereby taking responsibility for
their own lives. Wiener believed that this is possible only where
significant freedom, equality and human compassion prevail.
1.5 Methodology in information ethics


Because Wiener did not think of himself as creating a new branch of
ethics, he did not provide metaphilosophical comments about what he
was doing while analyzing an information ethics issue or
case. Instead, he plunged directly into his analyses. Consequently, if
we want to know about Wiener’s method of analysis, we need to
observe what he does, rather than look for any
metaphilosophical commentary upon his own procedures.


When observing Wiener’s way of analyzing information ethics issues and
trying to resolve them, we find – for example, in The Human
Use of Human Beings – that he tries to assimilate new
cases by applying already existing, ethically acceptable laws, rules,
and practices. In any given society, there is a network of
existing practices, laws, rules and principles that govern human
behavior within that society. These “policies” – to
borrow a helpful word from Moor (1985) – constitute a
“received policy cluster” (see Bynum and Schubert 1997);
and in a reasonably just society, they can serve as a good
starting point for developing an answer to any information ethics
question. Wiener’s methodology is to combine the “received
policy cluster” of one’s society with Wiener’s account of human
nature, plus his “great principles of justice”, plus
critical skills in clarifying vague or ambiguous language. In this
way, he achieved a very effective method for analyzing information
ethics issues. Borrowing from Moor’s later, and very apt, description
of computer ethics methodology (Moor 1985), we can describe Wiener’s
methodology as follows:

Identify an ethical question or case regarding the integration of
information technology into society. Typically this focuses upon
technology-generated possibilities that could affect (or are already
affecting) life, health, security, happiness, freedom, knowledge,
opportunities, or other key human values.
Clarify any ambiguous or vague ideas or principles that may apply
to the case or the issue in question.
If possible, apply already existing, ethically acceptable
principles, laws, rules, and practices (the “received policy
cluster”) that govern human behavior in the given
society.
If ethically acceptable precedents, traditions and policies are
insufficient to settle the question or deal with the case, use the
purpose of a human life plus the great principles of justice to find a
solution that fits as well as possible into the ethical traditions of
the given society.



In an essentially just society – that is, in a society where the
“received policy cluster” is reasonably just – this
method of analyzing and resolving information ethics issues will
likely result in ethically good solutions that can be assimilated into
the society.


Note that this way of doing information ethics does not require the
expertise of a trained philosopher (although such expertise might
prove to be helpful in many situations). Any adult who functions
successfully in a reasonably just society is likely to be familiar
with the existing customs, practices, rules and laws that govern a
person’s behavior in that society and enable one to tell whether
a proposed action or policy would be accepted as ethical. So those who
must cope with the introduction of new information technology –
whether they are computer professionals, business people, workers,
teachers, parents, public-policy makers, or others – can and
should engage in information ethics by helping to integrate new
information technology into society in an ethically acceptable
way. Information ethics, understood in this very broad sense,
is too important to be left only to information professionals or to
philosophers. Wiener’s information ethics interests, ideas and
methods were very broad, covering not only topics in the specific
field of “computer ethics”, as we would call it today, but
also issues in related areas that, today, are called “agent
ethics” (see, for example, Floridi 2013b), “Internet
ethics” (Cavalier 2005), and “nanotechnology ethics”
(Weckert 2002). The purview of Wiener’s ideas and methods is
even broad enough to encompass subfields like journalism ethics,
library ethics, and the ethics of bioengineering.


Even in the late 1940s, Wiener made it clear that, on his view, the
integration into society of the newly invented computing and
information technology would lead to the remaking of society –
to “the second industrial revolution” – “the
automatic age”. It would affect every walk of life, and would be
a multi-faceted, on-going process requiring decades of effort. In
Wiener’s own words, the new information technology had placed human
beings “in the presence of another social potentiality of
unheard-of importance for good and for evil.” (1948, p. 27)
However, because he did not think of himself as creating a new branch
of ethics, Wiener did not coin names, such as “computer
ethics” or “information ethics”, to describe what he
was doing. These terms – beginning with “computer
ethics” – came into common use years later, starting in
the mid 1970s with the work of Walter Maner. (see Maner 1980)


Today, the “information age” that Wiener predicted more than half a
century ago has come into existence; and the metaphysical and
scientific foundation for information ethics that he laid down
continues to provide insight and effective guidance for understanding
and resolving ethical challenges engendered by information
technologies of all kinds.
2. Defining Computer Ethics


In 1976, nearly three decades after the publication of Wiener’s
book Cybernetics, Walter Maner noticed that the ethical
questions and problems considered in his Medical Ethics course at Old
Dominion University often became more complicated or significantly
altered when computers got involved. Sometimes the addition of
computers, it seemed to Maner, actually generated wholly new
ethics problems that would not have existed if computers had not been
invented. He concluded that there should be a new branch of
applied ethics similar to already existing fields like medical ethics
and business ethics. After considering the name “information
ethics”, he decided instead to call the proposed new field

“computer ethics”.[1]
(At that time, Maner did not know about the computer ethics works of
Norbert Wiener.) He defined the proposed new field as one that studies
ethical problems “aggravated, transformed or created by computer
technology”. He developed an experimental computer ethics course
designed primarily for students in university-level computer science
programs. His course was a success, and students at his university
wanted him to teach it regularly. He complied with their wishes and
also created, in 1978, a “starter kit” on teaching
computer ethics, which he prepared for dissemination to attendees of
workshops that he ran and speeches that he gave at philosophy
conferences and computing science conferences in America. In 1980,
Helvetia Press and the National Information and Resource Center on
Teaching Philosophy published Maner’s computer ethics
“starter kit” as a monograph (Maner 1980). It contained
curriculum materials and pedagogical advice for university
teachers. It also included a rationale for offering such a course in a
university, suggested course descriptions for university catalogs, a
list of course objectives, teaching tips, and discussions of topics
like privacy and confidentiality, computer crime, computer decisions,
technological dependence and professional codes of ethics. During the
early 1980s, Maner’s Starter Kit was widely
disseminated by Helvetia Press to colleges and universities in America
and elsewhere. Meanwhile Maner continued to conduct workshops and
teach courses in computer ethics. As a result, a number of scholars,
especially philosophers and computer scientists, were introduced to
computer ethics because of Maner’s trailblazing efforts.
2.1 The “uniqueness debate”


While Maner was developing his new computer ethics course in the
mid-to-late 1970s, a colleague of his in the Philosophy Department at
Old Dominion University, Deborah Johnson, became interested in his
proposed new field. She was especially interested in Maner’s view that
computers generate wholly new ethical problems, for she did
not believe that this was true. As a result, Maner and Johnson began
discussing ethics cases that allegedly involved new problems
brought about by computers. In these discussions, Johnson granted that
computers did indeed transform old ethics problems in interesting and
important ways – that is, “give them a new twist”
– but she did not agree that computers
generated ethically unique problems that had never been seen
before. The resulting Maner-Johnson discussion initiated a fruitful
series of comments and publications on the nature and uniqueness of
computer ethics – a series of scholarly exchanges that started
with Maner and Johnson and later spread to other scholars. The
following passage, from Maner’s ETHICOMP95 keynote address, drew a
number of other people into the discussion:


I have tried to show that there are issues and problems that are
unique to computer ethics. For all of these issues, there was an
essential involvement of computing technology. Except for this
technology, these issues would not have arisen, or would not have
arisen in their highly altered form. The failure to find satisfactory
non-computer analogies testifies to the uniqueness of these
issues. The lack of an adequate analogy, in turn, has interesting
moral consequences. Normally, when we confront unfamiliar ethical
problems, we use analogies to build conceptual bridges to similar
situations we have encountered in the past. Then we try to transfer
moral intuitions across the bridge, from the analog case to our
current situation. Lack of an effective analogy forces us to discover
new moral values, formulate new moral principles, develop new
policies, and find new ways to think about the issues presented to
us. (Maner 1996, p. 152)




Over the decade that followed the publication of this provocative
passage, the extended “uniqueness debate” led to a number
of useful contributions to computer and information ethics. (For some
example publications, see Johnson 1985, 1994, 1999, 2001; Maner 1980,
1996, 1999; Gorniak-Kocikowska 1996; Tavani 2002, 2005; Himma 2003;
Floridi and Sanders 2004; Mather 2005; and Bynum 2006, 2007.)
2.2 An agenda-setting textbook


By the early 1980s, Johnson had joined the staff of Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute and had secured a grant to prepare a set of
teaching materials – pedagogical modules concerning computer
ethics – that turned out to be very successful. She incorporated
them into a textbook, Computer Ethics, which was published in
1985 (Johnson 1985).  On page 1, she noted that computers “pose
new versions of standard moral problems and moral dilemmas,
exacerbating the old problems, and forcing us to apply ordinary moral
norms in uncharted realms.” She did not grant Maner’s
claim, however, that computers create wholly new ethical
problems. Instead, she described computer ethics issues as old ethical
problems that are “given a new twist” by computer
technology.


Johnson’s book Computer Ethics was the first major textbook
in the field, and it quickly became the primary text used in computer
ethics courses offered at universities in English-speaking
countries. For more than a decade, her textbook set the computer
ethics research agenda on topics, such as ownership of software and
intellectual property, computing and privacy, responsibilities of
computer professionals, and fair distribution of technology and human
power. In later editions (1994, 2001, 2009), Johnson added new ethical
topics like “hacking” into people’s computers without
their permission, computer technology for persons with disabilities,
and ethics on the Internet.


Also in later editions of Computer Ethics, Johnson continued
the “uniqueness-debate” discussion, noting for example
that new information technologies provide new ways to
“instrument” human actions. Because of this, she agreed
with Maner that new specific ethics questions had been
generated by computer technology – for example, “Should
ownership of software be protected by law?” or “Do huge
databases of personal information threaten privacy?” – but
she argued that such questions are merely “new species of old
moral issues”, such as protection of human privacy or ownership
of intellectual property. They are not, she
insisted, wholly new ethics problems requiring additions to
traditional ethical theories, as Maner had claimed (Maner 1996).
2.3 An influential computer ethics theory


The year 1985 was a “watershed year” in the history of
computer ethics, not only because of the appearance of Johnson’s
agenda-setting textbook, but also because James Moor’s classic paper,
“What Is Computer Ethics?” was published in a special
computer-ethics issue of the
journal 
 Metaphilosophy.
 There Moor provided an account of the nature of computer ethics that
was broader and more ambitious than the definitions of Maner or
Johnson. He went beyond descriptions and examples of computer ethics
problems by offering an explanation of why computing
technology raises so many ethical questions compared to other kinds of
technology. Moor’s explanation of the revolutionary power of computer
technology was that computers are “logically
malleable”:


Computers are logically malleable in that they can be shaped and
molded to do any activity that can be characterized in terms of
inputs, outputs and connecting logical operations … . Because
logic applies everywhere, the potential applications of computer
technology appear limitless. The computer is the nearest thing we have
to a universal tool. Indeed, the limits of computers are largely the
limits of our own creativity. (Moor, 1985, 269)




The logical malleability of computer technology, said Moor, makes it
possible for people to do a vast number of things that they were not
able to do before. Since no one could do them before, the question may 
never have arisen as to whether one ought to do them. In addition, 
because they could not be done before, perhaps no laws or standards of good
practice or specific ethical rules had ever been established to govern
them. Moor called such situations “policy vacuums”, and
some of those vacuums might generate “conceptual muddles”:


A typical problem in computer ethics arises because there is a policy
vacuum about how computer technology should be used. Computers provide
us with new capabilities and these in turn give us new choices for
action. Often, either no policies for conduct in these situations
exist or existing policies seem inadequate. A central task of computer
ethics is to determine what we should do in such cases, that is,
formulate policies to guide our actions … . One difficulty is that
along with a policy vacuum there is often a conceptual
vacuum. Although a problem in computer ethics may seem clear
initially, a little reflection reveals a conceptual muddle. What is
needed in such cases is an analysis that provides a coherent
conceptual framework within which to formulate a policy for
action. (Moor, 1985, 266)




In the late 1980s, Moor’s “policy vacuum” explanation of
the need for computer ethics and his account of the revolutionary
“logical malleability” of computer technology quickly
became very influential among a growing number of computer ethics
scholars. He added additional ideas in the 1990s, including the
important notion of core human values: According to Moor,
some human values – such as life, health, happiness,
security, resources, opportunities, and knowledge – are so
important to the continued survival of any community that essentially
all communities do value them. Indeed, if a community did not
value the “core values”, it soon would cease to
exist. Moor used “core values” to examine computer ethics
topics like privacy and security (Moor 1997), and to add an account of
justice, which he called “just consequentialism” (Moor,
1999), a theory that combines “core values” and
consequentialism with Bernard Gert’s deontological notion of
“moral impartiality” using “the blindfold of
justice” (Gert,1998).


Moor’s approach to computer ethics is a practical theory that provides
a broad perspective on the nature of the “information
revolution”. By using the notions of “logical
malleability”, “policy vacuums”, “conceptual
muddles”, “core values” and “just
consequentialism”, he provides the following problem-solving
method:

Identify a policy vacuum generated by computing technology.
Eliminate any conceptual muddles.
Use the core values and the ethical resources of just
consequentialism to revise existing – but inadequate –
policies, or else to create new policies that justly
eliminate the vacuum and resolve the original ethical issue.




The third step is accomplished by combining deontology and
consequentialism – which traditionally have been considered
incompatible rival ethics theories – to achieve the following
practical results:


If the blindfold of justice is applied to [suggested] computing
policies, some policies will be regarded as unjust by all rational,
impartial people, some policies will be regarded as just by all
rational, impartial people, and some will be in dispute. This approach
is good enough to provide just constraints on consequentialism. We
first require that all computing policies pass the impartiality
test. Clearly, our computing policies should not be among those that
every rational, impartial person would regard as unjust. Then we can
further select policies by looking at their beneficial
consequences. We are not ethically required to select policies with
the best possible outcomes, but we can assess the merits of the
various policies using consequentialist considerations and we may
select very good ones from those that are just. (Moor, 1999,
68)


2.4 Computing and human values


Beginning with the computer ethics works of Norbert Wiener (1948,
1950, 1963), a common thread has run through much of the history of
computer ethics; namely, concern for protecting and advancing
central human values, such a life, health, security, happiness,
freedom, knowledge, resources, power and opportunity. Thus, most
of the specific issues that Wiener dealt with are cases of defending
or advancing such values. For example, by working to prevent massive
unemployment caused by robotic factories, Wiener tried to preserve
security, resources and opportunities for factory workers. Similarly,
by arguing against the use of decision-making war-game machines,
Wiener tried to diminish threats to security and peace.


This “human-values approach” to computer ethics has been
very fruitful. It has served, for example, as an organizing theme for
major computer-ethics conferences, such as the 1991 National
Conference on Computing and Values at Southern Connecticut State
University (see the section below on “exponential
growth”), which was devoted to the impacts of computing
upon security, property, privacy, knowledge, freedom and
 opportunities.
 In the late 1990s, a similar approach
to computer ethics, called “value-sensitive computer
design”, emerged based upon the insight that potential
computer-ethics problems can be avoided, while new technology is under
development, by anticipating possible harm to human values and
designing new technology from the very beginning in ways that prevent
such harm. (See, for example, 
 Brey, 2001, 2012; Friedman, 1997; Friedman and Nissenbaum, 1996; Introna,
2005a; Introna and Nissenbaum, 2000; Flanagan, et al., 2008.)
2.5 Professional ethics and computer ethics


In the early 1990s, a different emphasis within computer ethics was
advocated by Donald Gotterbarn. He believed that computer ethics
should be seen as a professional ethics devoted to the
development and advancement of standards of good practice and codes of
conduct for computing professionals. Thus, in 1991, in the article
“Computer Ethics: Responsibility Regained”, Gotterbarn
said:


There is little attention paid to the domain of professional ethics
– the values that guide the day-to-day activities of computing
professionals in their role as professionals. By computing
professional I mean anyone involved in the design and development of
computer artifacts. … The ethical decisions made during the
development of these artifacts have a direct relationship to many of
the issues discussed under the broader concept of computer
ethics. (Gotterbarn, 1991)




Throughout the 1990s, with this aspect of computer ethics in mind,
Gotterbarn worked with other professional-ethics advocates (for
example, Keith Miller, Dianne Martin, Chuck Huff and Simon Rogerson)
in a variety of projects to advance professional responsibility among
computer practitioners. Even before 1991, Gotterbarn had been part of
a committee of the ACM (Association for Computing Machinery) to create
the third version of that organization’s “Code of Ethics and
Professional Conduct” (adopted by the ACM in 1992, see Anderson,
et al., 1993). Later, Gotterbarn and colleagues in the ACM and the
Computer Society of the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers) developed licensing standards for software engineers. In
addition, Gotterbarn headed a joint taskforce of the IEEE and ACM to
create the “Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional
Practice” (adopted by those organizations in 1999; see
Gotterbarn, Miller and Rogerson, 1997).


In the late 1990s, Gotterbarn created the 
 Software Engineering Ethics Research Institute 
(SEERI) at East Tennessee State University; and in the early 2000s,
together with Simon Rogerson, he developed a computer program called
SoDIS (Software Development Impact Statements) to assist individuals,
companies and organizations in the preparation of ethical
“stakeholder analyses” for determining likely ethical
impacts of software development projects (Gotterbarn and Rogerson,
2005). These and many other projects focused attention
upon professional responsibility and advanced the
professionalization and ethical maturation of computing
practitioners. (See the bibliography below for works by R. Anderson,
D. Gotterbarn, C. Huff, C. D. Martin, K. Miller, and S. Rogerson.)
3. Globalization


In 1995, in her ETHICOMP95 presentation “The Computer Revolution
and the Problem of Global Ethics”, Krystyna
Górniak-Kocikowska, made a startling prediction (see
Górniak, 1996). She argued that computer ethics eventually will
evolve into a global ethic applicable in every culture on
earth. According to this “Górniak hypothesis”,
regional ethical theories like Europe’s Benthamite and Kantian
systems, as well as the diverse ethical systems embedded in other
cultures of the world, all derive from “local” histories
and customs and are unlikely to be applicable world-wide. Computer and
information ethics, on the other hand, Górniak argued, has the
potential to provide a global ethic suitable for the Information
Age:

a new ethical theory is likely to emerge from computer ethics in
response to the computer revolution. The newly emerging field of
information ethics, therefore, is much more important than even its
founders and advocates believe. (p. 177)
The very nature of the Computer Revolution indicates that the
ethic of the future will have a global character. It will be global in
a spatial sense, since it will encompass the entire globe. It will
also be global in the sense that it will address the totality of human
actions and relations. (p.179)
Computers do not know borders. Computer networks … have a
truly global character. Hence, when we are talking about computer
ethics, we are talking about the emerging global ethic. (p. 186)
the rules of computer ethics, no matter how well thought through,
will be ineffective unless respected by the vast majority of or maybe
even all computer users. … In other words, computer ethics will
become universal, it will be a global ethic. (p.187)



The provocative “Górniak hypothesis” was a
significant contribution to the ongoing “uniqueness
debate”, and it reinforced Maner’s claim – which he made
at the same ETHICOMP95 conference in his keynote address – that
information technology “forces us to discover new moral values,
formulate new moral principles, develop new policies, and find new
ways to think about the issues presented to us.” (Maner 1996,
p. 152) Górniak did not speculate about the globally relevant
concepts and principles that would evolve from information ethics. She
merely predicted that such a theory would emerge over time because of
the global nature of the Internet and the resulting ethics
conversation among all the cultures of the world.
Górniak may well be right. Computer ethics today appears to
be evolving into a broader and even more important field, which might
reasonably be called “global information ethics”. Global
networks, especially the Internet, are connecting people all over the
earth. For the first time in history, efforts to develop mutually
agreed standards of conduct, and efforts to advance and defend human
values, are being made in a truly global context. So, for the first
time in the history of the earth, ethics and values will be debated
and transformed in a context that is not limited to a particular
geographic region, or constrained by a specific religion or
culture. This could be one of the most important social developments
in history (Bynum 2006; Floridi 2014). Consider just a few of the
global issues: 
3.1 Global laws
If computer users in the United States, for example, wish to
protect their freedom of speech on the Internet, whose laws apply?
Two hundred or more countries are interconnected by the Internet, so
the United States Constitution (with its First Amendment protection of
freedom of speech) is just a “local law” on the Internet
– it does not apply to the rest of the world. How can issues
like freedom of speech, control of “pornography”,
protection of intellectual property, invasions of privacy, and many
others to be governed by law when so many countries are involved?
(Lessig 2004) If a citizen in a European country, for example, has
Internet dealings with someone in a far-away land, and the government
of that country considers those dealings to be illegal, can the
European be tried by courts in the far-away country?
3.2 Global cyberbusiness
In recent years, there has be a rapid expansion of global
“cyberbusiness”.  Nations with appropriate technological
infrastructure already in place have enjoyed resulting economic
benefits, while the rest of the world has lagged behind. What will be
the political and economic fallout from this inequality? In addition,
will accepted business practices in one part of the world be perceived
as “cheating” or “fraud” in other parts of the
world? Will a few wealthy nations widen the already big gap between
the rich and the poor? Will political and even military confrontations
emerge?
3.3 Global education
If inexpensive access to a global information net is provided to
rich and poor alike – to poverty-stricken people in ghettos, to
poor nations in the “underdeveloped world”, etc. –
for the first time in history, nearly everyone on earth will have
access to daily news from a free press; to texts, documents and art
works from great libraries and museums of the world; to political,
religious and social practices of peoples everywhere. What will be the
impact of this sudden and profound “global education” upon
political dictatorships, isolated communities, coherent cultures,
religious practices, etc.? As great universities of the world begin to
offer degrees and knowledge modules via the Internet, will
“lesser” universities be damaged or even forced out of
business?
3.4 Information rich and information poor


The gap between rich and poor nations, and even between rich and poor
citizens in industrialized countries, is already disturbingly wide. As
educational opportunities, business and employment opportunities,
medical services and many other necessities of life move more and more
into cyberspace, will gaps between the rich and the poor become even
worse?
4. A Metaphysical Foundation for Computer Ethics


Important recent developments, which began after 1995, appear to be
confirming Górniak’s hypothesis – in particular,
the metaphysical
information ethics theory of Luciano Floridi (see, for
example, Floridi, 1999, 2005a, 2008, 2013b) and the “Flourishing
Ethics” theory of the present author which combines ideas from
Aristotle, Wiener, Moor and Floridi (see Bynum, 2006).


Floridi, in developing his information ethics theory
(henceforth
 FIE)[2],
 argued that the purview of computer ethics
– indeed of ethics in general – should be widened to
include much more than simply human beings, their actions, intentions
and characters. He developed FIE as another “macroethics”
(his term) which is similar to utilitarianism, deontologism,
contractualism, and virtue ethics, because it is intended to be
applicable to all ethical situations. On the other hand, FIE
is different from these more traditional Western theories
because it is not intended to replace them, but rather
to supplement them with further ethical considerations that
go beyond the traditional theories, and that can be overridden,
sometimes, by traditional ethical considerations. (Floridi, 2006)


The name “information ethics” is appropriate to
Floridi’s theory, because it treats everything that exists as
“informational” objects or processes:


 [All] entities will be described as clusters of data, that is, as
informational objects. More precisely, [any existing entity] will be a
discrete, self-contained, encapsulated package containing

the appropriate data structures, which constitute the nature of
the entity in question, that is, the state of the object, its unique
identity and its attributes; and
a collection of operations, functions, or procedures, which are
activated by various interactions or stimuli (that is, messages
received from other objects or changes within itself) and
correspondingly define how the object behaves or reacts to
them.


 At this level of abstraction, informational systems as such, rather
than just living systems in general, are raised to the role of agents
and patients of any action, with environmental processes, changes and
interactions equally described informationally. (Floridi 2006a,
9–10)



Since everything that exists, according to FIE, is an informational
object or process, he calls the totality of all that exists –
the universe considered as a whole – “the
infosphere”. Objects and processes in the infosphere can be
significantly damaged or destroyed by altering their characteristic
data structures. Such damage or destruction Floridi calls
“entropy”, and it results in partial “empoverishment
of the infosphere”. Entropy in this sense is an evil that
should be avoided or minimized, and Floridi offers four
“fundamental principles”:

Entropy ought not to be caused in the infosphere (null law).
Entropy ought to be prevented in the infosphere. 
Entropy ought to be removed from the infosphere. 
The flourishing of informational entities as well as the whole infosphere ought
to be promoted by preserving, cultivating and enriching their properties.



FIE is based upon the idea that everything in the infosphere has at
least a minimum worth that should be ethically respected, even if that
worth can be overridden by other considerations:


[FIE] suggests that there is something even more elemental than life,
namely being – that is, the existence and flourishing
of all entities and their global environment – and something
more fundamental than suffering, namely entropy
… . [FIE] holds that being/information has an
intrinsic worthiness. It substantiates this position by recognizing
that any informational entity has a Spinozian right to
persist in its own status, and a Constructionist right to
flourish, i.e., to improve and enrich its existence and
essence. (Floridi 2006a, p. 11)




By construing every existing entity in the universe as
“informational”, with at least a minimal moral worth, FIE
can supplement traditional ethical theories and go beyond them by
shifting the focus of one’s ethical attention away from the
actions, characters, and values of human agents toward the
“evil” (harm, dissolution, destruction) –
“entropy” – suffered by objects and processes in the
infosphere. With this approach, every existing entity – humans,
other animals, plants, organizations, even non-living artifacts,
electronic objects in cyberspace, pieces of intellectual property
– can be interpreted as potential agents that affect other
entities, and as potential patients that are affected by other
entities. In this way, Floridi treats FIE as a
“patient-based” non-anthropocentric ethical theory to be
used in addition to the traditional “agent-based”
anthropocentric ethical theories like utilitarianism, deontologism and
virtue theory.


FIE, with its emphasis on “preserving and enhancing the
infosphere”, enables Floridi to provide, among other things, an
insightful and practical ethical theory of robot behavior and the
behavior of other “artificial agents” like softbots and
cyborgs.  (See, for example, Floridi and Sanders, 2004.) FIE is an
important component of a more ambitious project covering the entire
new field of the “Philosophy of Information” (his
term). (See Floridi 2011) 
5. Exponential Growth


The paragraphs above describe key contributions to “the history
of ideas” in information and computer ethics, but the history of
a discipline includes much more. The birth and development of a new
academic field require cooperation among a “critical mass”
of scholars, plus the creation of university courses, research
centers, conferences, academic journals, and more. In this regard, the
year 1985 was pivotal for information and computer ethics. The
publication of Johnson’s textbook, Computer Ethics,
plus a special issue of the journal Metaphilosophy (October
1985) – including especially Moor’s article “What Is
Computer Ethics?” – provided excellent curriculum
materials and a conceptual foundation for the field. In addition,
Maner’s earlier trailblazing efforts, and those of other people
who had been inspired by Maner, had generated a “ready-made
audience” of enthusiastic computer science and philosophy
scholars. The stage was set for exponential growth. (The formidable
foundation for computer and information ethics, which Wiener had laid
down in the late 1940s and early 1950s, was so far ahead of its time
that social and ethical thinkers then did not follow his lead and help
to create a vibrant and growing field of computer and information
ethics even earlier than the 1980s.)


In the United States, rapid growth occurred in information and
computer ethics beginning in the mid-1980s. In 1987 the Research
Center on Computing & Society was founded at Southern Connecticut
State University. Shortly thereafter, the Director (the present
author) joined with Walter Maner to organize “the National
Conference on Computing and Values” (NCCV), funded by
America’s National Science Foundation, to bring together
computer scientists, philosophers, public policy makers, lawyers,
journalists, sociologists, psychologists, business people, and
others. The goal was to examine and push forward some of the major
sub-areas of information and computer ethics; namely, computer
security, computers and privacy, ownership of intellectual property,
computing for persons with disabilities, and the teaching of computer
ethics. More than a dozen scholars from several different disciplines
joined with Bynum and Maner to plan NCCV, which occurred in August
1991 at Southern Connecticut State University. Four hundred people
from thirty-two American states and seven other countries attended;
and the conference generated a wealth of new computer ethics materials
– monographs, video programs and an extensive bibliography
– which were disseminated to hundreds of colleges and
universities during the following two years.


In that same decade, professional ethics advocates, such as Donald
Gotterbarn, Keith Miller and Dianne Martin – and professional
organizations, such as Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and the Special
Interest Group on Computing and Society (SIGCAS) of the ACM –
spearheaded projects focused upon professional responsibility for
computer practitioners. Information and computer ethics became a
required component of undergraduate computer science programs that
were nationally accredited by the Computer Sciences Accreditation
Board. In addition, the annual “Computers, Freedom and
Privacy” conferences began in 1991 (see www.cfp.org), and the
ACM adopted a new version of its Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct in 1992.


In 1995, rapid growth of information and computer ethics spread to
Europe when the present author joined with Simon Rogerson of De
Montfort University in England to create the Centre for Computing and
Social Responsibility and to organize the first computer ethics
conference in Europe, ETHICOMP95.  That conference included attendees
from fourteen different countries, mostly in Europe, and it became a
key factor in generating a “critical mass” of computer
ethics scholars in Europe. After 1995, every 18 months, another
ETHICOMP conference occurred, moving from country to country in Europe
and beyond – Spain, the Netherlands, Italy, Poland, Portugal,
Greece, Sweden, Japan, China, Argentina, Denmark, France. In addition,
in 1999, with assistance from Bynum and Rogerson, the Australian
scholars John Weckert and Christopher Simpson created the Australian
Institute of Computer Ethics and organized AICEC99 (Melbourne,
Australia), which was the first international computer ethics
conference south of the equator. A number of AICE conferences have
occurred since then (see http://auscomputerethics.com).


A central figure in the rapid growth of information and computer
ethics in Europe was Simon Rogerson. In addition to creating the
Centre for Computing and Social Responsibility at De Montfort
University and co-heading the influential ETHICOMP conferences, he
also (1) added computer ethics to De Montfort University’s
curriculum, (2) created a graduate program with advanced computer
ethics degrees, including PhDs, and (3) co-founded and co-edited (with
Ben Fairweather) two computer ethics journals – The Journal
of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society in 2003 (see
the section “Other Internet Resources” below), and the
electronic journal The ETHICOMP Journal in 2004 (see Other
Internet Resources below). Rogerson also served on the Information
Technology Committee of the British Parliament, and he participated in
several computer ethics projects with agencies of the European
Union.


Other important computer ethics developments in Europe in the late
1990s and early 2000s included, for example, (1) Luciano
Floridi’s creation of the Information Ethics Research Group at
Oxford University in the mid 1990s; (2) Jeroen van den Hoven’s
founding, in 1997, of the CEPE (Computer Ethics: Philosophical
Enquiry) series of conferences, which occurred alternately in Europe
and America; (3) van den Hoven’s creation of the
journal Ethics and Information Technology in 1999; (4) Rafael
Capurro’s creation of the International Center for Information
Ethics in 1999; (5) Capurro’s creation of the
journal International Review of Information Ethics in 2004;
and Bernd Carsten Stahl’s creation of The International
Journal of Technology and Human Interaction in 2005.


In summary, since 1985 computer ethics developments have proliferated
exponentially with new conferences and conference series, new
organizations, new research centers, new journals, textbooks, web
sites, university courses, university degree programs, and
distinguished professorships. Additional “sub-fields” and
topics in information and computer ethics continually emerge as
information technology itself grows and proliferates. Recent new
topics include on-line ethics, “agent” ethics (robots,
softbots), cyborg ethics (part human, part machine), the “open
source movement”, electronic government, global information
ethics, information technology and genetics, computing for developing
countries, computing and terrorism, ethics and nanotechnology, to name
only a few examples. (For specific publications and examples, see the
list of selected resources below.)


Compared to many other scholarly disciplines, the field of computer
ethics is very young. It has existed only since the late 1940s when
Norbert Wiener created it. During the next few decades, it grew
very little because Wiener’s insights were so far ahead of everyone
else’s. Beginning in 1985, however, information and computer ethics
has grown exponentially, first in America, then in Europe, and then globally.