Confucius (551?-479? BCE), according to Chinese tradition, was a
thinker, political figure, educator, and founder of
the Ru School of Chinese
 thought.[1]
His teachings, preserved in
the Lunyu or Analects, form the foundation
of much of subsequent Chinese speculation on the education and
comportment of the ideal man, how such an individual should live his
life and interact with others, and the forms of society and government
in which he should participate. Fung Yu-lan, one of the great
20thcentury authorities on the history of Chinese
thought, compares Confucius' influence in Chinese history with that of
Socrates in the West.
 
1. Confucius' Life


The sources for Confucius' life were compiled well after his death
and taken together paint contradictory pictures of his personality and
of the events in his life. The early works agreed by textual
authorities to be relatively reliable sources of biographical material
are: the Analects, compiled by Confucius'
disciples and later followers during the centuries following his death;
the Zuozhuan, a narrative history composed from earlier
sources sometime in the fourth century; and the Mengzi or
Mencius, a compilation of the teachings of the well-known
eponymous fourth century follower of Confucius' thought put
together by his disciples and
 adherents.[2]
The Confucius of the Analects appears most
concerned with behaving morally even when this means enduring hardship
and poverty. Mencius' Confucius is a politically motivated
figure, seeking high office and departing from patrons who do not
properly reward
 him.[3]
A third
Confucius is found in the pages of the Zuozhuan. This one is a
heroic figure courageously facing down dangers that threaten the lord
of Confucius' native state of Lu.


Many of the stories found in these three sources as well as the
legends surrounding Confucius at the end of the
2ndcentury were included in a biography of Confucius
by the Han dynasty court historian, Sima Qian (145-c.85), in his
well-known and often-quoted Records of the Grand
 Historian (Shiji).[4]
This collection of tales opens by identifying
Confucius' ancestors as members of the Royal State of Song, a genealogy
 Sima Qian borrows from the Zuozhuan.[5]
This same account notes as well that his great
grandfather, fleeing the turmoil in his native Song, had moved to Lu,
somewhere near the present town of Qufu in south-eastern Shandong,
where the family became impoverished. Confucius' father is
usually identified as Shu He of Zhou who, according to the
Zuozhuan, led Lu armies in 563 and again in 556, acting with
great valor and extraordinary strength (qualities for which his son
would later be known according to the same historical source). Nothing
of certainty is known of his mother; she may have been a daughter of
the Yan family. Confucius was born in the walled town of Zhou in the
state of Lu in 552 or in 551 according to the earliest sources that
preserve such information about him. If the year of his birth was
551—the date most scholars favor—then, since that year was
a gengxu year according to the traditional system of cyclical
designations for years, Confucius was born under the sign of the dog.
This may account for why, according to Sima Qian's biography,
Confucius accepted as true the observation that in his sad and forlorn
appearance he resembled a “stray
 dog.”[6]


Confucius is described, by Sima Qian and other sources, as having
endured a poverty-stricken and humiliating youth and been forced, upon
reaching manhood, to undertake such petty jobs as accounting and caring
for
 livestock.[7]
Sima Qian's
account includes the tale of how Confucius was born in answer to his
parents' prayers at a sacred hill (qiu) called Ni. Confucius'
surname Kong (which means literally an utterance of
thankfulness when prayers have been answered), his tabooed given
name Qiu, and his social name Zhongni, all
appear connected to the miraculous circumstances of his birth. This
casts doubt, then, on Confucius' royal genealogy as found in the
Zuozhuan and Shiji. Similarly, Confucius' recorded
age at death, ‘seventy-two,’ is a ‘magic
number’ with far-reaching significance in early Chinese
literature. It is not surprising that we can say little about
Confucius's childhood beyond noting that he probably spent it in
the Lu town where he is reported to have been born. There are many
important figures in early Chinese history about whose youth we know
even less. Almost as if to provide something to fill this lacuna in his
account of Confucius, Sima Qian says that, “As a child [of five,
according to some highly imaginative hagiographers], Confucius
entertained himself by habitually arranging rituals vessels and staging
ceremonies,” thus prefiguring the philosopher's famous
interest in rites.


We do not know how Confucius himself was educated, but tradition has
it that he studied ritual with the fictional Daoist Master Lao Dan,
music with Chang Hong, and the lute with Music-master Xiang. In his
middle age Confucius is supposed to have gathered about him a group of
disciples whom he taught and also to have devoted himself to political
matters in Lu. The number of Confucius' disciples has been greatly
exaggerated, with Sima Qian and other sources claiming that there were
as many as three thousand of them. Sima Qian goes on to say that,
“Those who, in their own person, became conversant with the Six
Disciplines [taught by Confucius], numbered seventy-two.” The
Mencius and some other early works give their number as
seventy. Perhaps seventy or seventy-two were a maximum, though both of
these numbers are suspicious given Confucius' supposed age at
death.


In 525, when Confucius was twenty-seven or twenty-eight, he is
supposed by the authors of the Zuozhuan to have visited the
ruler of the small state of Tan in order to learn bureaucratic history
from him and then to marvel, with reflexive condescension, at how such
knowledge was lost to the Son of Heaven but “may still be studied
among the distant border peoples of the four quarters.” The theme
of the extreme inquisitiveness of the young Confucius is also reflected
in the Analects: “When the Master entered the Grand
Temple he asked questions about everything. Someone said, ‘Who
said that this son of a man from Zhou knows about ritual? When he
entered the Grand Temple he asked about everything.’ When the
Master learned of this he observed, ‘Doing so is prescribed by
ritual’” (Lunyu 
 3.15).[8]


Two Zuozhuan passages—that relate to events that took
place in 522 when Confucius would have been thirty or
thirty-one—lay claim to what appear to be among the first times
when Confucius uttered judgment on the behavior or reputation of
others. The first of these has to do with Duke Jing of Qi (r. 547–490)
whom Confucius criticized for becoming angry with an underling
determined to fulfil his official responsibilities even when that meant
disobeying a direct order from his ruler. The other is his
“tearful” comment when he learned of the death of the Zheng
statesman Zi Chan: “The love for others seen among the ancients
survived in
 him.”[9]


In another Zuozhuan passage that occurs not long after
these two, the Lu nobleman Ming Xizi, immediately before his death in
518, praised Confucius as “the descendant of a sage” and
instructed the grand officers who attended him that, upon his death,
they should entrust his two sons to Confucius. These are strong signals
that in the eyes of the authors of the Zuozhuan, Confucius was
by this time in his life established as a person of significance in Lu.
Meng Xizi went on, however, and declared that what another Lu nobleman
named Zang Sunhe had once said was true in the case of Confucius:
“If a sage possessed of bright virtue does not fit the age in
which he lives then surely among his descendants there will be one who
is successful.” Meng Xizi's Zuozhuan speech should
be read not only as indicative of a turning point in Confucius'
early career—his emergence from obscurity—but also as the
first of many ancient declarations that Confucius was worthy of a crown
that he would not receive in his lifetime.


Politics in Confucius' native Lu were extremely unstable
because of the challenge to the ruler posed by the “three Huan
families” which had the hereditary right to occupy the most
powerful ministerial offices in the Lu government. In 517 Duke Zhao of
Lu moved against the head of the most powerful—and the
wealthiest— of the families: the Ji clan. But the attack failed
and the duke was forced to flee from Lu and spend the remaining years
of his reign in exile, first in Lu's large neighbor Qi and then
in a town in the state of Jin where he died in 510. According to Sima
Qian, when Duke Zhao was first forced into exile, Confucius also went
to Qi to serve as a retainer in the household of the nobleman Gao
Zhaozi. The Analects mentions how, during this period in Qi,
Confucius heard for the first time a performance of the sacred Shao
music and was overwhelmed by the experience and then had an audience
with Duke Jing of Qi in which Confucius observed that what Qi required
was that “The ruler should be a ruler, his subjects subjects, the
father should be a father, and his son a son” (Lunyu 
12.11). He was no doubt commenting on politics in Qi where—as was
also the case in Lu—power rested not in the hands of the ruler
but instead in the hands of the powerful ministerial families who were
supposed to serve him. Some unidentified adversity probably
precipitated Confucius' departure from Qi. And it seems that back
home in Lu he was fairing poorly in locating employment. So noteworthy
was this failure that a passage in the Analects comments on
it: “Someone asked Confucius, ‘Why is it that you are
not in government?’ Confucius replied, ‘The
Documents say, ”Be filial, oh, only be filial! Be
friendly toward your brothers and extend this to governing.“
Practicing this is also to govern. Why must one be in office to
govern?’” (Lunyu  2.21). As noted earlier, what
mattered to the Confucius of the Analects was not winning an
official position but remaining faithful to the moral behavior
he
 valued.[10]


Whether or not Confucius held any important office in Lu is a
much-debated point, but from the Mengzi onward, there is
consistent ancient testimony that he was director of crime (si
kou). The Zuozhuan confirms that he held the post
starting sometime around
 509.[11]
We know very little of what Confucius accomplished
in the job and nothing about his understanding of his responsibilities.
Given what one might expect a director of crime to do—to enforce
the law and impose corporal punishments on those found guilty of
crime—it is odd to think that Confucius served in the role given
his famous opposition to the use of fines and punishments, dismissing
them as ineffective and counterproductive in governing people:
“If they are led by virtue, and uniformity sought among them
through the practice of ritual propriety, the people will possess a
sense of shame and come to you of their own accord”
(Lunyu  2.3). The contradiction among our sources is
paradigmatic of the problems we face in figuring out the events in
Confucius' life. Perhaps the claims that Confucius served as
director of crime are fictional. Perhaps he did serve in the role and
learned from the experience the ineffectiveness of punishment in
maintaining order in society. Or perhaps the Analects passage
is an interpolation—something Confucius himself never
said—added by a branch of his school that wanted to represent
their master as strongly opposed to legalistic measures in spite of his
having served as a law enforcement officer in Lu.


As it is presented in the Zuozhuan, the single most
important event in Confucius' official career in Lu, and perhaps
even in his lifetime, was the 500 BCE meeting at Jiagu in the state of
Qi when he was called upon to protect the life of Duke Ding of Lu (r.
509–495) and defend the honor of his native state. To formalize a peace
agreement between Lu and Qi, the rulers of the two states met at Jiagu
and signed an oath promising to abide by certain terms and conditions
lest they be harshly dealt with by the gods and spirits.
Confucius' role in the event is described in the text as that of
“overseer” of the protocols of the meeting. The Qi ruler
and his lieutenants had plotted to use the occasion to humiliate Lu and
perhaps even to seize Lu's ruler. The Confucius of the
Zuozhuan is shown as adroit and skilful in dealing with these
dangerous circumstances. He succeeds not only in getting Qi to withdraw
its armed men from the meeting but also to return to Lu lands that Qi
had previously appropriated in return for Lu's future
participation in Qi's military
 adventures.[12]


If Confucius in fact experienced some sort of triumph at Jiagu,
tales about the period following his return to Lu speak of intense
conflict among the three Huan families and between them and Duke Ding.
The duke attempted to have the families tear down the walls of the
fortresses that secured their fiefs—the duke's argument was
that the fortresses might be seized by lower-ranking stewards and thus
were more of a threat than a benefit to the families—but the
population of the Ji family fortress at Bi rebelled and attacked the Lu
capital threatening the life of the duke. Again, Confucius came to the
duke's rescue and the rebellion by the Bi masses was eventually
put down by the army of Lu. However, the Meng family simply refused to
tear down the walls that protected their family fortress at Cheng. Duke
Ding led an army to lay siege to Cheng and level its walls but he
failed to do so and his weakness and ineptitude were made all the more
obvious by this failure.


What role Confucius played in the duke's plans is difficult to
determine. It seems rather that, at least according to the
Zuozhuan, his disciple Zi Lu, in the employ of the Ji family,
played a more significant part. Whatever the case may be, in the
stories that follow this dramatic tale, Confucius, along with Zi Lu and
other disciples, departed Lu late in 498 and went into
 exile.[13]
As in other ancient cultures, exile
and suffering are common themes in the lives of the heroes of the early
Chinese tradition. In the company of his disciples, Confucius travelled
in the states of Wei, Song, Chen, Cai, and Chu, purportedly looking for
a ruler who might employ him but meeting instead with indifference and,
occasionally, severe hardship and danger. Several of these episodes, as
preserved in Sima Qian's account, appear to be little more than
prose retellings of songs found in the ancient Chinese Book of
Songs. Confucius' life is thus rendered a re-enactment of the
suffering and alienation of the personas of the poems.
Analects 6.28 claims that while he was in Wei, Confucius
visited its ruler's wicked consort Nanzi. Confronted by Zi
Lu's displeasure, Confucius swore he did not do anything wrong
with the woman. While it is possible to suspect that the story is a
later addition to the Analects, that does not mean that it is
less believable than anything else the text says about events in
Confucius' life. Later on, in the state of Song, Confucius just
barely escaped with his life from an attack by Marshal Huan, a
formidable Song nobleman, who for unknown reasons was intent on
killing
 him.[14]
During these
difficulties Confucius got separated from his favorite disciple Yan
Hui. When they were subsequently reunited, Confucius said, “I
assumed you were deadl” Yan Hui responded, “While the
Master is alive, how would I, Hui, dare to die?” (Lunyu 
11.21). Still later in his exile, while in the tiny state of Cai,
Confucius is supposed to have encountered the disreputable Shen
Zhuliang, better known by his title “duke of She,” who
along with other noblemen from the great southern state of Chu were
occupying Cai and herding about its population. According to passages
in the Analects, the duke of She asked Confucius about the art
of governing and also asked Zi Lu about Confucius' character.
Both passages are meant to suggest that Confucius found the duke
lacking in virtue and
 learning.[15]


Their time in the small state of Chen was especially precarious for
Confucius and his followers: “While in Chen, food supplies for
the journey were cut off. Followers fell ill and none was able to rise
to his feet. Zi Lu, indignant, saw Kongzi and asked, ‘Is it right
that even the superior man should be reduced to poverty?’ The
Master replied, ‘A superior man remains steadfast in the face of
poverty; the small man, when impoverished, loses all
restraint’” (Lunyu  15.2). Confucius' reply
to Zi Lu is not merely a lesson on the distinction between the superior
man's endurance of hardship and the tendency of his opposite, the
petty individual, to resort to crime. Confucius is drawing the
distinction when all were in straitened circumstances and as such his
words should be read as a pointed reminder to Zi Lu and the other
disciples traveling with him at the time that, in spite of the
difficulties they were facing, they should adhere to the highest
standards of ethical behavior. Perhaps it was Zi Lu's indignation
that triggered in Confucius a worry that his followers might take
extreme and even immoral measures to find food. Either inspired by this
story or informed by tales and traditions that are lost to us, a
passage in the Mozi—a text that preserves a political
and social philosophy greatly at odds with the teachings of Confucius
and the Ru school—claims that Confucius, who had a reputation for
being scrupulous about his meals, ate pork given him by Zi Lu even
though he had reason to believe that Zi Lu had stolen
 it.[16]
Other passages in the
Analects hint that Confucius was disturbed by the behavior of
some of his followers while they were abroad with him and by their
failure to make more progress in the cultivation of the moral values
he
 prized.[17]


In any case, by most traditional accounts, after a brief second
visit to Wei, Confucius returned to Lu in 484. The Ji family was still
the most powerful in Lu as they had been when Confucius had departed in
the aftermath of Duke Ding's aborted efforts to dismantle the
fortresses of the three Huan families. While he had some interaction
with the head of the Ji family as well as with the reigning Lu ruler,
Duke Ai, Confucius appears to have spent the remainder of his life
teaching, putting in order the Book of Songs,
the Book of Documents, and other ancient classics, as
well as editing the Spring and Autumn Annals, the court
chronicle of Lu. Sima Qian's account also provides background on
Confucius' connection to the early canonical texts on ritual and on
music (the latter of which was lost at an early date). Sima Qian
claims, moreover, that, “In his later years, Confucius delighted
in the Yi”—the famous divination manual
popular to this day in China and in the West.
The Analects passage which appears to corroborate
Sima Qian's claim seems corrupt and hence unreliable on this point.
Confucius' traditional association with these works led them and
related texts to be revered as the “Confucian Classics” and
made Confucius himself the spiritual ancestor of later teachers,
historians, moral philosophers, literary scholars, and countless others
whose lives and works figure prominently in Chinese intellectual
history.


Our best source for understanding Confucius and his thought is
the Analects. But the Analects is a
problematic and controversial work, having been compiled in variant
versions long after Confucius' death by disciples or the disciples of
disciples. Some have argued that, because of the text's inconsistencies
and incompatibilities of thought, there is much in
the Analects that is non-Confucian and should be
discarded as a basis for understanding the thought
of
 Confucius.[18]
Benjamin Schwartz
cautions us against such radical measures: “While textual
criticism based on rigorous philological and historic analysis is
crucial, and while the later sections [of the Analects] do contain late
materials, the type of textual criticism that is based on
considerations of alleged logical inconsistencies and incompatibilities
of thought must be viewed with great suspicion… . While none of
us comes to such an enterprise without deep-laid assumptions about
necessary logical relations and compatibilities, we should at least
hold before ourselves the constant injunction to mistrust all our
unexamined preconceptions on these matters when dealing with
comparative
 thought.”[19]
The difficulties in reading and interpreting the text of the
Analects have given rise to numerous extensive commentaries
that struggle to untangle the complexities of its language
and
 thought.[20]


Book X of the Analects consists of personal
observations of how Confucius comported himself as a thinker, teacher,
and official. Some have argued that these passages were originally more
general prescriptions on how a gentleman should dress and behave that
were relabelled as descriptions of Confucius. Traditionally, Book X has
been regarded as providing an intimate portrait of Confucius and has
been read as a biographical sketch. The following passages provide a
few examples of why, more generally, it is difficult to glean from the
Analects a genuinely biographical, let alone intimate,
portrait of the Master.



Confucius, at home in his native village, was simple and unassuming
in manner, as though he did not trust himself to speak. But when in the
ancestral temple or at Court he speaks readily, though always choosing
his words with due caution. (Lunyu 10.1)


When at court conversing with the officers of a lower grade, he is
friendly, though straightforward; when conversing with officers of a
higher grade, he is restrained but precise. When the ruler is present
he is wary, but not cramped. (Lunyu 10.2)


On entering the Palace Gate he seems to contract his body, as though
there were not sufficient room to admit him. If he halts, it must never
be in the middle of the gate, nor in going through does he ever tread
on the threshold. (Lunyu 10.4)


When fasting in preparation for sacrifice he must wear the Bright
Robe, and it must be of linen. He must change his food and also the
place where he commonly sits. He does not object to his rice being
thoroughly cleaned, nor to his meat being finely minced.
(Lunyu 10.7, 10.8)


When sending a messenger to enquire after someone in another
country, he bows himself twice while seeing the messenger off.
(Lunyu 10.15)


In bed he avoided lying in the posture of a corpse … On
meeting anyone in deep mourning he must bow across the bar of his
chariot. (Lunyu 10.24, 10.25)


Analects passages such as these may not satisfy a
modern reader looking for some entry into understanding the connection
between Confucius the man and Confucius the thinker, but they did
succeed in rendering Confucius the model of
courtliness and personal decorum for countless generations of Chinese
officials.


By the fourth century, Confucius was recognized as a unique
figure, a sage who was ignored but should have been recognized and
become a king. At the end of the fourth century BCE, Mencius says
of Confucius: “Ever since man came into this world, there has
never been one greater than Confucius.” And in two passages
Mencius implies that Confucius was one of the great sage kings who,
according to his reckoning, arises every five hundred years. Confucius
also figures prominently as the subject of anecdotes and the teacher of
wisdom in the writings of Xunzi, a third century follower of Confucius'
teachings. Indeed chapters twenty-eight to thirty of
the Xunzi, which some have argued were not the work of
Xunzi but compilations by his disciples, look like an alternative, and
considerably briefer, version of the Analects.


Confucius and his followers also inspired considerable criticism
from other thinkers. The anecdote quoted earlier from the Mozi
is an example. The authors of the Zhuangzi took
particular delight in parodying Confucius and the teachings
conventionally associated with him. But Confucius' reputation was so
great that even the Zhuangzi appropriates him to
give voice to Daoist teachings.
2. Confucius' Ethics


Confucius' teachings and his conversations and exchanges with his
disciples are recorded in
the Lunyu  or Analects, a collection
that probably achieved something like its present form around the
second century BCE. While Confucius believes that people live their
lives within parameters firmly established by Heaven—which,
often, for him means both a purposeful Supreme Being as well as
‘nature’ and its fixed cycles and patterns—he argues
that men are responsible for their actions and especially for their
treatment of others. We can do little or nothing to alter our fated
span of existence but we determine what we accomplish and what we are
remembered for.


Confucius represented his teachings as lessons transmitted from
antiquity. He claimed that he was “a transmitter and not a
maker” and that all he did reflected his “reliance on and
love for the ancients” (Lunyu 7.1). Confucius
pointed especially to the precedents established during the height of
the royal Zhou (roughly the first half of the first millennium BCE).
Such justifications for one's ideas may have already been conventional
in Confucius' day. Certainly his claim that there were antique
precedents for his ideology had a tremendous influence on subsequent
thinkers many of whom imitated these gestures. But we should not regard
the contents of the Analects as consisting of old
ideas. Much of what Confucius taught appears to have been original to
him and to have represented a radical departure from the ideas and
practices of his day.


Confucius also claimed that he enjoyed a special and privileged
relationship with Heaven and that, by the age of fifty, he had come to
understand what Heaven had mandated for him and for mankind.
(Lunyu 2.4). Confucius was also careful to instruct his
followers that they should never neglect the offerings due Heaven.
(Lunyu 3.13) Some scholars have seen a contradiction
between Confucius' reverence for Heaven and what they believe to be his
skepticism with regard to the existence of ‘the spirits.’
But the Analects passages that reveal Confucius'
attitudes toward spiritual forces (Lunyu 3.12, 6.20, and
11.11) do not suggest that he was skeptical. Rather they show that
Confucius revered and respected the spirits, thought that they should
be worshipped with utmost sincerity, and taught that serving the
spirits was a far more difficult and complicated matter than serving
mere mortals.


Confucius' social philosophy largely revolves around the concept
of ren, “compassion” or “loving
others.” Cultivating or practicing such concern for others
involved deprecating oneself. This meant being sure to avoid artful
speech or an ingratiating manner that would create a false impression
and lead to self-aggrandizement. (Lunyu 1.3) Those who
have cultivated ren are, on the contrary,
“simple in manner and slow of speech”
(Lunyu 13.27). For Confucius, such concern for others is
demonstrated through the practice of forms of the Golden Rule:
“What you do not wish for yourself, do not do to others;”
“Since you yourself desire standing then help others achieve it,
since you yourself desire success then help others attain it”
(Lunyu 12.2, 6.30). He regards devotion to parents and
older siblings as the most basic form of promoting the interests of
others before one's own. Central to all ethical teachings found in the
Analects of Confucius is the notion that the social arena in
which the tools for creating and maintaining harmonious relations are
fashioned and employed is the extended family. Among the various ways
in which social divisions could have been drawn, the most important
were the vertical lines that bound multigenerational lineages. And the
most fundamental lessons to be learned by individuals within a lineage
were what role their generational position had imposed on them and what
obligations toward those senior or junior to them were associated with
those roles. In the world of the Analects, the dynamics of
social exchange and obligation primarily involved movement up and down
along familial roles that were defined in terms of how they related to
others within the same lineage. It was also necessary that one play
roles within other social constructs—neighborhood, community,
political bureaucracy, guild, school of thought—that brought one
into contact with a larger network of acquaintances and created ethical
issues that went beyond those that impacted one's family. But the
extended family was at the center of these other hierarchies and could
be regarded as a microcosm of their workings. One who behaved morally
in all possible parallel structures extending outward from the family
probably approximated Confucius's conception of ren.


It is useful to contrast this conception of ren and the
social arena in which it worked with the idea of jian ai or
“impartial love” advocated by the Mohists who as early as
the fifth century BCE posed the greatest intellectual challenge to
Confucius' thought. The Mohists shared with Confucius and his
followers the goal of bringing about effective governance and a stable
society, but they constructed their ethical system, not on the basis of
social roles, but rather on the self or, to be more precise, the
physical self that has cravings, needs, and ambitions. For the Mohists,
the individual's love for his physical self is the basis on which
all moral systems had to be built. The Confucian emphasis on social
role rather than on the self seems to involve, in comparison to the
Mohist position, an exaggerated emphasis on social status and position
and an excessive form of self-centeredness. While the Mohist love of
self is also of course a form of self-interest, what distinguishes it
from the Confucian position is that the Mohists regard self-love as a
necessary means to an end, not the end in itself, which the Confucian
pride of position and place appears to be. The Mohist program called
for a process by which self-love was replaced by, or transformed into,
impartial love—the unselfish and altruistic concern for others
that would, in their reckoning, lead to an improved world untroubled by
wars between states, conflict in communities, and strife within
families. To adopt impartial love would be to ignore the barriers that
privilege the self, one's family, and one's state and that
separate them from other individuals, families, and states. In this
argument, self-love is a fact that informs the cultivation of concern
for those within one's own silo; it is also the basis for
interacting laterally with those to whom one is not related, a large
cohort that is not adequately taken into account in the Confucian
scheme of ethical obligation.


Confucius taught that the practice of altruism he thought necessary
for social cohesion could be mastered only by those who have learned
self-discipline. Learning self-restraint involves studying and
mastering li, the ritual forms and rules of propriety
through which one expresses respect for superiors and enacts his role
in society in such a way that he himself is worthy of respect and
admiration. A concern for propriety should inform everything that one
says and does:


Look at nothing in defiance of ritual, listen to nothing in defiance
of ritual, speak of nothing in defiance or ritual, never stir hand or
foot in defiance of ritual. (Lunyu 12.1)


Subjecting oneself to ritual does not, however, mean suppressing
one's desires but instead learning how to reconcile one's own desires
with the needs of one's family and community. Confucius and many of his
followers teach that it is by experiencing desires that we learn the
value of social strictures that make an ordered society possible
(See Lunyu 2.4.). And at least for Confucius'
follower Zi Xia, renowned in the later tradition for his knowledge of
the Book of Songs, one's natural desires for sex and
other physical pleasures were a foundation for cultivating a passion
for worthiness and other lofty ideals (Lunyu 
 1.7).[21]


Confucius' emphasis on ritual does not mean that he was a
punctilious ceremonialist who thought that the rites of worship and of
social exchange had to be practiced correctly at all costs. Confucius
taught, on the contrary, that if one did not possess a keen sense of
the well-being and interests of others his ceremonial manners signified
nothing. (Lunyu 3.3) Equally important was Confucius'
insistence that the rites not be regarded as mere forms, but that they
be practiced with complete devotion and sincerity. “He [i.e.,
Confucius] sacrificed to the dead as if they were present. He
sacrificed to the spirits as if the spirits were present. The Master
said, ‘I consider my not being present at the sacrifice as though
there were no sacrifice’” (Lunyu 3.12).
3. Confucius' Political Philosophy


Confucius' political philosophy is also rooted in his belief that a
ruler should learn self-discipline, should govern his subjects by his
own example, and should treat them with love and concern. “If the
people be led by laws, and uniformity among them be sought by
punishments, they will try to escape punishment and have no sense of
shame. If they are led by virtue, and uniformity sought among them
through the practice of ritual propriety, they will possess a sense of
shame and come to you of their own accord”
(Lunyu 2.3; see also 13.6.). It seems apparent that in his
own day, however, advocates of more legalistic methods were winning a
large following among the ruling elite. Thus Confucius' warning about
the ill consequences of promulgating law codes should not be
interpreted as an attempt to prevent their adoption but instead as his
lament that his ideas about the moral suasion of the ruler were not
proving popular.


Most troubling to Confucius was his perception that the political
institutions of his day had completely broken down. He attributed this
collapse to the fact that those who wielded power as well as those who
occupied subordinate positions did so by making claim to titles for
which they were not worthy. When asked by a ruler of the large state of
Qi, Lu's neighbor on the Shandong peninsula, about the principles of
good government, Confucius is reported to have replied: “Good
government consists in the ruler being a ruler, the minister being a
minister, the father being a father, and the son being a son”
(Lunyu 12.11). I should claim for myself only a title that
is legitimately mine and when I possess such a title and participate in
the various hierarchical relationships signified by that title, then I
should live up to the meaning of the title that I claim for myself.
Confucius' analysis of the lack of connection between actualities and
their names and the need to correct such circumstances is often
referred to as Confucius' theory of zhengming. Elsewhere
in the Analects, Confucius says to his disciple Zilu that
the first thing he would do in undertaking the administration of a
state is zhengming. (Lunyu 13.3). In that
passage Confucius is taking aim at the illegitimate ruler of Wei who
was, in Confucius' view, improperly using the title
“successor,” a title that belonged to his father the
rightful ruler of Wei who had been forced into
 exile.[22]
Xunzi composed an entire essay
entitled Zhengming. But for Xunzi the term referred to
the proper use of language and how one should go about inventing new
terms that were suitable to the age. For
Confucius, zhengming does not seem to refer to the
‘rectification of names’ (this is the way the term is most
often translated by scholars of the Analects), but
instead to rectifying the behavior of people and the social reality so
that they correspond to the language with which people identify
themselves and describe their roles in society. Confucius believed that
this sort of rectification had to begin at the very top of the
government, because it was at the top that the discrepancy between
names and actualities had originated. If the ruler's behavior is
rectified then the people beneath him will follow suit. In a
conversation with Ji Kangzi (who had usurped power in Lu), Confucius
advised: “If your desire is for good, the people will be good.
The moral character of the ruler is the wind; the moral character of
those beneath him is the grass. When the wind blows, the grass
bends” (Lunyu  12.19).


For Confucius, what characterized superior rulership was the
possession of de or ‘virtue.’ Conceived
of as a kind of moral power that allows one to win a following without
recourse to physical force, such ‘virtue’ also enabled the
ruler to maintain good order in his state without troubling himself and
by relying on loyal and effective deputies. Confucius claimed that,
“He who governs by means of his virtue is, to use an analogy,
like the pole-star: it remains in its place while all the lesser stars
do homage to it” (Lunyu 2.1). The way to maintain
and cultivate such royal ‘virtue’ was through the practice
and enactment of li or
‘rituals’—the ceremonies that defined and punctuated
the lives of the ancient Chinese aristocracy. These ceremonies
encompassed: the sacrificial rites performed at ancestral temples to
express humility and thankfulness; the ceremonies of enfeoffment,
toasting, and gift exchange that bound together the aristocracy into a
complex web of obligation and indebtedness; and the acts of politeness
and decorum—such things as bowing and yielding—that
identified their performers as gentlemen. In an influential study,
Herbert Fingarette argues that the performance of these various
ceremonies, when done correctly and sincerely, involves a
‘magical’ quality that underlies the efficacy of royal
‘virtue’ in accomplishing the aims of the
ruler.
4. Confucius and Education


A hallmark of Confucius' thought is his emphasis on education and
study. He disparages those who have faith in natural understanding or
intuition and argues that the only real understanding of a subject
comes from long and careful study. Study, for Confucius, means finding
a good teacher and imitating his words and deeds. A good teacher is
someone older who is familiar with the ways of the past and the
practices of the ancients. (See Lunyu 7.22) While he sometimes
warns against excessive reflection and meditation, Confucius' position
appears to be a middle course between learning and reflecting on what
one has learned. “He who learns but does not think is lost. He
who thinks but does not learn is in great danger”
(Lunyu 2.15).[23] 
He taught his students morality, proper
speech, government, and the refined arts. While he also emphasizes the
“Six Arts” — ritual, music, archery, chariot-riding,
calligraphy, and computation — it is clear that he regards
morality as the most important subject.  Confucius' pedagogical
methods are striking. He never discourses at length on a
subject. Instead he poses questions, cites passages from the classics,
or uses apt analogies, and waits for his students to arrive at the
right answers. “Only for one deeply frustrated over what he does
not know will I provide a start; only for one struggling to form his
thoughts into words will I provide a beginning. But if I hold up one
corner and he cannot respond with the other three I will not repeat
myself” (Lunyu 7.8).


Confucius' goal is to create gentlemen who carry themselves with
grace, speak correctly, and demonstrate integrity in all things. His
strong dislike of the sycophantic “petty men,” whose clever
talk and pretentious manner win them an audience, is reflected in
numerous Lunyu passages. Confucius finds himself in
an age in which values are out of joint. Actions and behavior no longer
correspond to the labels originally attached to them. “Rulers do
not rule and subjects do not serve,” he observes.
(Lunyu 12.11; cf. also 13.3) This means that words and
titles no longer mean what they once did. Moral education is important
to Confucius because it is the means by which one can rectify this
situation and restore meaning to language and values to society. He
believes that the most important lessons for obtaining such a moral
education are to be found in the canonical Book of Songs,
because many of its poems are both beautiful and good. Thus Confucius
places the text first in his curriculum and frequently quotes and
explains its lines of verse. For this reason,
the  Lunyu  is also an important source for Confucius'
understanding of the role poetry and art more generally play in the
moral education of gentlemen as well as in the reformation of society.
Recent archaeological discoveries in China of previously lost ancient
manuscripts reveal other aspects of Confucius's reverence for
the Book of Songs and its importance in moral
education. These manuscripts show that Confucius had found in the
canonical text valuable lessons on how to cultivate moral qualities in
oneself as well as how to comport oneself humanely and responsibly in
public.