Continental feminism denotes a branch of feminist philosophy that
draws on theoretical concepts and methods from the continental
tradition. Continental feminists adapt three main methodological
tools—postmodernism, psychoanalysis, and phenomenology—to
unearth sexist commitments in: (1) contemporary social problems and
(2) the field of philosophy. 


While it is no easy task to characterize the heterogeneity of
projects gathered under the heading of continental feminist philosophy,
one can delineate two broad aims: deconstructive (critical) projects
and reconstructive projects. In the former case, continental feminists
draw on the tools and methodological approaches of postmodernism and
psychoanalysis to uncover the sexist, racist, and homophobic core of
Western thought. In the latter case, adapting phenomenological
approaches, continental feminists develop new, more inclusive concepts
of identity, agency, sexuality, race, and power. Their
reconstructive projects also introduce helpful models for clarifying
the nature of contemporary political and social problems.
 
1. The Critical Projects of Postmodernism and Psychoanalysis


Eradicating sexism and racism is not only a project of combating
ignorance or mere lack of knowledge and therefore demonstrating that
various figures in the history of Western philosophy based their views
of women or people of color on faulty knowledge is not sufficient to
combat future sexism. Continental feminists argue that much of the
lethal racism and sexism of Western thought—the thought
underlying our basic social structures and ideals—is affective,
unconscious, imaginary, visual, and kinesthetic (for example, Alcoff
2006, Brennan 2003, Lee 2010, Sullivan 2006). One should not
conclude, however, that careful examination of arguments, assumptions,
and patterns of reasoning have no place in continental feminism, but
rather that this work must be supplemented to adequately unearth the
non-discursive deep-seated biases and blind spots of the Western
tradition of thought not easily detected by an exclusive focus on the
examination of arguments. One can find useful parallels between
this particular focus among continental feminists and the emerging body
of work on the epistemologies of ignorance among analytic feminists
(see, for example, Code 2007, Hoagland 2007, Tuana 2004, Spelman
2007).
1.1 Psychoanalysis


A basic premise of psychoanalysis is that we do not have the ability
to fully know our motivations. Psychoanalysis emphasizes the
subterranean structures of personality incapable of being fully
presented discursively and thus able to be evaluated. As a method
taken up by continental feminists, psychoanalysis offers a new
dimension to philosophical work because it is primarily a therapeutic
practice aimed at healing. Hence, continental feminists who adopt
psychoanalysis often aim to heal deep pathologies within Western
thought (see McAfee 2000, 2008). 


The real strength of psychoanalysis lies in its diagnostic power: it
traces the causes and events responsible for a traumatic response, a
phobia, a neurotic symptom, or a psychotic break not easily discernable
by the patient (or in this case, tradition of thought). Feminists
avail themselves of psychoanalytic categories and insights to give
richer accounts of the origins of pernicious social problems, i.e., to
clarify the intransigence of racism, homophobia, and sexism as
psychological processes. Lastly, psychoanalysis identifies
universally inherited processes and psychological structures and yet
balances analyses of pathology with sensitivity to how cultural shifts
and cultural mores impact personality development. 
1.1.1 Lacanian Psychoanalysis


Jacques Lacan, who profoundly influences the French feminists Luce
Irigaray and Julia Kristeva, famously made a “return to
Freud” in the 1950s in France. Lacan's
principle interest in returning to Freudian ideas was to clarify the
singular role that language plays in structuring subjects (namely,
personal identity). Lacan focuses on earlier Freudian works, such
as The Interpretation of Dreams and Jokes and Their
Relation to the Unconscious, wherein Freud attends to faux
pas, slips of the tongues, and dreams as instances where the
unconscious irrupts.   For Lacan, what matters in
successfully diagnosing a patient is not what she intends to say, but
rather what she actually says. Only in her actual speech
will the analyst track the workings of an irrupting unconscious; the
patient's speech is a symptom to be decoded. 


Influenced profoundly by the work of Claude Lévi-Strauss
(1976) and Ferdinand de Saussure (1959), Lacan posits that language is
fundamental and distinctive to human beings. Language is a
structure with rules for creating meaning that pre-exists any
particular lexicon in a given language group. The rules that
govern language use are also symbolic and comprise the laws and taboos
central to the culture of the speaker. These rules are not
conscious to us, but rather, as Lacan famously pointed out, structure
our unconscious (1977, 147).


In keeping with his linguistic focus, Lacan reworks Sigmund
Freud's metapsychology into his own tri-partite structure: the
imaginary, the symbolic, and the real (1977a, 1978, 1988). The
imaginary order is responsible for creating the ego (le moi),
which is a necessary condition for becoming a speaking being
(parlêtre). Before an infant can speak, she must
discover her mirror image and thereby create her first anchor in the
world of human relations—her ego—which also helps her gain
a sense of mastery over her otherwise disorganized and
still-developing, uncoordinated body. And yet, this
identification with one's mirror image is fundamentally
alienating. She is both that object in the mirror and is not; the
mirror-image is an illusion (not really her) and yet only by seeing
oneself as this illusion can one begin the process of
self-mastery. This alienation forms, according to Lacan, a
fundamental split at the heart of subjectivity in human beings. 
To grasp ourselves as whole, coordinated, and self-possessed is to
simultaneously see ourselves as an other (not only to ourselves but to
all other subjects).    Most importantly, we perceive
ourselves as other (wholly separate) from our mother, who has hitherto
been our most important relationship insofar as she has met our needs
and cared for us. Becoming a subject is admitting that we are not
one with our mothers and thus she does not exist to fulfill all our
needs, nor do we complete her. We have boundaries and limits that
often put us at a distance from what we want and need.  
Moreover, our mother leaves us behind at times, and we begin to suspect
her absences are the result of our father (the Phallus) possessing
something that the mother wants more than us; we are symbolically
castrated (unable to be the sole object of satisfaction for our
mother). The name-of-the-father becomes the first symbol that
intimates to us that we might also gain the source of an omnipotent
power that will banish our sense of impotence. 


While the imaginary order begins the process of subjectivity, it is
the symbolic order that gives us access to intersubjective
relationships and the laws that regulate them. The symbolic order
is so named because it highlights that our mediation with others is
through symbols or signifiers that stand in for what we want, perceive,
or need. Following the insights of de Saussure, Lacan argues that
language is not an unmediated relationship between symbol and object,
but rather a system of signifiers that produce meaning in their
relationships to each other rather than represent objects. The
signifiers we use to name objects have an arbitrary relation to what
they signify, a relationship forged by excluding other possible
signifiers from naming the object in question. 


As we leave the mirror stage with our newly formed ego, we begin to
take up language as an attempt to restore our sense of lost symbiosis
with the mother's body and to gain mastery over our world. 
We do not have what we want—whether food or love—and so we
need to use words to present what is absent to us. Lacan argues
that we rely upon the linguistic processes of metaphor and metonymy in
the symbolic order to attempt to satisfy desire (an attempt doomed to
fail because we can never satisfy our most primordial desire to be one
with the wholeness of the maternal body nor will we ever achieve total
mastery). As we take up language, we discover the power of
metaphor to make homologous substitutions for objects that are in line
with cultural mores. We likewise discover metonymy or synecdoche to
speak our desires in more elliptical ways that again avoids censure in
the symbolic realm of culture. Both metaphor and synecdoche work
by substituting a part of an object for the whole object. Lionel
Bailly offers the following simple illustrations of metonymy and
metaphor: one can “fish for pearls” wherein we are
metonymically using the word “fish” to signify that we are
drawing things out of the ocean (even if those things are not fish) but
still within the same domain of fishing (the ocean) or we can
“fish for information,” wherein we are metaphorically
substituting fishing into a new domain (2009, 54). Metaphoric
substitutions and metonymic displacements simultaneously repress the
words (signifiers) for objects we should not name or are too painful to
name and creates the unconscious, which is a repository of repressed or
displaced signifiers. Such an act of repression or displacement
begins the long sequences of signifying chains that become unconscious
to the Subject (je), the speaking being.   The goal
of successful analysis is to bring those repressed chains of signifiers
into consciousness via the ‘talking cure.’


Lacan's final order is the real. The real is not to be
confused with “reality,” which for Lacan is a linguistic
and socially mediated reality. The real is intrinsically
incapable of being represented or symbolized; it is unnamable. 
The real regularly irrupts in our daily lives as a persistent and often
menacing reminder that as essentially linguistic beings we are not
capable of mastering our world, our selves, or our relationships to
others. There is always something in excess, ungraspable by our
merely adequate signifiers. When the real irrupts in our daily
life—whether innocuously as a high pitch noise that breaks our
attention or more painfully as a deer that runs straight into our car
on a highway—it serves to remind us of the inextricably
contingent nature of existence. 
1.1.2 Putting the Western Philosophical Tradition on the Couch


Continental feminists have found that psychoanalytic thought is
useful for two reasons 1) it provides them conceptual tools for
understanding racism, sexism, or homophobia as deep-seated, unconscious
habits that are thereby immune to rational debate and deliberation (and
political inclusion) and 2) it provides them—especially in the
work of major theorists like Freud and Lacan—a crystallization of
cultural stereotypes and misconceptions of gender, sexuality, and
race. 


Incredulity is a typical reaction to feminist psychoanalytic
work. Feminists, such a Kate Millett ([1970] 2000) and Phyllis
Chesler ([1972]1997), view psychoanalysis as nothing more than another
powerful attempt by patriarchy to control women's
sexuality. Cultural theorist Jonathan Michel Metzl (2003) reminds
us that psychoanalysis, as practiced in the 1950s and 60s in the United
States by white men, often blamed mothers (as well as feminism) as the
source of social unrest. Moreover, many scholars have exposed
Freud's decision to ignore the accounts of rape and sexual
violence that his female patients were giving in therapy, choosing
instead to interpret them as mere “fantasies.” (Masson
1998)  Given the problematic relationship between feminism and
psychoanalysis, it is not surprising that some feminists are bewildered
by a sizable literature among Continental feminists (including such
thinkers as Teresa Brennan (1992; 1993; 2003), Judith Butler (1990;
1993; 1997; 2004), Drucilla Cornell (1995; 1998), Teresa de Lauretis
(1989; 1994), Jane Gallop (1982; 1987), Kelly Oliver (1997; 2004),
Shannon Sullivan (2006), and Cynthia Willett (1995) on both Freud and
Lacan's work.


One strategy of psychoanalytically-oriented continental feminist
theorists is to read a canonical and authoritative psychoanalytic text
against the grain: to subject it to the same unconscious probing that
it purports to demonstrate in order to expose the analyst's blind
spots. After all, a core insight about the unconscious, according
to both Freud and Lacan, is that it evades consciousness; we simply do
not—and perhaps cannot—know what is buried down there.
Juliet Mitchell was an early pioneer of this technique; in 
Psychoanalysis and Feminism (1974) she challenged
feminist scholars to look seriously at Freud as an opportunity to
better unravel the patriarchal imagination and unconscious. 
Appearing in France the same year as Mitchell's book, Luce
Irigaray's Speculum of the Other Woman (1985) puts Freud
on the couch. Irigaray reads Freud closely to uncover his
unconscious fantasies and fears of the other sex. 
Speculum has become one type of model for many continental
feminists for strategically engaging with the texts of both Freud and
Lacan. What these canonical texts reveal, when read against the
grain, is how notions of pathological femininity, penis envy, or
castration anxiety emerge in Western thought as an expression of deeply
entrenched patriarchal fears of sexual difference. 


Unfortunately, rather than directly confront or challenge entrenched
ideas about the wickedness of female sexuality, Freud and Lacan
rationalize and then use them as explanations for many psychiatric
disorders. Take, for example, the long-standing belief that
presence of a womb (hystera) is what makes women prone to
hysteria (King 1993). While Freud does not credit the actual womb as the
root of hysteria, he does agree with the corresponding belief that
women are more emotionally labile. Lacan, on the other hand, portrays
the mother less as a loving nurturing presence in the infant's
world, but rather a whore, who abandons the child to a higher bidder
for her affections (Willett 1995). Irigaray pokes fun of such
caricatures of femininity in Lacan's and Freud's
texts. She mimics (and thereby exaggerates) the traditional
representations of femininity they posit as natural and proper
(1985)—a notion that Judith Butler later reworks as gender
performativity (see 1.2.1). Irigaray's strategy of mimicry
aims to expose the crucial role these patriarchal representations play
as framing assumptions in Western reasoning, and as such, are not only
taken for granted, but legitimate the association of femininity with
pathology.


To further clarify how Freud and Lacan take these representations
for granted, consider again how Lacan argues that our very sanity
depends on our adherence to both the imaginary and symbolic realm of
culture; we rely on these realms to make sense of the world. As
explained above (1.1.1), the imaginary realm provides us with
fictitious images of ourselves as whole and self-mastering, while the
symbolic realm provides us with the conceptual categories of our shared
world. What is particularly significant is their view that once
we enter the symbolic realm, by beginning to speak, we quickly learn
the various binary oppositions—pairs of contraries such as,
nature/culture or speech/writing wherein one is more valuable than its
opposite. One of these binaries is man/woman, which trains us to
place more value on men and masculinity (precisely because he/it is
opposed to woman), without any rational argumentation that defends such
an assumption. It should be stressed, moreover, that for Lacan,
both the images and the symbols we inherit, through the imaginary and
symbolic respectively, are fixed; they are not revised as culture
transforms nor do they reflect the material, social world the subject
finds him or herself in. Shannon Sullivan (2006) characterizes
this aspect of classical psychoanalysis ‘familialism,’
which is a view that the Oedipal drama responsible for constructing the
self precedes any interaction with a social, historical world. As
familialist, classical psychoanalysis sees certain features of
personality—i.e., gender roles or racist tendencies—as
inevitable rather than conditioned by certain historical attitudes.


Irigaray (1985) and Jane Gallop (1982), among others, argue,
contrary to Freud and Lacan, for a more fluid notion of the imaginary,
one that produces more humane and faithful images of women to shift the
culture and to reflect that cultural ideas shift (see also Hansen
2000). Psychoanalytic feminists agree that our identity is
produced out of identifications with various imaginary constructions
(beauty ideals, heroic personages, our parents, or public icons). 
They further agree that these imaginary constructions lay the
foundation for the sort of social, engaged agent we will become. 
If we identify with images of self-sacrificing, self-abnegating, meek
women, then we will perhaps be less likely to protest oppressive
circumstances. Drucilla Cornell (1995), in response to the effect that
these punitive and restrictive images can have on women or other
politically marginalized persons, argues for legal protection for the
“imaginary domain”—a free psychic space—which,
she argues is compatible with John Rawls' notion of
self-respect. We should be allowed to imagine and represent to
ourselves our sexual nature free from shameful fantasies imposed on us
by a heterosexist culture. The imaginary and symbolic realms that
mediate our social development, therefore, need to be challenged and
reformed, argue continental feminists, rather than prostrated
before.


Another related strategy continental feminists employ in re-reading
Lacan and Freud is to use their theoretical conclusions concerning the
pathologies of female subjectivity as symptomatic of the
pathological culture that women find themselves in. For example,
Butler (1997) reworks Freud's notion of melancholia (depression)
as a psychic-somatic indication of a culture that tells certain
subjects they matter and others they are failures. 
Lesbians, Butler argues, are threats to the conservative, heterosexist
forces in culture. As a threatening identity, no widespread set
of images or concepts support this identity. Images, and
concepts, if you remember our discussion of Lacan above (1.1.1), help
guide us in the process of forming a coherent self and become ideals to
which the self aspires. Because there are no ideals to which a lesbian
can live toward, a lesbian necessarily fails to achieve the
conventional and prescribed ideals, because they are heterosexist. 
Butler points out how this psychic failure might be understood
analogously to a psychoanalytic account of depression. Depressed
subjects often mourn something they are not allowed to be. When the ego
fails to reach such ideals, according to Freud, the super-ego punishes
it, sending the subject into a severe depression. Butler shows
that this logic works well to explain the process of all
gendered subject formation; all of us, even heterosexuals, must give up
parts of ourselves that fail to fit within the rigid symbolic
order. Only the heterosexual couple (as imagined in patriarchy)
is permitted. We “give up” the unruly parts of our
sexuality by repressing it or proscribing it—psychic acts that shade
all gender formation, for Butler, as melancholic processes.
1.1.3 Psychoanalysis and Race


In addition to the significant body of psychoanalytic feminist work
deconstructing gender and sexuality is a budding, though fraught, body
of work applying the concepts and categories of classical
psychoanalysis to race, and more specifically, racial identity. 
This work is controversial because some African American feminist
scholars suspect that applying psychoanalytic theoretical concepts to
racial identity will significantly distort the life world that African
Americans grow up in (Christian 1987). Unlike some white
feminists, some African American or Latina scholars, for example, are
less interested in turning to psychoanalytic philosophy—the
colonizer's philosophy—to make sense of their predicaments.
The editors of the collection, Feminist Subjects in Black and
White, assert

 … these interpretive strategies derive from and
reinforce a particular construction of the unconscious more useful in
exposing fissures in the dominant cultural texts than in interrogating
the discourse of the dominated. Filtering texts by subjugated
groups through a psychoanalytic ‘hermeneutics of suspicion’
tends to subvert their specific kinds of social knowledge and
authority. (Abel et al. 1997, 5; see also Spillers 1997) 


Here we see another important complication in using psychoanalytic
concepts to make sense of race: such an interpretive strategy further
marginalizes and thereby ignores the specific theoretical contributions
that African American feminists are already making and which are
grounded in the lived experiences of African Americans (Christian
1987). African American feminists, for example, may find richer
theoretical resources for making sense of their own identity in
spiritual discourses, i.e. proverbs preserved from African
religions. Barbara Christian argues:


For people of color have always theorized—but in forms quite
different from the Western form of abstract logic.  And I am inclined
to say that our theorizing (and I intentionally use the verb rather
than the noun) is often in narrative forms, in the stories we create,
in riddles and proverbs, in the play with language, since dynamic
rather than fixed ideas seem more to our liking (1987,
52).


 Finally, African American feminists have expressed deep
concern over the trend of turning to African American women's
literature—such as Toni Morrison's
Beloved—to uncover gender and racial formation in
psychoanalytic terms. Ann duCille writes—expressing a deep
ambivalence over this trend—“[w]e become objects of study
where we are authorized to be the story but have no special claim to
decoding that story. We can be, but someone else gets to tell us
what we mean” (1997, 34). Hence, rather than assume that
the African American author is the subject and the racist world she
finds herself is the
Other, psychoanalytic readings of African American
literature presume that non-white subjects are first and foremost the
Other (see also Christian 1987).


While the problems using psychoanalytic theory to unravel the
construction of non-white identity may be insoluble, some white
feminists have productively used such theory to reveal how white
identity and white privilege function. Here theorists are
attempting to use the master's tools—Freud and
Lacan—to destroy the master's house (see Lourde 1984):
dominant cultural texts are ripe for such an against-the-grain reading
of orthodox psychoanalytic concepts. In Revealing
Whiteness (2006), Sullivan takes up Freud and Jean
LaPlanche's notion of the unconscious to give better expression
to the source of everyday covert racist behavior. She argues
that, in general, the majority of racist acts and attitudes flow from
an unconscious allegiance to (identification with) white privilege such
that the seeming intractability of covert racism—the lethal
racism of well-meaning white people—is to be explained by its
unconsciousness. LaPlanche's influence on Sullivan,
however, inspires her to characterize racism as unconscious habits
rather than the unconscious tout court.  Consistent
with much continental feminist theorizing, Sullivan rejects any theory
of the self, such as Freudian theory, which maintains the Cartesian
mind-body dualism that she sees as having played a role in demeaning
women and people of color throughout history.   Framing white
privilege as an unconscious habit is intended to underscore the ways in
which it is expressed in body language, such as how white people take
up space. These unconscious habits, furthermore, are transmitted
as “enigmatic messages” from parents to infants in a way
that bypasses conscious awareness. For example, how parents hold
their bodies or change the timbre of their voices in the presence of
non-whites. And if these habits are unconscious, then she argues that
the rational, deliberate argumentation crucial to liberal political
theory is unlikely to alter them; rather, we will need to discover
alternative routes to transform habits—perhaps techniques that
work directly on our embodied self, such as transforming the spaces we
transact with—rather than solely appeal to critical
reasoning.


While very few non-white feminists have availed themselves of
psychoanalytic tools for unraveling the processes that produced the
raced subject, some scholars have encouraged this sort of theorizing to
take place. Hortense Spillers (1997) laments the lack of
“critical inquiries into the ‘souls of black
folk’” and goes on to consider this absence “the
missing layer of hermeneutic and interpretive projects of an entire
generation of black intellectuals now at work” (136). Gwen
Bergner, likewise, notes “ … although W.E.B. Du
Bois's term ‘double consciousness’ has become the
standard shorthand to describe African-American subjectivity, the
condition of double consciousness remains relatively under
theorized” (1999, 221). While both Spillers and Bergner are
acutely aware of the reasons why African American Studies has not
embraced psychoanalytic theory, both nonetheless argue that a retooling
and refitting of the fundamental concepts of psychoanalysis could be
useful for making sense of black and other non-white subject
formation. Bergner, in particular, cites the work of Frantz Fanon
(1991 [1952]/1991 [1961]) as a model for a psychoanalytic theory
attuned to and able to account for historical, social reality; in
Fanon's work, we do not see a need to “unhinge politics and
identity” (Bergner 1999, 227).
1.2 Postmodernism


As with Lacanian psychoanalysis, postmodern thinkers share insights
drawn from the structuralists, de Saussure and Levi-Strauss. 
While psychoanalysis aims to diagnose how the non-discursive forces,
such as, repression or unconscious racial habits, play a significant
role in persisting social inequalities, postmodernists tend to focus on
discourse (see Derrida 1978, 280). Whereas the analyst attends to
her patient's speech as a clue to unconscious, non-discursive
motivations or habits, the postmodernist treats discourse as
independent of the author. Concepts, rules, symbols, and words
take a life of their own in structuring the worlds we live in and how
we understand ourselves. Discursive systems, in other words, are
not fully within the control of linguistic beings and rather than
reveal the world to us, they can just as well constrain what are
possible objects of experience. This position is very close to
one taken by philosopher of science, Thomas Kuhn (1962), who stresses
that when our models of what the world is like shift, so then does what
we actually see; in other words, we see what we believe. 
Moreover, the conviction that ‘knowing’ is never a
disengaged or disinterested project is deeply inspired by Friedrich
Nietzsche's (1999) critique of ‘truth’ as a
‘will to power,’ which posits that the models we build to
render reality knowable ultimately bear traces of the interests of
their makers. Thus, for postmodernists, human knowledge is
inextricably tied to human interests.
1.2.1 Derridean Deconstructive Reading


Prominent among postmodern thinkers, Jacques Derrida (1973) makes
the epistemological claim that “nothing is outside the
text,” hence, there is nothing beyond our discursive
systems of representation insofar as we can only know or think what is
represented. Derrida is the inspirational figure for a branch of
postmodernism called deconstruction, which is a term Derrida takes from
Martin Heidegger (1962, 44) to describe a way to study a given
tradition by locating the “architectural” supports upon
which it rests. Deconstructionists insist that difference is
always at work at the heart of any theoretical construction, such as a
scientific model or a given method of analysis. The foundations
we lay to build up models or methods are not natural starting points,
but rather human constructions arising from a particular historical
context and set of concerns. This implies that our theoretical
constructions are pragmatic tools that necessarily exclude other ways
(perhaps equally valuable) of rendering the world. What grounds a
theory is not an indubitable truth, if by ‘truth’ we
mean a mirror image of nature.


Given the postmodern criticism of epistemology as historically
contingent and driven by human interests, one should surmise that
calling ‘deconstruction’ a method is fraught with
difficulties. In an effort to prevent a misunderstanding of
deconstruction as a method, commentators on Derrida's work refer
to his project as “deconstructive readings” (see, for
example, Johnson 1980).  This description aims to highlight the
singularity of each of Derrida's investigations of formative
texts in the history of philosophy. Derrida often coins
neologisms in the midst of his meticulous readings of thinkers such as
Heidegger (1982) or Plato (1981), such as différance or
pharmakon respectively. These words are not intended to
represent an enduring feature of reality, and for this reason Derrida
coins new terms for new readings and rarely uses the same term
twice. These neologisms are intended to trace out moments of the
exclusion of difference (heterogeneity) within a specific theoretical
hypothesis (theories). If such theories are our tools for picking
out patterns, stable relationships, and specific objects, then they
search for what is the same in the midst of an overwhelming
heterogeneity. Theories give us order. And yet, for
Derrida, every theory rests upon shifting sands. From this point of
view, the pursuit of knowledge is not necessarily—at least not in
every case—a progressive gain, if this means that we are getting
closer to uncovering an ultimate reality, since the pursuit of
knowledge, at least when driven by theories, often excludes intricacies
in the heterogeneity.


Derrida's deconstructive readings often unearth binary
oppositions that are projected as an unstable center of any given
theory and thereby should make us deeply skeptical of any given
method. The oppositions should not be taken as a pure primordial
reality, but rather constructions. Even what is
‘natural’ for a deconstructionist, is a construction. 
For example, some contemporary feminists embrace ‘natural
childbirth.’  This concept is supposed to describe a pure
experience, one which is unsullied by technology designed, perhaps, to
control unruly female bodies. And yet, natural childbirth is as
much a constructed concept as ‘hospital birth.’  The
latter concept simultaneously constructs ‘natural
childbirth’ as the other (its mutually exclusive
opposite) to which it is opposed; a hospital birth is supposed to be
superior to a mere natural childbirth. And yet, the latter did
not properly exist as a practice until the advent of obstetrics with
its technical manipulation of pregnant female bodies. From the
point of view of a deconstructive reading, feminists who embrace
‘natural childbirth’ are attempting to reverse a cultural
privileging of culture over nature. Yet, such a move is as
problematic because the two concepts mutually implicate each other and
neither one has an original priority. They are both constructions; each
serves its own purposes. An implication of Derridean
deconstructive readings is that neither feminists nor patriarchs can
ground a theory by claiming to have discovered the proper
foundation—whether ‘natural’ or
‘cultural.’


In her highly influential book Gender Trouble (1990) and
the follow-up book Bodies that Matter (1993), Butler employs
Derridean deconstructive readings to radically undermine both feminist
and non-feminist understandings of sex and gender. Gender
Trouble presents her theory of gender as essentially performative,
drawing from Derrida's reading of J.L. Austin in
“Signature, Event, Context” (1982a), wherein he suggests that
language—signification—precedes the reality it purports to
represent. In other words, what exists comes into being through
performances (or utterances, to use Austin's term). Butler
applies the concept of performativity to gender itself, arguing that
gender comes into being as it is performed by subjects. She
writes “[g]ender is the repeated stylization of the body, a set
of repeated acts within a highly rigid regulatory frame that congeal
over time to produce the appearance of substance, of a natural sort of
being” (1990, 33). There is no gender identity or anything
like a pure material substrate that exists prior to these
performances. Linda Martín Alcoff (2006) characterizes
Butler's position as ‘synthetic constructivism’ to
highlight that Butler's theory is as much a metaphysical account
of gender as an epistemological account; our very bodies are synthetic
rather than natural objects. The cultural symbolic system of
meaning that constructs (synthesizes) gender, furthermore, is
regulatory, an expression of power, a law, which thereby prohibits
certain possibilities from coming into existence at any given
historical moment (c.f. Colebrook 2000). Lastly, for Butler, it
makes no sense to postulate a materiality outside of discursive
systems, thus to posit that there is a pre-discursive (pure)
materiality that cultural systems of meaning inscribe, is unthinkable
on Butler's terms. The idea of a pre-discursive reality is
only posited, retrospectively, by a discourse that constructs gender as
a cultural fact and simultaneously posits sex as an ontological
fact. Hence, the notion of a pre-discursive reality is simply
contradictory: reality is discursive—if you will—so the
very idea of a ‘pre-discursive reality’ is incoherent.


If there is nothing outside of discourse, as Butler maintains, then
the lever needed to alter the inequalities between the sexes cannot be
a construction of a more faithful account of or a more culturally
valued female sexual identity. There is neither a disfigurement
of nature nor a distortion of worth by discourse because both, for
Butler, are entirely its own constructions. Hence, she adopts a
different strategy: parody. Butler argues that drag performances
both expose the otherwise invisible heterosexual matrix that otherwise
punitively restricts gender identities to a simple binary as well as
expose the very structure of gender identity as an imitation of a
heterosexual fantasy of femininity or masculinity. Butler
suggests that:

… part of the pleasure, the giddiness of the performance is
in the recognition of a radical contingency in the relation between sex
and gender in the face of cultural configurations … that are
regularly assumed to be natural and necessary … [drag]
dramatizes the cultural mechanism of their fabricated unity
(138). 


In other words, drag is merely an exaggeration of what all gender
identities are—performances that imitate a fantasy—rather
than expressions of what is true, real, or natural. The fantasy
of gender, moreover, is historically contingent and variable because it
reflects whatever is intelligible—permitted by the regulatory
power of discourse to be thought—at any given moment. 
1.2.2 Foucauldian Analytics of Power: Archeology and Genealogy


Michel Foucault's work offers continental feminism a useful
analytics of power to further trace out the sexism, racism, and
homophobia within Western thought. Through his historical
genealogies of punishment (1979) and the asylum (1973) for example, he
demonstrates that individuals do not wield power; power is not
an object that one has in one's possession as an instrument for
directing or controlling external events or people. Ladelle McWhorter
(2004) clarifies that for Foucault power is an event wherein multiple
parties are in a struggle over their competing interests and
agendas. The struggle is a crucial feature of power, for wherever
power is at work, so is resistance to it in the form of trying to
change a situation or undermining the rules some establish to direct
the actions of others. Finally, power acts upon bodies in both
repressive (pouvoir) and creative (puissance) ways:
either one tries to exercise power over another by limiting the range
of options she has for expressing herself (clothing or body language)
or power can create a new corporeal competency, such as the ability to
sit still and focus one's attention for long stretches of
time.


Sandra Bartky (1990) skillfully captures how both kinds of power
(repressive and creative) function in the modern practices of
beautification:

A woman's skin must be soft, supple, hairless, and smooth; ideally,
it should betray no sign of wear, experience, age, or deep thought.
Hair must be removed not only from the face but from large surfaces of
the body as well, from legs and thighs, an operation accomplished by
shaving, buffing with fine sandpaper, or foul-smelling
depilatories… The removal of facial hair can be more
specialized. Eyebrows are plucked out by the roots with a tweezer. Hot
wax is sometimes poured onto the mustache and cheeks and then ripped
away when it cools. The woman who wants a more permanent result may try
electrolysis: This involves the killing of a hair root by the passage
of an electric current down a needle which has been inserted into its
base (69).


Productive power is at work when individuals internalize norms and
police themselves to stay in accordance with them; it co-opts us rather
than coerces us. Barky argues that feminists should feel some
deep ambivalence over the practices of beautification. While on
the one hand, the productive power of these “micro-physics of
power” develop new skills and competencies in women, on the other
hand, they constrain women's self-expression to adherence to the
reigning cultural standards of beauty.


Foucault developed two different and yet compatible methods for
unearthing the working of power, a rethinking of Nietzsche's
will-to-power (1969) in the production of technical knowledge
(conaissance): ‘archeology’ (1970, 1972, 1973) and
‘genealogy’ (1979, 1990).   An archeological
approach strictly studies discourse—technical concepts such as
‘feminism’ and what historical preconditions are necessary
to think such a concept. Language is in sediment the implicit
rules (not merely, but including, grammatical rules), but also explicit
rules (discursive formations) that delimit a proper field of thought
and study. If it is strange to us to imagine periods in history
where male erotic relationships were normal and venerated (e.g.,
5th century Athens), this is because of the invisible
constraints on thought that are embedded in our language, which
Foucault's histories of practices tries to make visible.
Archaeological analyses attempt to excavate language-as-sediment in
order to find traces of these implicit rules. The rules never
present themselves as such, but we can study the surface effects of
these subterranean structures.


Drawing on Hortense Spiller's essay, “Mama's Baby,
Papa's Maybe: An American Grammar Book (1987),” Ellen K.
Feder engages in an archaeological inquiry to trace the
“conditions of the appearance of  … rules …
that govern what counts as ‘woman’” (2007, 12). 
Feder, following Spillers, argues that historically, part of what
constitutes gender (‘woman’) as a category is an implicit
rule that excludes black (slave) “women.”  To put this
more concretely, part of what is picked out by the category of
‘woman’ is “being a mother,” and thus thinking
gender is fundamentally bound up with the family and its proper
roles. And yet, as the category of woman-as-mother emerges, so
does a simultaneous denial that slaves can have blood or kin
relations—because they are property not people—which then
conditions thought and thereby restricts the application of the
category of woman to black women. This line of inquiry suggests
that one of the reasons why early feminist analyses of the production
of gender, such as Nancy Chodorow's (1978), finds it difficult to
think race and gender together, and thereby isolates gender from race,
is owing to the implicit rules (or “American grammar”) that
govern gender; to be a woman has always already meant to be a
white woman.


Genealogy begins with a present object—such as psychiatry or
punishment—and traces the historical emergence of that object out
of competing and divergent accounts. Foucault's genealogical
approach is best illustrated in his work Discipline and Punish
(1979) where he begins with a present conception of punishment and
identifies the workings of power—particularly on
bodies—that produced it. Genealogical analyses do not aim
to show a continuity of thought, but rather how practices, technical
expertise, and concepts emerge in a circuitous and contingent way. The
time-honored example of how power disciplines bodies is that of the
soldier for whom military training is concerned with instilling
specific bodily habits and aptitudes. Military training
manufactures soldiers. Sandra Bartky (1990) develops a genealogical
analysis of the modern production of femininity, which describes the
intricate technical competence women need to master to achieve a
standard of feminine beauty. In many cases, especially the
feminine body, we mistake how women carry themselves, or their public
facial expressions as “natural,” and forget how utterly
contingent they are. 
2. Phenomenology and Reconstructive Projects


Reconstructive projects in continental feminism harken back to
pre-Kantian speculative philosophy, or uncovering the nature
of reality, and yet with an important difference. Traditionally,
speculative philosophy concerns itself with metaphysical and
ontological questions—what exists in the world. However,
because feminist reconstructive projects begin with an expanded notion
of experience (beyond the “sense data” empiricism of the
modern tradition) and therefore assume metaphysical pluralism (i.e.,
plural realities), when continental feminists set out to theorize about
nature, sexual difference, or bodies, they do so without any
pretensions of discovering the singular, monistic essence of
things or the timeless order of the world. 


Continental feminists seek to understand ontology not in terms of
identities, but differences (see Braidotti 1994, Grosz 2004;
2005). What can be known is always already in the process of
differentiating, proliferating, becoming-other than we know it. 
Because ontology—on this view—is not a project of cutting
nature at its joints, ontology becomes fundamentally entwined with a
study of culture, power relations, and history. What exists, and
how we have previously described it, bears the markings of various
systems of meaning (e.g., language). And, following postmodern
insights, all systems of meaning are bound up with operations of
power. While analytic feminist philosophers also unearth how
power distorts theories of reality and knowledge, continental
feminists, influenced by Foucault (1.2.2), operate with a different
sense of power. As pointed out above (1.2.2), in addition to the
quest to dominate others, one might describe power as a productive
force that creates new institutions, social and political arrangements,
concepts, and even bodily habits. 
2.1 Phenomenology


Phenomenology emerges in the 20th century as a new method
aimed at clarifying the transcendental structures of consciousness that
construct the objectivity that prefigures scientific investigation and
later, and more relevant to continental feminist philosophy, becomes a
method for describing subjective, lived, embodied experience.
Continental feminists have traditionally appealed to three dominant
trends within phenomenology: (i) hermeneutic phenomenology, which is an
essentially an interpretive activity aimed at clarifying implicit,
inherited traditional views on various philosophical concepts deemed
vital for constructing a flourishing life; (ii) phenomenology of the
body, which clarifies how inherited cultural practices shape our bodies
and their transactions with the worlds they find themselves in; and,
finally, (iii) existential phenomenology, which aims at liberating the
self to transcend the “objectifying gaze” of powerful
others and construct a non-oppressive identity.
2.1.1 Hermeneutic Phenomenology


Hermeneutical phenomenology is a method of philosophical inquiry
aimed at clarifying how background ideas, practices, and beliefs shape
our interpretations of the world (including our activities in the
world). Martin Heidegger called his method in Being and
Time (1962) hermeneutical phenomenology in order to emphasize that
the proper role of philosophical inquiry is to make explicit the
implicit practices that constrain our understanding of what
exists. Traditional hermeneutics is the art of interpreting texts
by putting them in context, i.e., if one wants to understand a
18th century British novel, it helps to understand the
ideas, institutional arrangements, and historical events contemporary
to the novel (Palmer 1969). Phenomenology is the attempt to study
experience (whether objectively or subjectively) free from entrenched
theoretical models that selectively attend to certain features of our
experience while ignoring others. Hence, hermeneutical
phenomenology aims to make explicit the “inescapable
frameworks” through which we interpret our experience (Taylor
1989). 


Hermeneutical phenomenology, as a method, appeals to continental
feminists for a variety of reasons. First of all, such a method
challenges a modern empiricist view that the task of philosophy is to
clarify our ideas of the world, and as such, essentially privileges
cognizing over other modes of philosophical insight, such as affective
receptivity, associated with feminine experience. Secondly,
hermeneutical phenomenology brings into focus that the specific
practices of philosophers (but not limited to philosophers) have a
history and are therefore not the correct or only
practices (see Holland 1990). As a historical practice, the
specific texts and philosophers that we take to be the canon is an
historical construction. As such, it ignores the contributions of
women, people of color, and non-Western peoples as well as the
value-ladenness of putatively “neutral” philosophical
concepts, such as ‘object.’  Susan Bordo (1987), for
example, situates Descartes into his culture and thereby reads his
methodological preference to render the world as objects of knowledge
as elevating knowing as a detached and disembodied—attitudes
that, for Bordo, devalue what is culturally associated with femininity
(the body, affectivity, and relationality). Thirdly, this method
highlights that knowing is essentially interpretation, which flows from
a “practical holism” (Dreyfus 1980). That is, much of
what frames the subject matter philosophers attend to is a set of
habits, common sense beliefs, customs, or practices that we acquire
from our culture and that are more often than not unconscious—a
stance which affirms the value of affective, embodied, and relational
knowing. Lastly, hermeneutical phenomenology directs us to
reflect more carefully on “common sense” or
“experience” so that we are in a better position to
challenge or transform it, which is a primary goal of feminist
philosophy.


To clarify how continental feminists adapt hermeneutical
phenomenology, consider Linda Martín Alcoff's (2006)
analysis of how we perceive race in the United States. The
visible difference that marks race in the United States
denotes far more than skin pigmentation or morphological
differences. Seeing race already embodies an
attitude toward those who are not white.   Typically, we
inherit attitudes toward race without being consciously aware of how it
shapes our perceptions, e.g., a suspicion that the Latina mother
strolling in the park with a young white girl is an illegal. Our
perception of the visible world contains in sediment the various
schemes for interpreting the world that we are born into and with which
we tacitly take up when we learn language or specific cultural
practices.  
2.1.2 Phenomenology of the Body


Continental feminists also adapt Maurice Merleau-Ponty's
(1962, 1968) phenomenological insights concerning the role the body
plays in interpreting the worlds we inhabit; such a focus extends
phenomenology beyond mere method to a critical stance of wider social
structures and institutions that shape, constrain, or liberate our
bodies. On this view, the body is not a mere instrument to carry
out the wishes of pure consciousness, but itself possesses a
pre-theoretical, unreflective understanding of the world and its
objects. Further, experience is fuller and more textured than the
mere sense data that comes across our skin; the body is not a passive
receptor but intentional, engaged, and interpretive of any given
situation, including the subtle body language of others. In
possessing “motor intentionality,” the body, explains
Merleau-Ponty , makes meaning; it is a transcending
body already oriented toward objects and engaged in a project one
might be only dimly aware of (1962, 96). For example, as I leave
my office building to head downstairs, I reach for the doorknob and
lean in just a bit because the door is heavy and sometimes sticks; none
of these bodily comportments reach the level of consciousness, nor are
they merely reflexive. These bodily comportments are
intentional—aimed at opening the door to enable me to get
downstairs and out of the building—but I am not merely reporting
and assessing various features of the phenomena—i.e., the heft of
the door—as I am opening it. 


The fluid, goal-oriented, intentional body described in
Merleau-Ponty's work gets complicated by both Iris Marion Young
and Frantz Fanon, who point out how oppressive social meanings, i.e.
the assumption of criminality of young black male bodies, can interrupt
or frustrate the fluid body more typical of whiteness or
patriarchy. Adapting Merleau-Ponty's insights concerning
‘motor intentionality,’ Iris Marion Young (1980) sets out
to describe how women in advanced, industrial societies typically
comport themselves in inhibited, truncated, or inefficient
movements. The aim of her phenomenology of feminine comportment
is to critically unearth how patriarchy shapes the more habitual,
fluid, structured movements of bodies such as walking, carrying
objects, or throwing a football. Because women are likely to
experience themselves as objectified by a male gaze, feminine
comportment is more self-conscious than fluid. As they move through a room, for example, women feel more self-aware they are being observed.


Fanon characterizes the self-awareness that interrupts fluid,
seamless goal-oriented movement as a “racial epidermal
schema” (1967, 112); Alcoff (2006) characterizes one who
experiences such a “racial epidermal schema” as a
“visible identity.”  Playing on a passage in
Fanon's essay “The Fact of Blackness,” (1967),
Nathifa Greene (2012) clarifies that in meeting the eyes of the white
other, the racialized body experiences a decomposing of what
ought to be a coordinated, fluid, intentional body. And such
decomposition frustrates such a body from enjoying a free, easy, lack
of self-awareness more common, for example, to young white men, thereby
requiring more self-conscious scripting or composing of her body. 
While Fanon describes the experience of being racialized in overt
racist contexts such as Jim Crow or the colonial situation, he
nonetheless masterfully captures the more subtle ways that white
privilege decomposes the visible body, typical of our contemporary
moment. For example, he describes the difference in being
noticed as a black man walking into a café, where “I see
in those white faces that it is not a new man who has come in, but a
new kind of man, a new genus. Why, it's a Negro!”
(116). 


Emily Lee (2010) expounds on the pernicious and subtle violence the
racialized body experiences under the white gaze. In her
phenomenological analysis of Patricia Williams' (1991)
first-person description of being disbarred from entering a high-end
store in Manhattan by a young, white salesperson in the high crime era
of mid-1980s, Lee further illuminates how pre-existing, dimly
conscious, sedimented associations exist alongside the black
body—what Fanon describes as the “thousand details,
anecdotes, and stories” that “the white man had woven me
out of” (1967, 111). During this era, many stores installed
buzzers, intended to keep out suspected thieves or junkies, and thus
when Williams peers into the window as a brown skin, kinky-hair,
African-American woman in casual weekend clothing, she is perceived by
the young salesperson within a racist horizon that interprets her as a
potential threat.


We are far from an era free of a racist horizon that infects
perception of racialized bodies. Moreover, the violence of such racist
perception is not always subtle. Consider the neighborhood watch
coordinator who shot and killed 17-year old Trayvon Martin (2011), a
young African-American male deemed suspicious because he was wearing a
hooded sweatshirt and walking through his neighborhood in the
rain. These subtle and more overtly violent interchanges between
the racialized body and the privileged white gaze systematically
disrupt the fluid body that Greene (2012) argues ought to
be equally available to all bodies.
2.1.3 Existential Phenomenology


One could argue that the existential phenomenological project is
primarily an ethical project; the existentialist is less interested in
a neutral description of the world, and more interested in promoting
justice and social progress. Thus, existential phenomenology has
special relevance for continental feminists because it can be used to
clarify how women can transform the world through combatting sexism and
racism. Both Simone de Beauvoir and Fanon were early pioneers of
existentialism, inspiring women, the colonized, and racialized
individuals to revolt by transcending their oppressive situation
through collective and creative struggle. A primary assumption of
existentialists is that human beings are more than the situation they
find themselves in; they are more than their biological make-up; and
they are more than the low expectations placed upon them. Human
beings are capable of creating new social institutions, identities, and
thereby new futures. 


What enables humans to transform their worlds is their unique
capacity for transcendence—what in the mainstream philosophical
tradition is understood as free will. Transcendence also enables
creativity—a departure from the routine, custom, and the
well-worn path. However, many continental feminists, influenced
by de Beauvoir and Fanon, who were more attuned to the peculiar ways
that racism and sexism impinge upon human transcendence, argue that a
pre-requisite of human transcendence is the ability to be a
coordinated, fluid, intentional body. Thus a specific obstacle to
women or racialized men, who wish to transform racist and sexist
institutions, is the very self-awareness racialized or sexualized
persons have—a self-awareness that emerges, for example, from
both side-long glances of the white privileged and the sexual
objectification of women's bodies. Part of women's
struggle for liberation depends upon changing the still pervasive and
dominant perception of women, and this is particularly true for women
of color where race expectations intersect with those of
gender. 


A number of continental feminists, notably Luce Irigaray, argue that
liberation, and the positive impact it has for all humans and their
environs, requires the acknowledgement and protection of difference,
especially the irreconcilable reality of sexual difference. Black
feminist writers, such as Donna-Dale L. Marcano and Kathryn Gines,
further stress that the recognition of the ontological existence of
black female identity—the reality of black female
identity—is crucial to the overcoming interlocking forms of
oppression—sexism, racism, and classism. Thus in opposition
to analytic philosophers—including Naomi Zack (1993)—who
argue for the elimination of all forms of racial or gender identity to
focus on what is universally “human,” continental
feminists, particularly black feminists, argue that liberation is
impossible without acknowledging the unique difference—both
positively and negatively—that one's identity as
‘Other’ makes.
2.2 Embracing a Positive Notion of Difference


Given the specific focus on liberation integral to existentialist
phenomenology, and given that existentialist phenomenology is bound up
with hermeneutic phenomenology and phenomenology of the body, it is not
surprising that a major debate within continental feminist thought is
how to construct a positive notion of sexual and racial identity. 
Luce Irigaray focuses mainly on sexual difference as the primary
ontological fact, which has lead to a healthy debate concerning whether
positing sexual difference as fundamental ontology fully captures the
specific, lived experiences of non-white women (see, for example,
Chanter 1995, Bloodsworth 1999, Weiss 1999, Deutscher 2003, Grosz
2005). While surely Irigaray is a champion of pluralism, i.e. the
dismissal of “a view from nowhere,” the question remains
whether or not asserting sexual difference really is the difference
from which all others spring.
2.2.1 Constructing a Positive Notion of Sexual Difference


One could argue two main schools of thought exist within continental
feminism on the question of sexual difference. The first, best
represented by Irigaray, approaches sexual difference as a more or less
ontological reality, and asserts that rather than attempting to
transcend or deny differences between men and women, feminism should
embrace the fact of difference and take it as the very foundation of
both theory and practice. The second, best represented by Butler
(see section 1.2.1), questions the very reality of any sort of
sexual difference, and views such a difference as part and parcel of a
coercive and restrictive representational system.


Irigaray's central critique of Western philosophy rests upon
her diagnosis of its inherent sexual indifference, that is, a failure
on the part of those theories to recognize that the human species is
always internally differentiated, certainly by sex. When such
theories have allowed ‘male’ to stand in for
‘human’—whether by defining the human in terms of
characteristics associated specifically with men, or constructing the
male as the paradigm of the species, or by simply conflating the two
linguistically by use of the male generic—they have necessarily
rendered women as lesser humans. By considering the human species
as essentially one, and then allowing the male to stand in for that
‘one,’ the philosophical tradition has defined women out of
the specificity of their own existence, and has only allowed women to
be seen in relation to men and their desires and needs.


Irigaray claims that, for both philosophical and political reasons,
Western culture must recognize that difference lies at the very
foundation of the human species and experience. The human species, she
says, is ‘at least’ two (1996, 37). Her point here is
that, trapped as Western culture and thought is within a male-centered
metaphysics, both sexes (and those that may remain unrecognized) have
been constructed contrary to their ontological distinction. 
Therefore, we do not really know who men are; their sexual specificity
has been veiled by their paradigmatic sex-neutral status. And, we
certainly do not know who women are, as their sexual specificity has
been utterly denied in the construction of their inferior status.


In order to rectify both our philosophical understanding of human
beings and our sexual politics, Irigaray elevates the philosophical
virtue of wonder (1994). The sexes must approach each other with
a sense of humility and awareness of the unknown, a recognition that no
one person or subset of persons can represent the human species in its
totality, and that therefore the other has something to teach, and
something to say. To approach the other as different is not (as
some other philosophical traditions would have it) to construct it as
inferior. Difference need not be understood as deviations from a
norm, nor signify the lack of important qualities. Women
differ from men, not as less faithful examples of ideal human
beings. Women differ from men in that they are a wholly distinct
category. Irigaray's ontological point here has important
political implications:  women cannot understand their own
identities on male terms. Women need to “become who they
are”: to unleash and live out their own particular modalities of
being in the world.


Other thinkers committed to thinking through the political
implications of sexual difference include Rosi Braidotti and Elizabeth
Grosz. Braidotti (1994) rethinks the project of sexual difference
as a project of rethinking female subjectivity. She makes a helpful
distinction between identity and subjectivity: identity is rooted in
the imaginary (and unconscious) identifications we make with
“culturally available positions,” while subjectivity is a
conscious, willful form of political resistance (162, 157). 
Braidotti agrees with Irigaray (who is echoing Heidegger) that sexual
difference is the question of our age (Irigaray 1984, 5). She
alternates between describing her philosophical project as an
affirmation of a “feminist female subjectivity” and a
“nomadic subjectivity,” because for Braidotti the
affirmation of a female subjectivity is necessarily an historically
contingent project rather than a permanent project; if a future moment
no longer requires the thinking through of sexual difference, her
nomadic subject will move onto a new political horizon (1994, 33).


Drawing heavily on the work of Gilles Deleuze, Braidotti argues that
subject positions entail practices, habits, and activities energized
and propelled forward by a non-conscious affective
center. Desire, on a Deulezian as opposed to a Freudian reading,
is experimental: “producing ever new alignments, linkages, and
connections” (168). For our present historical moment, Braidotti
asserts, the affirmation of sexual difference is the unleashing of a
positive, affective force that will usher in “open spaces for
experimentation” (171). Sexual difference is a site for the
production and proliferation of even more differences. And
difference, for Braidotti and Irigaray, is a counterweight to the
rigidity, dogmatism, and statism of the status quo of Western thought;
without difference, in fact, there is no future, only a decaying past
ill-equipped to handle the multifarious challenges of posed by the
profound political and cultural shifts of globalization.


Elizabeth Grosz is, perhaps, the most faithful proponent of
Irigaray's project of sexual difference. In her works
Volatile Bodies (1994) and In the Nick of Time
(2004), Grosz draws insights from Gilles Deleuze, Friedrich Nietzsche,
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Michel Foucault, Henri Bergson and Charles
Darwin with the aim of rethinking ontology and nature as essentially
dynamic, differentiating, proliferating and progressive. In her
early work, Grosz (1994) follows Irigaray in positing a “pure
… material difference” between the sexes; sexual
difference, on this view, is not solely a symbolic difference, but a
fact of materiality (i.e., understanding sexual difference is not
solely an epistemological project or study of culture) (190). 
However, various cultural inscriptions place significance and value on
material, corporeal differences, which the body enacts and
embodies. Grosz's insight helps us see the nature of the
ethical harm in a dominant, patriarchal meaning system (symbolic order)
that inscribes differentiated bodies. Drawing on Julia
Kristeva's work (1982), Grosz argues that women's bodies
have functioned as the abject (viz., polluting underbelly) to
this patriarchal order. Women's bodies have been
represented as unruly, uncontrollable, seeping, leaky, viscous and
entrapping. Rather than see women's differences as a positivity
(both in terms of value and pure material presence), the patriarchal
symbolic order rewrites these corporeal differences as vile. As a
result many women come to understand themselves —form a
body-image of themselves—on these harmful terms. 


In Grosz's (2004) more recent work, she focuses on a rethinking
of nature—including bodies—as a dynamic, differentiating,
complex force in its own right. Rather than the “raw
material” of cultural inscriptions, nature in its tendency toward
greater complexity and differentiation “impels the complications
and variability of culture itself” (4). Perhaps one of the
most intriguing aspects of Grosz's work is her bringing together
Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection with
Irigaray's affirmation of sexual difference. Grosz explains
that, according to Darwin, there is


an evolutionary advantage to the interbreeding of pairs over forms
of self-generated  or hermaphroditic reproduction. He
suggests that it is the combination of inherited material from two
individuals that generates much greater variation, more difference, and
gives new individuals an evolutionary edge (69).


Grosz not only finds an ally for Irigaray in Darwin's work,
but she also uses Darwin's insights about the dynamism,
unpredictability, and endless inventiveness of nature to undergird a
feminist politics. Arguing by analogy, if endless variation gives
individuals an evolutionary advantage, i.e., helps them survive and
thrive, then fostering a cultural appreciation for difference and
differentiation and the various “experiments in living”
that flow from such plurality will enable humanity to better thrive and
survive. Sexual difference, understood as an originary, natural
difference (cutting across species and plant life) is the very engine
of our basic existence. Without difference, we are dead.
2.2.2 Constructing a Positive Notion of Racial Difference


More recently, Irigaray's, and by extension those continental
feminists who further her project, persistent emphasis on sexual
difference as the most fundamental difference among human beings has
been met with concern: prioritizing sexual difference over racial
difference as a lived experience simply is untenable to many non-white
feminists who fervently argue that we cannot subordinate racial
difference to sexual difference. Hence, black feminists, who come
out of the continental tradition, are currently debating how to embrace
racial difference (see Davidson, Gines and Marcano 2010). The
underlying concern is to make clear that a person's race
positions them socially, politically, and economically in distinct
ways. To insist that social and political systems ignore a
person's race is to contradict this lived experience. In
this sense, the project of embracing racial difference is similar to
embracing sexual difference: to demonstrate how ill suited many of our
social institutions are when they embrace liberalism or
color-blindness. Black feminists and race theorists are focusing
both on the issue of the “reality of race” and the specific
experience of being a woman of color.


A helpful way to map the two main positions concerning the nature of
race in both Africana and continental philosophy is: eliminativism vs.
conservationism. The former argues that we should dispense with
treating race as an ontological reality, while the latter argues for
both the existential and epistemological significance of racial
difference. 


In Africana studies and race theory, analytically-trained
philosophers, Kwame Anthony Appiah (1993) and Naomi Zack (1994), have
defended the elminativist argument concerning the ‘reality’
of race by showing that the concept of race is incoherent (it does not
actually pick out anything real in the world) and, moreover,
involves obviously racist premises that do not accord with biological
facts about the world. Race, is a socially constructed category,
which for eliminativists means that it contingent, not-inevitable, and
thus capable of being eliminated. Race is an artifact of racist
institutions and racist science. Hence, the move to retain race
as a useful category for social scientific research, for example,
perpetuates racism. When African Americans cling to their
racial identity—so the argument goes—they are preserving
what is essentially a racist notion. The eliminativist argument stamps
those who embrace race as essentialists. 


In continental feminism, Judith Butler (1990) and Joan Scott (1992),
represent the eliminativist position insofar as both criticize identity
politics as a liberation strategy. Continental feminists,
however, typically do not characterize their position as
eliminiativist, but rather postmodern. Moreover, unlike
eliminativists, postmodern feminists suspicious of embracing racial or
gender identities do not posit a reality outside of language (or
systems of representation). For example, Butler (1990) asserts
that the oppressive discursive systems, such as law, produce racial and
gender identities and thus political organization around these
identities only serves to reinforce the legitimacy of oppressive
discourses—such identities have no reality outside
discourse. And, Scott cautions against multiculturalism
(recognition of racial, ethnic, or cultural identities), because it
“…naturalize[s] identity, making it a matter of biology
or history or culture, an inescapable trait…” (1992,
14). Despite their different metaphysical commitments from
eliminativists, postmodern feminists and eliminativists alike reject
essentialist (naturalizing) approaches in feminist and race theory.


Borrowing a phrase from Susan Bordo (2003), Donna-Dale L. Marcano
(2010) characterizes Butler's position as
“postmodern gender skepticism,” which has the practical
consequence of undermining the conditions African-American women thrive
in for collective action against racist institutions and habits. 
Anika Maaza Mann (2010) illustrates, following Jean-Paul Sartre's
Critique of Dialectical Reason, that the wellspring of a
unified, collective struggle lies in solidarity that many oppressed
groups will readily feel with each other due to common experiences of
danger and limitations. And, this solidarity
springs from embracing one's marginal identity rather than
eliminating it due to its contingent or constructed nature. Maria
del Guadalupe Davidson (2010) further stresses that the postmodernist
stance on race is coextensive with the modernist project, because it
fails to recognize as real, plural identities and thereby plural
experiences. When postmodernist feminists take up the identity of
black female subjectivity, it is largely to stress their
‘alterity,’ and thus belie the constructed nature of the
philosophical project. But drawing attention only to their
alterity, Davidson argues, following Hortense Spillers, Barbara Smith,
Barbara Christian, and Alice Walker, effectively deprives black women
of a voice as well as fails to capture their real, lived experience in
the world. 


Thus, on the other side of this debate over the reality of race, are
the conservationists, who, like Marcano, Davidson and Maaka Mann, argue
that not only should we acknowledge the reality of race, but also
perhaps preserve it as an important and valuable feature of our social
ontology. Kathryn Gines (2003), for example, argues that
conserving and preserving a positive concept of racial identity serves
as “a source of heritage and even resistance and
empowerment” against future possible assaults against the
humanity of non-white people striving together for the accomplishment
of certain more or less vividly conceived ideals of life (66). 
Another argument in favor of preserving race as real is that a
reconstructed and positively valued notion of race—as was evident
in the slogan “Black is Beautiful”—plays an important
role in restoring various psychic wounds inflicted by racism and racist
ideology. Lewis Gordon (2000), for example, points out blackness
and whiteness function as metaphors for pollution and purity,
respectively. To represent African Americans as
“black,” is not a neutral choice, but designed to conjure
up the various imaginary associations of blackness and dirt, darkness,
or pollution. So, part of conservation is to associate more
self-affirming notions with race, which is consistent with and inspired
by earlier existentialist projects of Frantz Fanon and Simone De
Beauvoir; conservationists consider the redescription of social
ontology as a crucial part of promoting justice and social
progress.
3. Limits of a Methodological Approach


The guiding heuristic to this description of continental feminism
has been to characterize the work as three different
methods—psychoanalysis, postmodernism, and
phenomenology—divided between critical (deconstructive) and
reconstructive projects.  From this point of view, one might
reasonably conclude that continental feminists often come to opposing
conclusions concerning feminist work. For example, one major
debate in continental feminist work is the value of reconstructing the
concepts of gender or race (i.e., constructing a positive notion) to
improve the status of women and women of color in philosophy and
beyond. Those drawn to phenomenology are more likely to endorse
such a reconstructive project, while those drawn to postmodern
analysis—whether Derridean or Foucauldian—consider the
project fatally flawed and argue that the real liberatory work lies in
critical (deconstructive) genealogies of contemporary attitudes and
practices. 


However, the more deeply one reads continental feminist work, the
more one recognizes that many theorists are employing all three
methods—often within the same work—for different
purposes. Very few continental feminists identify exclusively
with one method or with one project, but find value in all three
methods depending on the particular argument at hand. Thus, the
approach in this entry on continental feminism is limited and risks
unnecessarily sharpening divisions among continental
feminists. 


As the field of continental feminism continues to evolve, new hybrid
methods will be more clearly discernable that enable a general
description of the field that does not artificially divide theorists
along methodological, epistemological and metaphysical lines. 
Until this work more clearly emerges, it is best to see that the
methods and basic projects (deconstruction and reconstruction) outlined
here is merely a heuristic.