The cosmological argument is less a particular argument than an
argument type. It uses a general pattern of argumentation
(logos) that makes an inference from particular alleged facts
about the universe (cosmos) to the existence of a unique
being, generally identified with or referred to as God. Among these
initial facts are that particular beings or events in the universe are
causally dependent or contingent, that the universe (as the totality
of contingent things) is contingent in that it could have been other
than it is, that the Big Conjunctive Contingent Fact possibly has an
explanation, or that the universe came into being. From these facts
philosophers infer deductively, inductively, or abductively by
inference to the best explanation that a first or sustaining cause, a
necessary being, an unmoved mover, or a personal being (God) exists
that caused and/or sustains the universe. The cosmological argument is
part of classical natural theology, whose goal is to provide evidence
for the claim that God exists.

On the one hand, the argument arises from human curiosity as to why
there is something rather than nothing or than something else. It
invokes a concern for some full, complete, ultimate, or best
explanation of what exists contingently. On the other hand, it raises
intrinsically important philosophical questions about contingency and
necessity, causation and explanation, part/whole relationships
(mereology), infinity, sets, the nature of time, and the nature and
origin of the universe. In what follows we will first sketch out a
very brief history of the argument, note the two basic types of
deductive cosmological arguments, and then provide a careful analysis
of examples of each: first, two arguments from contingency, one based
on a relatively strong version of the principle of sufficient reason
and one based on a weak version of that principle; and second, an
argument from the alleged fact that the universe had a beginning and
the impossibility of an infinite temporal regress of causes. In the
end we will consider an inductive version of the cosmological argument
and what it is to be a necessary being.
 
1. Historical Overview

Although in Western philosophy the earliest formulation of a version
of the cosmological argument is found in Plato’s Laws,
893–96, the classical argument is firmly rooted in
Aristotle’s Physics (VIII, 4–6) and
Metaphysics (XII, 1–6). Islamic philosophy enriches the
tradition, developing two types of arguments. Arabic philosophers
(falasifa), such as Ibn Sina (c. 980–1037), developed
the argument from contingency, which is taken up by Thomas Aquinas
(1225–74) in his Summa Theologica (I,q.2,a.3) and his
Summa Contra Gentiles (I, 13). Influenced by John Philoponus
(5th c) (Davidson 1969) the
mutakallimūm—theologians who used reason and
argumentation to support their revealed Islamic
beliefs—developed the temporal version of the argument from the
impossibility of an infinite regress, now referred to as the
kalām argument. For example, al-Ghāzāli
(1058–1111) argued that everything that begins to exist requires
a cause of its beginning. The world is composed of temporal phenomena
preceded by other temporally-ordered phenomena. Since such a series of
temporal phenomena cannot continue to infinity because an actual
infinite is impossible, the world must have had a beginning and a
cause of its existence, namely, God (Craig 1979: part 1). This version
of the argument enters the medieval Christian tradition through
Bonaventure (1221–74) in his Sentences (II
Sent. D.1,p.1,a.1,q.2).

Enlightenment thinkers, such as Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Samuel
Clarke, reaffirmed the cosmological argument. Leibniz
(1646–1716) appealed to a strengthened principle of sufficient
reason, according to which “no fact can be real or existing and
no statement true without a sufficient reason for its being so and not
otherwise” (Monadology, §32). Leibniz uses the
principle to argue that the sufficient reason for the “series of
things comprehended in the universe of creatures” (§36)
must exist outside this series of contingencies and is found in a
necessary being that we call God. The principle of sufficient reason
is likewise employed by Samuel Clarke in his cosmological argument
(Rowe 1975: chap. 2).

Although the cosmological argument does not figure prominently in
Asian philosophy, a very abbreviated version of it, proceeding from
dependence, can be found in Udayana’s
Nyāyakusumāñjali I,4. In general,
philosophers in the Nyāya tradition argue that since the universe
has parts that come into existence at one occasion and not another, it
must have a cause. We could admit an infinite regress of causes if we
had evidence for such, but lacking such evidence, God must exist as
the non-dependent cause. Many of the objections to the argument
contend that God is an inappropriate cause because of God’s
nature. For example, since God is immobile and has no body, he cannot
properly be said to cause anything. The Naiyāyikas reply that God
could assume a body at certain times, and in any case, God need not
create in the same way humans do (Potter 1977: 100–07).

The cosmological argument came under serious assault in the
18th century, first by David Hume and then by Immanuel
Kant. Hume (1748) attacks both the view of causation presupposed in
the argument (that causation is an objective, productive, necessary
power relation that holds between two things) and the Causal
Principle—every contingent being has a cause of its
existence—that lies at the heart of the argument. Kant contends
that the cosmological argument, in identifying the necessary being,
relies on the ontological argument, which in turn is suspect. We will
return to these criticisms below.

Both theists and nontheists in the last part of the 20th
century and the first part of the 21st century generally
have shown a healthy skepticism about the argument. Alvin Plantinga
concludes “that this piece of natural theology is
ineffective” (1967: chap. 1). Richard Gale contends, in Kantian
fashion, that since the conclusion of all versions of the cosmological
argument invokes an impossibility, no cosmological arguments can
provide examples of sound reasoning (1991: chap. 7). (However, Gale
seems to have changed his mind and in recent writings proposed and
defended his own version of the cosmological argument, which we will
consider below.) Similarly, Michael Martin (1990: chap. 4), John
Mackie (1982: chap. 5), Quentin Smith (Craig and Smith 1993), Bede
Rundle (2004), Wes Morriston (2000, 2002, 2003, 2010), and Graham Oppy
(2006: chap. 3) reason that no current version of the cosmological
argument is sound. Yet dissenting voices can be heard. Robert Koons
(1997) employs mereology and modal and nonmonotonic logic in taking a
“new look” at the argument from contingency. In his widely
discussed writings William Lane Craig marshals multidisciplinary
evidence for the truth of the premises found in the
kalām argument. Richard Gale and Alexander Pruss propose
a new version based on a so-called weak principle of sufficient reason
that leads to a finite God that is not omnibenevolent, and Richard
Swinburne, though rejecting deductive versions of the cosmological
argument, proposes an inductive argument that is part of a larger
cumulative case for God’s existence. 


There is quite a chance that if there is a God he will make something
of the finitude and complexity of a universe. It is very unlikely that
a universe would exist uncaused, but rather more likely that God would
exist uncaused. The existence of the universe…can be made
comprehensible if we suppose that it is brought about by God. (1979:
131–32) 


In short, contemporary philosophers continue to contribute
increasingly detailed and complex arguments on both sides of the
debate.
2. Typology of Cosmological Arguments

Philosophers employ diverse classifications of the cosmological
arguments. Swinburne distinguishes inductive from deductive versions.
Craig distinguishes three types of deductive cosmological arguments in
terms of their approach to an infinite regress of causes. The first,
advocated by Aquinas, is based on the impossibility of an essentially
ordered infinite regress. The second, which Craig terms the
kalām argument, holds that an infinite temporal regress
of causes is impossible because an actual infinite is impossible, and
even if it were possible it could not be temporally realized. The
third, espoused by Leibniz and Clarke, is overtly founded on the
Principle of Sufficient Reason (Craig 1980: 282–83). Craig notes
that the distinction between these types of arguments is important
because the objections raised against one version may be irrelevant to
other versions. So, for example, a critique of a particular version of
the Principle of Sufficient Reason (PSR), which one finds developed by
William Rowe or Richard Gale, might not be telling against the
Thomistic or kalām versions of the argument. Another way
of distinguishing between versions of the argument is in terms of the
relevance of time to the argument. In Aquinas’s version,
consideration of the essential ordering of the causes or reasons
proceeds independent of temporal concerns. The relationship between
cause and effect is treated as real but not temporal, so that the
first cause is not a first cause in time but a sustaining cause. In
the kalām version, however, the temporal ordering of the
causal sequence is central, introducing issues of the nature of time
into the discussion.
3. Complexity of the Question

It is said that philosophy begins in wonder. So it was for the
ancients, who wondered what constituted the basic stuff of the world
around them, how this basic stuff changed into the diverse forms they
experienced, and how it came to be. Those origination questions
related to the puzzle of existence that, in its metaphysical
dimensions, is the subject of our concern.

First, why is there anything at all? Why is there something, no matter
what it is, even if different or even radically different from what
currently exists? This question becomes clearer when put in
contrastive form, Why is there something rather than nothing? We can
ask this question even in the absence of contingent beings, though in
this context it is likely to prove unanswerable. For example, if God
or the universe is logically or absolutely necessary, something would
not only exist but would have to exist even if nothing else existed.
At the same time, probably no reason can be given for why logically
necessary things exist.

Some doubt whether we can ask this question because there being
nothing is not an option. John Heil asks, “What exactly is
nothing at all? What would nothing be?” (Heil
2013: 174). He analogizes nothing with the notion of empty space, in
terms of which, he thinks, we can conceptualize nothing. He reasons
that we cannot achieve a notion of empty space simply by removing its
contents one at a time, for space (the void) would still exist. But we
need not analogize nothing in terms of empty space, and even if we do,
we surely can conceive of removing space. If we think of space as a
particular type of relation between objects, the removal of all
objects (everything) would leave nothing, including relations. The key
point is that “leaving nothing” is not to be understood in
the sense that nothing is or has existence. We can easily be misled by
the language of there being nothing at all, leading to the
notion that nothing has being or existence. Heil suggests that nothing
might be a precursor to the Big Bang. But this too is a
misconception—though one widely held by those who think that the
universe arose out of nothing, e.g., a vacuum fluctuation. A vacuum
fluctuation is itself not nothing “but is a sea of fluctuating
energy endowed with a rich structure and subject to physical
laws” (Craig and Sinclair 2009: 183, 191). The contrastive
question is comprehensible: “Why is there something rather than
there never having been anything whatsoever?”

Rutten (2012, Other Internet Resources: 15–16), using the modal
proposition S5, develops an a priori argument for the
impossibility of there being nothing. Suppose that there is nothing.
If there is nothing, then there are no possible states of affairs,
since nothing is actual to bring them about. But since I am actual,
there is at least one possible state of affairs S. But if
S is possible, then by S5, necessarily, S is possible.
But this contradicts the original assumption that total nothingness is
metaphysically possible. Hence, total nothingness cannot be actual.
Rutten’s argument rests on the Principle of Causation, about
which we will have a lot more to say below.

Second, why are there contingent beings? That is, “Why does
a universe exist?” Several possible responses have been
given: it might not be explicable (the universe just exists; its
existence is a brute fact); it has always existed, which also leaves
it as a brute fact; it was brought about by the intentional act of a
supernatural being. The traditional cosmological arguments consider
these options and determine that the last provides the best
explanation for the existence of a contingent universe.

Third, why are there these particular contingent beings? The
starting point here is the existence of particular things, and the
question posed asks for an explanation for there being these
particular things. If we are looking for a causal explanation and
accept a full explanation (in terms of contemporary or
immediately prior causal conditions and the relevant natural laws or
intentions that together necessitate the effect), the answer emerges
from an analysis of the relevant immediate causal conditions present
in each case. As Hume argues, explanation in terms of immediately
conjunctory factors is satisfactory. Theists counter that if we seek a
complete causal explanation where nothing of the causal event
remains unexplained, the response can lead to the development of the
cosmological argument.

Heil suggests that the answer depends on how one understands the Big
Bang (2013: 178). If it was spontaneous, the question has no answer.
If not spontaneous, there might be an answer. Theists take up the
latter cause, broadening the explanatory search to include final
causes or intentions appropriate to a personal cause. It leads us to
ask the question, “Supposing that God exists, why did he bring
about contingent beings?” This assumes that God exists and now
inquires about the reasons for creation. On the one hand, we might
argue that this question is unanswerable in that only God would know
his reasons for bringing the universe of contingent beings into
existence (O’Connor 2008). On the other hand, God acts out of
his nature; Swinburne (2004: 47, 114–23) emphasizes his
goodness, from which we can infer possible reasons for what he brings
about. God also acts from his intentions (Swinburne 1993:
139–45; 2007: 83–84), so that God could reveal his
purposes for his act of creating.

Fourth, why do things exist now or at any given point? This is the
question that Thomas Aquinas posed. Aquinas was interested not in a
beginning cause but in a sustaining cause, for he believed that the
universe could be eternal—although he believed on the basis of
revelation that it was not eternal. He constructed his cosmological
arguments around the question of what sustains things in the universe
in their existence.

Fifth, if the universe has a beginning, what is the cause of that
beginning? This is the question that is addressed by the
kalām cosmological argument, given its central premise
that everything that begins to exist has a cause.

Two things should be obvious from this discussion. First, questions
about existence are more nuanced than usually addressed (Heil 2013:
177). It is important to be more precise about what one is asking when
one asks this broader metaphysical question about why there is
something rather than nothing. Second, it becomes clear that the
cosmological argument lies at the heart of attempts to answer the
questions, and to this we now turn.
4. Argument for a Non-contingent Cause

Thomas Aquinas held that among the things whose existence needs
explanation are contingent beings that depend for their existence upon
other beings. Richard Taylor (1992: 84–94) discusses the
argument in terms of the world (“everything that ever does
exist, except God, in case there is a god”, 1992: 87) being
contingent and thus needing explanation. Arguing that the term
“universe” refers to an abstract entity or set, William
Rowe rephrases the issue, “Why does that set (the universe) have
the members that it does rather than some other members or none at
all?” (Rowe 1975: 136). Put broadly, “Why is there
anything at all?” (Smart, in Smart and Haldane, 1996: 35; Rundle
2004). The response of defenders of the cosmological argument is that
what is contingent exists because of the action of a necessary
being.
4.1 A Deductive Argument from Contingency

As an a posteriori argument, the cosmological argument begins
with a fact known by experience, namely, that something contingent
exists. We might sketch out a version of the argument as follows.

A contingent being (a being such that if it exists, it
could have not-existed or could cease to exist) exists.
This contingent being has a cause of or
 explanation[1]
 for its existence.
The cause of or explanation for its existence is
something other than the contingent being itself.
What causes or explains the existence of this
contingent being must either be solely other contingent beings or
include a non-contingent (necessary) being.
Contingent beings alone cannot provide a completely
adequate causal account or explanation for the existence of a
contingent being.
Therefore, what causes or explains the existence of
this contingent being must include a non-contingent (necessary)
being.
Therefore, a necessary being (a being such that if it
exists, it cannot not-exist) exists.
The universe is contingent.
Therefore, the necessary being is something other than
the universe.


In the argument, steps 1–7 establish the existence of a
necessary or non-contingent being; steps 8–9 attempt in some way
to identify it.

Over the centuries philosophers have suggested various instantiations
for the contingent being noted in
 premise 1.
 In his Summa Theologica (I,q.2,a.3), Aquinas argued that we
need a causal explanation for things in motion, things that are
caused, and contingent
 beings.[2]
 Others, such as Richard Swinburne (2004), propose that the contingent
being referred to in premise 1 is the universe. The connection between
the two is supplied by John Duns Scotus, who argued that even if the
essentially ordered causes were infinite, “the whole series of
effects would be dependent upon some prior cause” (Scotus [c.
1300] 1964: I,D.2,p.1,q.1,§53). Gale (1999) calls this the
“Big Conjunctive Contingent Fact”. Whereas the
contingency of particular existents is generally undisputed, not the
least because of our mortality, the contingency of the universe
deserves some defense (see
 section 4.2).
 Premise 2 invokes a moderate version of the
Principle of Causation or the Principle of Sufficient Reason,
according to which if something is contingent, there must be a cause
of its existence or a reason or explanation why it exists rather than
not exists. The point of
 3
 is simply that something cannot cause or explain its own existence,
for this would require it to already exist (in a logical if not a
temporal sense).
 Premise 4
 is true by virtue of the Principle of Excluded Middle: what explains
the existence of the contingent being either are solely other
contingent beings or includes a non-contingent (necessary) being.
Conclusions
 6
 and
 7
 follow validly from the respective premises.

For many critics,
 premise 5
 (along with
 premise 2)
 holds the key to the argument’s success or failure. The truth
of 5 depends upon the requirements for an adequate explanation.
According to the Principle of Sufficient Reason (PSR), what is
required is an account in terms of sufficient conditions that provides
an explanation why the cause had the effect it did, or alternatively,
why this particular effect and not another arose. Swinburne (2004:
75–79), and Alexander Pruss (2006: 16–18) after him, note
diverse kinds of explanations. In a full explanation the
causal factors—in scientific causation, causal conditions and
natural laws; in personal causation, persons and their
intentions— are sufficient for the occurrence of an event. They
“together necessitate the occurrence of the effect”
(Swinburne 2004: 76). 


It does not allow a puzzling aspect of the explanandum to disappear:
anything puzzling in the explanandum is either also found in the
explanans or else explained by the explanans. (Pruss 2006: 17) 


It suffices to explain why something comes about given the immediately
present causal conditions, but leaves unexplained why those
explanatory causal conditions and/or reasons themselves hold.

In a complete explanation, every aspect of the explanandum
and explanans at the time of the occurrence is accounted for; nothing
puzzling remains. 

A complete explanation of the occurrence of E is a full
explanation of its occurrence in which all the factors cited are such
that there is no [further] explanation (either full or partial) of
their existence of operation in terms of factors operative at the time
of their existence or operation. (Swinburne 2004, 78)


Pruss and Swinburne argue that the kind of explanation required by the
PSR is a complete explanation.

Quinn argues that an adequate explanation need not require a complete
explanation (2005: 584–85); a partial explanation might do just
as well, depending on the context. Among these adequate explanations
of why this actual world obtains rather than another possible world
(including one with no contingent beings) is that the universe is an
inexplicable brute fact and that God strongly actualized the world
(although not everything in it). He refuses to take sides on the
debate between explanations, except to say that science cannot provide
an adequate explanation if the explanatory chain is infinite, for the
chain of causes is itself contingent or it ends in an initial
contingency not scientifically accountable. However, not only does
Quinn not clarify what constitutes an adequate explanation, but as
Pruss contends, the PSR “is not compatible with an infinite
chain of explanations that has no ultimate explanans” (2006:
17), for in an infinite chain something puzzling remains to be
explained, with the result that the PSR would again be invoked to
explain what is puzzling. But, as we will question below, is the brute
fact of the universe any more unacceptable as a complete explanation
than the brute fact of a necessary being?

One worry with understanding the PSR is that it may lead to a
deterministic account that not only bodes ill for the success of the
argument but on a libertarian account may be incompatible with the
contention that God created freely. Pruss, however, envisions no such
difficulty. 


What gives sufficiency to explanation is that mystery is taken away,
for example, through the citing of relevant reasons, not that
probability is increased. (Pruss 2006: 157) 


Giving reasons neither makes the event deterministic nor removes
freedom. 


Once we have said that xxx freely chose AAA for RRR, then the
only thing left that is unexplained is why xxx existed and was both
free and attracted by RRR. (2006: 158)


Finally, some (disputedly, see below) argue that explanations must be
either natural (impersonal) or non-natural (personal).
 8
 &
 9
 assert that if the contingent being identified in
 1
 is the universe, given that the universe encompasses all natural
existents and the laws and principles governing them, the explanation
must be in terms of a non-natural, eternal, necessary being that
provides an intentional, personal, ultimate explanation. Since the
argument proceeds independent of temporal considerations, the argument
does not necessarily propose a first cause in time, but rather a first
or primary sustaining cause of the universe. As Aquinas noted, the
philosophical arguments for God’s existence as first cause are
compatible with the eternity of the universe (On the Eternity of
the World).

The question whether the necessary being to which the argument
concludes is God is debated. Some hold that the assertion that the
first sustaining cause is God (steps
 8
 and
 9)
 is not part of the cosmological argument per se; such
defenders of the argument sometimes create additional arguments to
identify the first cause. Others, however, contend that from the
concept of a necessary being other properties appropriate to a divine
being flow. O’Connor (2004) argues that being a necessary being
cannot be a derivative emergent property, otherwise the being would be
contingent. Likewise the connection between the essential properties
must be necessary. Hence, the universe cannot be the necessary being
since it is mereologically complex. Similarly, the myriad elementary
particles cannot be necessary beings either, for their distinguishing
distributions are externally caused and hence contingent. Rather, he
contends that a more viable account of the necessary being is as a
purposive agent with desires, intentions, and beliefs, whose activity
is guided but not determined by its goals, a view consistent with
identifying the necessary being as God. Koons (as are Craig and
Sinclair 2009: 192–94) also is willing to identify the necessary
being as God, constructing corollaries regarding God’s nature
that follow from his construction of the cosmological argument. Oppy
(1999), on the other hand, expresses significant skepticism about the
possibility of such a deductive move.

Critics have objected to key premises in the argument. We will
consider the most important objections and responses.
4.2 Objection 1: The Universe Just Is

Interpreting the contingent being in
 premise 1
 as the universe, Bertrand Russell denies that the universe needs an
explanation
 (premise 2);
 it just is. Russell, following Hume (1779), contends that since we
derive the concept of cause from our observation of particular things,
we cannot ask about the cause of something like the universe that we
cannot experience. The universe needs no explanation; it is
“just there, and that’s all” (Russell 1948 [1964]:
175). This view was reiterated by Hawking (1987: 651).

Swinburne replies that 


uniqueness is relative to description. Every physical object is unique
under some description,… yet all objects within the universe
are characterized by certain properties, which are common to more than
one object.… The objection fails to make any crucial
distinction between the universe and other objects; and so it fails in
its attempt to prevent at the outset a rational inquiry into the issue
of whether the universe has some origin outside itself. (Swinburne
2004: 134–35) 


We don’t need to experience every possible referent of the class
of contingent things to be able to conclude that a contingent thing
needs a cause. “To know that a rubber ball dropped on a Tuesday
in Waggener Hall by a redheaded tuba player will fall to the
ground”, I don’t need a sample that includes tuba players
dropping rubber balls at this location (Koons 1997: 202).

Morriston (2002: 235) responds that although it is true that we
don’t need to experience every instance to derive a general
principle, the universe is a very different thing from what we
experientially reference when we say that things cannot come into
existence without a cause. Tuba players are not “anything
remotely analogous to the ‘initial singularity’ that
figures in the Big Bang theory of the origin of the
universe”.

Defenders of the argument respond that there is a key similarity
between the universe and the experienced content, namely, both tuba
players (and the like) and the cosmos are contingent. Given our
experience with contingent particulars, we do not need to experience
every member of a contingent cosmos to know that it is caused.

But why should we think that the cosmos is contingent? Defenders of
the view contend that if the components of the universe are
contingent, the universe itself is contingent. Russell replies that
the move from the contingency of the components of the universe to the
contingency of the universe commits the Fallacy of Composition, which
mistakenly concludes that since the parts have a certain property, the
whole likewise has that property. Hence, whereas we legitimately can
ask for the cause of particular things, to require a cause of the
universe or the set of all contingent beings based on the contingency
of its parts is mistaken.

Russell correctly notes that arguments of the part-whole type can
commit the Fallacy of Composition. For example, the argument that
since all the bricks in the wall are small, the wall is small, is
fallacious. Yet it is an informal fallacy of content, not a formal
fallacy. Sometimes the totality has the same quality as the parts
because of the nature of the parts invoked—the wall is brick
(composed of baked clay) because it is built of bricks (composed of
baked clay). The universe’s contingency, theists argue,
resembles the second case. If all the contingent things in the
universe, including matter and energy, ceased to exist simultaneously,
the universe itself, as the totality of these things, would cease to
exist. But if the universe can cease to exist, it is contingent and
requires an explanation for its existence (Reichenbach 1972: chap.
5).

Whether this argument for the contingency of the universe is similar
to that advanced by Aquinas in his Third Way depends on how one
interprets Aquinas’s argument. Aquinas holds that “if
everything can not-be, then at one time there was nothing in
existence” (ST I,q.2,a.3). Plantinga, among others,
points out that this may commit a quantifier mistake (Plantinga 1967:
6; Kenny 1969: 56–66). However, Haldane (Smart and Haldane 1996:
132) defends the cogency of Aquinas’s reasoning on the grounds
that Aquinas’s argument is fallacious only on a temporal
reading, but Aquinas’s argument employs an atemporal ordering of
contingent beings. That is, Aquinas does not hold that over time there
would be nothing, but that in the per se ordering of causes, if every
contingent thing in that order did not exist, there would be
nothing.

William Rowe treats the argument temporally and contends (1975:
160–67) that this argument for the contingency of the universe
is fallacious, for even if every contingent being were to fail to
exist in some possible world, it may be the case that there is no
possible world that lacks a contingent being. That is, although no
being would exist in every possible world, every world would possess
at least one contingent being. In such a case, although each being is
contingent, it is necessary that something exist. Rowe gives the
example of a horse race. 


We know that although no horse in a given horse race necessarily will
be the winner, it is, nevertheless, necessary that some horse in the
race will be the winner. (1975: 164)


Rowe’s example will work only if it is necessary that some horse
will finish the race, for otherwise it is possible that all the horses
break a leg and none finishes the race—a condition he notes in
that “it is necessary that there exists at least one member of
the collection”. So why should we think that it is necessary
that something exist, even if it is contingent? Rowe does not say why,
but one argument given in defense of this thesis is that the existence
of one contingent being may be necessary for the nonexistence of some
other contingent being. But although the fact that something’s
existence is necessary for the non-existence of something else holds
for certain relational properties (for example, the existence of a
spouse is necessary for a man not to be a bachelor), it is doubtful
that something’s existence is necessary for the non-existence of
something else per se, which is what is needed to support the
argument that denies the contingency of the universe.

Rowe (1975: 166) develops a different argument to support the thesis
that the universe must be contingent. He argues that it is necessary
that if God exists, then it is possible that no dependent beings
exist. Since it is possible that God exists, it is possible that it is
possible that no dependent beings exist. (This conclusion is licensed
by the modal principle: If it is necessary that if ppp then qqq,
then if it is possible that ppp, it is possible that qqq.) Hence,
it is possible that there are no dependent beings; that is, that the
universe is contingent. Rowe takes the conditional as necessarily true
in virtue of the classical concept of God, according to which God is
free to decide whether or not to create dependent beings.

To avoid any hint of the Fallacy of Composition and to avoid its
complications, Koons (1997: 198–99) formulates the argument for
the contingency of the universe as a mereological argument. If
something is contingent, it contains a contingent part. The whole and
part overlap and, by virtue of overlapping, have a common part. Since
the part in virtue of which they overlap is wholly contingent, the
whole likewise must be contingent.

One might approach Russell’s thesis regarding the universe from
a different direction. If theists are willing to accept the existence
of God as the necessary being as a brute fact, why cannot nontheists
accept the existence of the universe as a brute fact, as a necessary
being? Bede Rundle, for example, argues that what has necessary
existence is causally independent. Matter has necessary existence, for
although it undergoes change as manifested in particular bits of
matter, the given volume of matter found in the universe persists, and
as persisting matter/energy does not have or need a cause. This
accords with the Principle of Conservation of Mass-Energy, according
to which matter and energy are never lost but rather transmute into
each other. As indestructible, matter/energy is the necessary being.
Consequently, although the material components of the universe are
contingent vis-à-vis their form, they are necessary
vis-à-vis their existence. On this reading, there is
not one but there are many necessary beings, all internal to the
universe. Their particular configurations are contingent, but since
matter/energy is conserved it cannot be created or lost.

Interestingly enough, this approach was anticipated by Aquinas in his
third way in his Summa Theologica (I,q.2,a.3). Once Aquinas
concludes that necessary beings exist, he then goes on to ask whether
these beings have their existence from themselves or from another. If
from another, then we have an unsatisfactory infinite regress of
explanations. Hence, there must be something whose necessity is
uncaused. As Kenny points out, Aquinas understands this necessity in
terms of being unable to cease to exist (Kenny 1969: 48). Although
Aquinas understands the uncaused necessary being to be God, Rundle
takes this to be matter/energy itself.

One question that arises with Rundle’s view is whether there
could have been more or less matter/energy than there is. That is, if
there is nnn amount of matter/energy in the world, could there be a
possible world with +n+n+n or −n−n-n amounts of matter/energy? We do
not know how much matter/energy existed in the first 10−3510−3510^{-35}
seconds of the universe. Even if the universe currently operates
according to the principle of the Conservation of Matter and Energy,
Rundle’s thesis depends on the contention that during the very
early phase of rapid expansion, a period of time we know little about,
this principle held. A second significant problem concerns what
follows from the existence of necessary beings. If the matter/energy
nexus constitutes the necessary being, what causally follows from that
nexus is itself necessary, and contingency, even in the composing
relations within the universe, would disappear. Everything in the
universe would be necessary, which is a disquieting position. Third,
O’Connor (2004) argues that since the necessary being provides
the ultimate explanation, there is no explanation of the
differentiation of the kinds of matter or of contingencies that
matter/energy causally undergo, for example, in terms of space-time
location. Perhaps one way to rescue Rundle’s thesis would be to
invoke an indeterministic presentation of quantum phenomena, which
would allow contingency of individual phenomena but not of the overall
probabilistic structure.
4.3 Objection 2: Explaining the Individual Constituents Is Sufficient

Whereas Russell argued that the universe just is, David Hume held that
when the parts are explained the whole is explained.


But the whole, you say, wants a cause. I answer that the
uniting of these parts into a whole… is performed merely by an
arbitrary act of the mind, and has no influence on the nature of
things. Did I show you the particular causes of each individual in a
collection of twenty particles of matter, I should think it very
unreasonable should you afterwards ask me what was the cause of the
whole twenty. This is sufficiently explained in explaining the parts.
(Hume 1779: part 9)


Hume contends that uniting the parts or individual constituents into a
whole is a mental act. In reality, all that exist are individual,
causally-related events, not whole sets of events. When we have
provided an account of each of these individual, causally-related
events we have explained the whole. We don’t need anything
more.

Rowe objects to what he terms the Hume-Edwards principle—that by
explaining the parts we have explained the whole:


When the existence of each member of a collection is explained by
reference to some other member of that very same collection,
then it does not follow that the collection itself has an explanation.
For it is one thing for there to be an explanation of the existence of
each dependent being and quite another thing for there to be an
explanation of why there are dependent beings at all. (Rowe 1975:
264)


Pruss (1999) expands on Rowe’s argument. An explanation of the
parts may provide a partial but not a complete explanation. The
explanation in terms of parts may fail to explain why these parts
exist rather than others, why they exist rather than not, or why the
parts are arranged as they are. Each member or part will be explained
either in terms of itself or in terms of something else that is
contingent. The former would make them necessary, not contingent,
beings. If they are explained in terms of something else, they still
remain unaccounted for, since the explanation would invoke either an
infinite regress of causes or a circular explanation. Pruss employs
the chicken/egg sequence: chickens account for eggs, which account for
chickens, and so on where the two are paired. But appealing to an
infinite chicken/egg regress or else arguing in a circle explains
neither any given chicken nor egg.

Richard Swinburne notes that an explanation is complete when
“any attempt to go beyond the factors which we have would result
in no gain of explanatory power or prior probability” (2004:
89). But explaining why something exists rather than something else or
than nothing and why it is as it is gives additional explanatory power
in explaining why a universe exists at all. Gale (1991: 257–58)
concludes that if we are to explain the parts of the universe and
their particular concatenation, we must appeal to something other than
those parts.
4.4 Objection 3: The Principles of Causation and of Sufficient Reason Are Suspect

Critics of the cosmological argument contend that the Causal Principle
or, where applicable, the broader Principle of Sufficient Reason (PSR)
that underlies versions of the argument, is suspect. As Hume argued,
there is no reason for thinking that the Causal Principle is true
a priori, for we can conceive of events occurring without
conceiving of their being caused, and what is conceivable is possible
in reality (1748: IV). Neither can an argument for the application of
the Causal Principle to the universe be drawn from inductive
experience. Even if the Causal Principle applies to events in the
world, we cannot extrapolate from the way the world works to the world
as a whole (Mackie 1982: 85).

Several replies are in order. First, Hume’s conceivability to
possibility argument is unsound. For one thing, whose conceivability
is being appealed to here? For another, someone who fails to
understand a necessarily true proposition might conceive of it being
false, but from this it does not follow that it possibly is false. A
person might think (wrongly) that pi is a determinate number,
but it does not follow that it is so. In the phenomenology of
conceivability, what is really conceivable is difficult if not
impossible to differentiate from what some might think is conceivable.
And even if something is conceivable, say in a logical sense, it does
not follow that it is metaphysically or factually possible. One might
conceive that, since heads can be distinguished from tails on a coin,
they can actually be separated, but metaphysically such is impossible.
What is distinguishable is not necessarily separable. Hume, it seems,
confuses epistemic with ontological conditions. Hence, the argument
based on conceivability is suspect (Reichenbach 1972:
57–60).

Second, there is reason to think that the Causal and Sufficient Reason
principles are true. Some suggest a pragmatic-type of argument: the
principles are necessary to make the universe intelligible. Critics
reply that the principles then only have methodological or practical
and not ontological justification. As John Mackie argues, we have no
right to assume that the universe complies with our intellectual
preferences for causal order. We can simply work with brute facts.
Perhaps so, but without such principles, science itself would be
undercut. As Pruss (2006: 255) points out, “Claiming to be a
brute fact should be a last resort. It would undercut the practice of
science”. Utilization of the principles best accounts for the
success of science, indeed, for any investigatory endeavor (Koons
1997; see also Koons 2008: 111–12, where he argues that it is
“a subjectively required presumption for needed for immunity to
internal defeaters”). The best explanation of the success of
science and other such rational endeavors is that the principles are
really indicative of how reality operates.

Pruss goes further to suggest that the PSR in particular is
“self-evident, obvious, intuitively clear, in no need of
argumentative support” (2006: 189). For example, he holds that
the principle of sufficient reason—“necessarily, every
contingently true proposition has an explanation” (he defers on
whether the principle also applies to necessarily true
propositions)—is self-evident in the sense that anyone who
understands it correctly understands that it is true. These persons
might not know it to be self-evidently true, but they do understand it
to be true. This is consistent with other persons denying it is
self-evident, for those who deny it might misunderstand the principle
in various ways. They might experience a conceptual blindness to the
nature of contingency or they might be “talked out of”
understanding the principle because of its controversial implications
(e.g., the existence of a necessary being).

The problem with the claim of self-evidence is that it is a
conversation ender, not a starter. One who denies its self-evidence
might think that those who hold to it are the ones who experience
conceptual blindness. In contrast to analyticity, self-evidence holds
in relation to the knowers themselves, and here diversity of
intuitions varies, perhaps according to philosophical or other types
of perspectives. Furthermore, if the principle truly is self-evident,
it would be strange to respond to skeptics by attempting to give
reasons to support that contention, and were such demanded, the
request would itself invoke the very principle in question.

Pruss responds that being self-evident is not incompatible with
providing arguments for self-evident propositions, and he thinks that
arguments can show the truth of the PSR to those who deny its
self-evidence. Among the numerous arguments he advances is a modal
argument employing a Weak Principle of Sufficient Reason, according to
which “every contingent proposition possibly has a complete
explanation” (Pruss 2006: 234–35). We will develop this in
 section 5.

Peter van Inwagen (1983: 202–04) argues that the PSR must be
rejected. If the PSR is true, every contingent proposition has an
explanation. Suppose P is the conjunction of all contingent
true propositions. Suppose also that there is a state of affairs
S that provides a sufficient reason for P. S
cannot itself be contingent, for then it would be a conjunct of
P and entailed by P, and as both entailing and entailed
by P would be P, so that it would be its own sufficient
reason. But no contingent proposition can explain itself. Neither can
S be necessary, for from necessary propositions only necessary
propositions follow. Necessary propositions cannot explain contingent
propositions, for if x sufficiently explains y, then
x entails y, and if x is necessary so is
y. So SSS cannot be either contingent or necessary, and hence
the PSR is false. Thus, if the cosmological argument appeals to the
PSR to establish the existence of a necessary being whose existence is
expressed by a necessary proposition as an explanation for contingent
beings, it fails in that it cannot account for the contingent beings
it purportedly explains. But, as Pruss notes (2006: chaps. 6 & 7),



The word sufficient can be read in two different ways: the
reason given can be logically sufficient for the explanandum,
or it can sufficiently explain the explanandum. (2006: 103)



We need not hold to the strong claim of logical sufficiency about the
relation between explaining and entailment in cases where the
explanation is brought about by libertarian free agency. Although God
is a necessary being, his connection with the world is through his
free agency, and free actions explain but do not entail the existence
of particular contingent states.

Clearly, the soundness of the deductive version of the cosmological
argument hinges on whether principles such as that of Causation or
Sufficient Reason are more than methodologically true and on the
extent to which these principles can be applied to individual things
or to the universe. Critics of the argument will be skeptical
regarding the universal application of the principles; defenders of
the argument generally not so. Perhaps the best one can say, with
Taylor, is that even those who critique the PSR invoke it when they
suggest that defenders have failed to provide a sufficient reason for
thinking it is true. 


The principle of sufficient reason can be illustrated in various
ways,…but it cannot be proved…. If one were to try
proving it, he would sooner or later have to appeal to considerations
that are less plausible than the principle itself. Indeed, it is hard
to see how one could even make an argument for it without already
assuming it. For this reason it might properly be called a
presupposition of reason itself. (1992: 87) 


We will return to the Principle of Causation below with respect to the
kalām argument.
4.5 Objection 4: Problems with the Concept of a Necessary Being

Immanuel Kant objected to the use of “necessary being”
throughout the cosmological argument, and hence to the conclusion that
a necessary being exists. Kant held that the cosmological argument, in
concluding to the existence of an absolutely necessary being, attempts
to prove the existence of a being whose nonexistence “is
impossible”, is “absolutely inconceivable”
(Critique B621). Kant indicates that what he has in mind by
an “absolutely necessary being” is a being whose existence
is logically necessary, where to deny its existence is contradictory.
The only being that meets this condition is the most real or maximally
excellent being—a being with all perfections, including
existence. This concept lies at the heart of the ontological argument
(see entry on
 ontological arguments).
 Although in the ontological argument the perfect being is determined
to exist through its own concept, in fact nothing can be determined to
exist in this manner; one has to begin with existence. In short, the
cosmological argument presupposes the cogency of the ontological
argument. But since the ontological argument is defective for the
above (and other) reason, the cosmological argument that depends on or
invokes it likewise must be defective (Critique B634).

Kant’s contention that the necessity found in “necessary
being” is logical necessity was common up through the 1960s.
J.J.C. Smart wrote,


And by “a necessary being” the cosmological argument means
“a logically necessary being”, i.e., “a
being whose non-existence is inconceivable in the sort of way that a
triangle’s having four sides is inconceivable”.…
Now since “necessary” is a word which applies primarily to
propositions, we shall have to interpret “God is a necessary
being” as “The proposition ‘God exists’ is
logically necessary”. (in Flew and MacIntyre 1955: 38; in a
later work Smart (Smart and Haldane 1996: 41–47) broadened his
notion of necessity.)


Many recent discussions of the cosmological argument, both supporting
and critiquing it, interpret the notion of a necessary being as a
being that cannot not exist (O’Connor 2008: 78, 2013: 38). For
example, Gale-Pruss contend that speaking about necessary beings does
not differ from speaking of the necessity of propositions (see
 section 5).
 As such, as Plantinga notes, if a necessary being is possible, it
exists (God, Freedom and Evil, 1967: 110). It is a being that
exists in all possible worlds. The only question that remains is
whether God’s existence is possible. This notion is similar to,
if not a modernization of, Aquinas’s contention that God’s
essence is to exist. Aquinas attempts to avoid the accusation that
this invokes the ontological argument on the grounds that we do not
have an adequate concept of God’s essence (ST
I,q.2,a.1). However, if we understand “necessary being” in
this sense, we can dispose of the cosmological argument as irrelevant;
what is needed rather is an argument to establish that God’s
existence is possible, for if it is possible that it is necessary that
God exists, then God exists (by Axiom S5).

But this need not be the sense in which “necessary being”
is understood in the cosmological argument. A more adequate notion of
necessary being is that the necessity is metaphysical or factual. A
necessary being is one that if it exists, it neither came into
existence nor can cease to exist, and correspondingly, if it does not
exist, it cannot come into existence (Reichenbach 1972: 117–20).
If it exists, it eternally maintains its own existence; it is
self-sufficient and self-sustaining. So understood, the cosmological
argument does not rely on notions central to the ontological argument.
Rather, instead of being superfluous, the cosmological argument, if
sound, gives us reason to think that the necessary being exists rather
than not.

Mackie replies that if God has metaphysical necessity, God’s
existence is logically contingent, such that some reason is required
for God’s own existence (Mackie 1982: 84). That is, if God
necessarily exists in the sense that if he exists, he exists in all
possible worlds, it remains logically possible that God does not exist
in any (and all) possible worlds. Hence, God, as Swinburne notes
(2004: 79, 148) is a logically contingent being, and so could have
not-existed. Why, then, does God exist? The PSR can be applied to the
necessary being.

The theist responds that the PSR does not address logical contingency
but metaphysical contingency. One is not required to find a reason for
what is not metaphysically contingent. It is not that the necessary
being is self-explanatory; rather, a demand for explaining its
existence is inappropriate. Hence, the theist concludes,
Hawking’s question “Who created God?” (Hawking 1988:
174) is out of place (Davis 1997). We will return to this discussion
in
 section 8.
5. Argument from the Weak Principle of Sufficient Reason

Recently Richard Gale and Alexander Pruss (1999) advanced a modal
version of the cosmological argument. They reject the strong version
of the PSR, according to which “for every proposition ppp, if
ppp is true, then there is a proposition, qqq, that explains
ppp”. In its place they favor using a weak version of the
PSR—it is possible that for every true proposition, there is a
proposition, qqq, that explains ppp—that they believe is
less question-begging and more initially acceptable to critics. They
phrase the argument in terms of contingent and necessary propositions.
A contingent proposition is one that is both possibly true and
possibly false (i.e., true in some worlds and false in others); a
necessarily true proposition is true in every possible world. In its
simplest form, the argument is (1) if it is possible that it is
necessary that a supernatural being of some sort exists, then it is
necessary that a supernatural being of that sort exists. Since (2) it
is possible that it is necessary that a supernatural being of some
sort exists, (3) it is necessary that this being exists. The being
that Gale has in mind is a very powerful and intelligent
designer-creator, not the all perfect God of Anselm, for this perfect
God who would exist in all possible worlds would be incompatible with
the existence of gratuitous and horrendous evils to be found in some
of those possible worlds.

If one grants modal Axiom S5 (if it is possible that it is necessary
that ppp, then it is necessary that ppp), the critical premise in
the argument is the second, and Gale and Pruss proceed to defend it
using their weak PSR. They begin with the notion of a Big Conjunctive
Fact (BCF), which is the totality of propositions that would be true
of any possible world were it actualized. Since all possible worlds
would have the same necessary propositions, they are differentiated by
their Big Conjunctive Contingent Fact (BCCF), which would contain
different contingent propositions. Let ppp be the BCCF of the actual
world WWW. Suppose, further, that it is possible that ppp has an
explanation, that is, that it is possible that there is some
proposition qqq that explains ppp. As such, there is a possible
world W1W1W_{1} that contains ppp, qqq, and the proposition that
qqq explains ppp. The question now is whether W1W1W_{1} is the
actual world, that is, whether there is a proposition qqq that
explains ppp in the actual world. Gale argues that W1W1W_{1} (which
contains qqq and the proposition that qqq explains ppp) is the
actual world, for since W1W1W_{1} contains ppp, there can be no
property of ppp that is not found in W1W1W_{1}. Every conjunct of
ppp will be a conjunct of p1p1p_{1} (the BCCF of W1W1W_{1}) in
W1W1W_{1}. Suppose that rrr is a conjunct of ppp in WWW, then
not-rrr cannot be a conjunct of p1p1p_{1} in W1W1W_{1}... Since
WWW and W1W1W_{1} have the same properties, W1W1W_{1} is the actual
world. Therefore, since these worlds are identical, the actual world
contains ppp, qqq, and the proposition that qqq explains ppp.
That is, there is something that explains the BCCF of the actual
world. The explanation of the BCCF cannot be scientific, for such
would be in terms of law-like propositions and statements about the
actual world at a given time, which would be contingent and hence part
of the BCCF. Since the only explanations we can conceive of are
personal or scientific, qqq provides a personal explanation of the
BCCF in terms of the intentional action of a necessary being who
freely brings it about that the world exists. qqq cannot report the
action of a contingent being, for then the being would be part of
ppp and explained by qqq. But something cannot explain itself.
Hence, although contingent, qqq reports the action of a necessary
being. Gale concludes that although this necessary being exists in
every possible world, this tells little about its power, goodness, and
other qualities. To make this being palatable to theists, he offers
that the argument be supplemented by other arguments, such as the
teleological arguments, to suggest that the necessary being is the
kind of being that satisfies theistic requirements. Since 


the actual world’s universe displays a wondrous complexity due
to its law-like unity and simplicity, fine tuning of natural
constants, and natural purpose and beauty,… there exists a
necessary supernatural being who is very powerful, intelligent, and
good and freely creates the actual world’s universe. (1999:
468–69) 


(For the detailed 18 step deductive argument, see Gale and Pruss 1999:
462–69).

Several objections have been raised about the argument from the weak
principle of sufficient reason. Almeida and Judisch construct their
objection via two reductio arguments. They note that, according to
Gale’s argument, qqq is a contingent proposition in the actual
world that reports the free, intentional action of a necessary being.
As such, since the actual world contains the contingent proposition
qqq, non-qqq is possible. That is, there is a possible world
W2W2W_{2} that contains ppp, non-qqq, and that qqq does not
explain ppp. But by Gale’s own reasoning, W2W2W_{2} is
identical to the actual world. But the actual world cannot contain
both qqq and non-qqq. Thus, qqq cannot be a contingent
proposition.

On the other hand, assume that qqq is a contingently necessary
proposition, that is, that it is possible that qqq is necessary and
possible that qqq is not necessary. By S5, we get that it is
necessary that qqq is necessary, making it impossible that qqq is
not necessary. As a result, it is both possible and not-possible that
qqq is not necessary, which likewise shows that qqq cannot be a
contingently necessary proposition. The only other option is that
qqq is a necessary truth, which would beg the question. Thus, the
argument fails by being unable to characterize qqq. For rebuttals,
see Gale and Pruss (2002) and Rutten (2012, Other Internet Resources:
84–87).

Graham Oppy (2000) similarly argues that suppose p1p1p_1 is the BCF of
some possible world, and p1p1p_{1} has no explanation. Then, given
rrr (namely, that p1p1p_{1} has no explanation) there is a
conjunctive fact p1p1p_{1} and rrr. Since by hypothesis the
conjunctive fact p1p1p_{1} and rrr is true in some world, on
Gale’s account it is true in the actual world. Then by the weak
PSR there is a world in which this conjunction of p1p1p_{1} and rrr
possibly has an explanation. If there is an explanation for the
conjunction of p1p1p_{1} and rrr, there is an explanation for
p1p1p_{1}. Thus, we have the contradiction that p1p1p_{1} both has and
does not have an explanation, which is absurd. Hence, no world exists
where the BCF lacks an explanation, which is the strong principle of
sufficient reason that Gale allegedly circumvented. Since accepting
the weak PSR would commit the nontheist to the strong PSR and
ultimately to a necessary being, the nontheist has no motivation to
accept the weak PSR.

Gale and Pruss (2002) subsequently concede that their weak PSR does
entail the strong PSR, but they contend that there still is no reason
not to proceed with the weak PSR, which they think the nontheist would
accept. The only grounds for rejecting it, they claim, is that it
leads to a theistic conclusion, which is not an independent reason for
rejecting it. Oppy, however, maintains that appealing to some initial
instincts of acceptance is irrelevant. Perhaps the nontheists did not
see what granting the weak PSR entailed, that it contradicted other
things they had independent reasons to believe, or they did not fully
understand the principle. There is a modus tolens reason to
reject it, since there are other grounds for thinking that theism is
false.

Jerome Gellman has argued that the Gale/Pruss conclusion to a being
that is not necessarily omnipotent also fails; this being is
essentially omnipotent and, if omnipotence entails omniscience, is
essentially omniscient. This too Gale and Pruss concede, which means
that the necessary being they conclude to is not significantly
different from that arrived at by the traditional cosmological
argument that appeals to the moderate version of the PSR.

Finally, there is doubt that Gale’s rejection of the traditional
cosmological argument on the grounds that the necessary being could
not be necessarily good is well grounded. Gale argues that since there
are possible worlds with gratuitous or horrendous evils, and since God
as necessary would exist in these worlds, God cannot be necessarily
good. The problem here is that if indeed there is this incompatibility
between a perfectly good necessary being (God) and gratuitous evils or
even absolutely horrendous evils, then it would follow that worlds
with God and such evils would not be possible worlds, for they would
contain a contradiction. In all possible worlds where a perfectly good
God as a necessary being would exist, there would be a justificatory
morally sufficient reason for the evils that would exist, or at least,
given the existence of gratuitous evils, for the possibility of the
existence of such evils (Reichenbach 1982: 38–39). Beyond this,
however, the point stands that the weak PSR entails the strong PSR,
and as we argued above, defenders of the cosmological argument do not
need such a strong version of the PSR to construct their argument.
6. The Kalām Cosmological Argument

A second type of cosmological argument, contending for a first or
beginning cause of the universe, has a venerable history, especially
in the Islamic mutakalliman tradition. Although it had
numerous defenders through the centuries, it received new life in the
recent voluminous writings of William Lane Craig. Craig formulates the
kalām cosmological argument this way (in Craig and Smith
1993: chap. 1):

Everything that begins to exist has a cause of its
existence.
The universe began to exist.
Therefore, the universe has a cause of its
existence.
Since no scientific explanation (in terms of physical
laws) can provide a causal account of the origin (very beginning) of
the universe, the cause must be personal (explanation is given in
terms of a personal agent).


This argument has been the subject of much recent debate, only some of
which we can summarize here. (For greater bibliographic detail, see
Craig and Sinclair 2009.)
6.1 The Causal Principle and Quantum Physics

The basis for the argument’s first premise is the Causal
Principle that undergirds many cosmological arguments. (Oderberg
[2002: 308] is mistaken when he tries to establish the uniqueness of
the kalām argument by denying that the Causal Principle
plays a role in kalām argument. It only does not play a
role in supporting a particular premise in the argument.) Defenders
and critics alike suggest that basing the argument on the Principle of
Causation rather than on the more general Principle of Sufficient
Reason is advantageous to the argument (Morriston 2000: 149). Craig
holds that the first premise is intuitively obvious; no one, he says,
seriously denies it (Craig, in Craig and Smith 1993: 57). Although at
times Craig suggests that one might treat the principle as an
empirical generalization based on our ordinary and scientific
experiences (which might not be strong enough for the argument to
succeed in a strong sense, although it might be supplemented by an
inference to the best explanation argument that what best explains the
success of science is that reality operates according to the causal
principle), ultimately, he argues, the truth of the Causal Principle
rests “upon the metaphysical intuition that something cannot
come out of nothing” (Craig, in Craig and Smith 1993: 147).
“No one sincerely believes that things, say, a horse or
an Eskimo village, can just pop into being without a cause”
(Craig and Sinclair 2009: 182), and this includes the universe.

The Causal Principle has been the subject of extended criticism. (We
addressed objections to the Causal Principle as subsumed under the PSR
from a philosophical perspective earlier in
 4.4.)
 Some critics deny that they share Craig’s intuitions about the
Causal Principle (Oppy 2002). Morriston (2000) argues that, for one
thing, it does not seem to be an a priori truth, for not only
does it lack “a kind of ‘luminosity’ that makes it
impossible not to believe it, but closer inspection does not make it
clearer that it is true” (2000: 156–59). He points not
only to the presence of serious doubters (which he thinks he should
not be able to find if it were truly an a priori truth), but
also to quantum phenomena, and thereby joins those who raise
objections to the Causal Principle based on quantum physics (Davies
1984: 200). On the quantum level, the connection between cause and
effect, if not entirely broken, is to some extent loosened. For
example, it appears that electrons can pass out of existence at one
point and come back into existence elsewhere. One can neither trace
their intermediate existence nor determine what causes them to come
into existence at one point rather than another. Neither can one
precisely determine or predict where they will reappear; their
subsequent location is only statistically probable given what we know
about their antecedent states. Hence, 


quantum-mechanical considerations show that the causal proposition is
limited in its application, if applicable at all, and consequently
that a probabilistic argument for a cause of the Big Bang cannot go
through. (Smith, in Craig and Smith 1993: 121–23, 182)


Craig responds that appeals to quantum phenomena do not affect the
kalām argument. For one thing, quantum events are not
completely devoid of causal conditions. Even if one grants that the
causal conditions are not jointly sufficient to determine the event,
at least some necessary conditions are involved in the quantum event.
But when one considers the beginning of the universe, he notes, there
are no prior necessary causal conditions; simply nothing exists
(Craig, in Craig and Smith 1993: 146; see Koons 1997: 203). Pruss
(2006: 169) contends that in quantum phenomena causal indeterminacy is
compatible with the causal principle in that the causes
indeterministically bring about the effect. Morriston is rightly
puzzled by this reply, for, he asks, what 


makes a cause out of a bunch of merely necessary
conditions. Apparently not that they are jointly
sufficient to produce the effect. (2000: 158) 


If conditions are not jointly sufficient, is there reason to think
that premise 1 is true? More recently, Craig argues that 


not all physicists agree that subatomic events are uncaused….
Indeed, most of the available interpretations of the mathematical
formulation of [Quantum Mechanics] are fully deterministic. (Craig and
Sinclair 2009: 183)


For another, a difference exists between predictability and causality.
It is true that, given Heisenberg’s principle of uncertainty, we
cannot precisely predict individual subatomic events. What is debated
is whether this inability to predict is due to the absence of
sufficient causal conditions, or whether it is merely a result of the
fact that any attempt to precisely measure these events alters their
status. The very introduction of the observer into the arena so
affects what is observed that it gives the appearance that effects
occur without sufficient or determinative causes. But we have no way
of knowing what is happening without introducing observers into the
situation and the changes they bring. In the above example, we simply
are unable to discern the intermediate states of the electron’s
existence apart from introducing conditions of observation. When
Heisenberg’s indeterminacy is understood not as describing the
events themselves but rather our knowledge of the events, the Causal
Principle still holds and can still be applied to the initial
singularity, although we cannot expect to achieve any kind of
determinative predictability about what occurs on the sub-atomic level
given the cause.

At the same time, it should be recognized that showing that
indeterminacy is a real feature of the world at the quantum level
would have significant negative implications for the more general
Causal Principle that underlies the deductive cosmological argument.
The more this indeterminacy has ontological significance, the weaker
is the Causal Principle. If the indeterminacy has merely epistemic
significance, it scarcely affects the Causal Principle. Quantum
accounts allow for additional speculation regarding origins and
structures of universes. In effect, whether Craig’s response to
the quantum objection succeeds depends upon deeper issues, in
particular, the epistemic and ontological status of quantum
indeterminacy, the nature of the Big Bang as a quantum phenomenon, the
nature and role of indeterminate causation, and whether realist
theories about quantum phenomena have serious traction. Quantum
physics is murky, as evidenced by Bell’s gedanken
experiments, as described by Mermin.
6.2 Impossibility of an Actual Infinite

In defense of premise 2, Craig develops both a priori and
a posteriori arguments. His primary a priori
argument is

An actual infinite cannot exist.
A beginningless temporal series of events is an actual
infinite.
Therefore, a beginningless temporal series of events
cannot exist.


Since (7) follows validly, if (5) and (6) are true the argument is
sound. In defense of premise (5), he defines an actual infinite as a
determinate totality that occurs when a part of a system can be put
into a one-to-one correspondence with the entire system (Craig and
Sinclair 2009: 104). Craig argues that if actual infinites that
neither increase nor decrease in the number of members they contain
were to exist in reality, we would have rather absurd consequences.
For example, imagine a library with an actually infinite number of
books. Suppose that the library also contains an infinite number of
red and an infinite number of black books, so that for every red book
there is a black book, and vice versa. It follows that the library
contains as many red books as the total books in its collection, and
as many red books as black books, and as many red books as red and
black books combined. But this is absurd; in reality the subset cannot
be equivalent to the entire set. Likewise, in a real library by
removing a certain number of books we reduce the overall collection.
But if infinites are actual, a library with an infinite number of
books would not be reduced in size at all by removal of a specific
number of books (short of all of them), for example, all the red books
or those with even catalogue numbers (Craig and Smith 1993:
11–16). The absurdities resulting from attempting to apply basic
arithmetical operations, functional in the real world, to infinities
suggest that although actual infinites can have an ideal existence,
they cannot exist in reality.

Craig’s point is this. Two sets AAA and BBB are the same
size just in case they can be put into one-to-one correspondence, that
is, if and only if every member of AAA can be correlated with
exactly one member of BBB in such a way that no member of BBB is
left out. In the case of infinite sets, this notion of “same
size” yields results like the following: the set of all natural
numbers (let this be AAA) is the same size as the set of squares of
natural numbers (BBB), since every member of AAA can be correlated
with exactly one member of BBB in a way that leaves out no member of
BBB (correlate 0↔00↔00\leftrightarrow 0, 1↔11↔11\leftrightarrow1,
2↔42↔42\leftrightarrow4, 3↔93↔93\leftrightarrow9, 4↔164↔164\leftrightarrow
16,…). So this is a case—recognized in fact as early as
Galileo (Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences)—where
two infinite sets have the same size but, intuitively, one of them, as
a subset, appears to be smaller than the other; one set consists of
only some of the members of another, but you nonetheless never run out
of either when you pair off their members.

Craig uses a similar, intuitive notion of “smaller than”
in his argument concerning the library. It appears that the set BBB
of red books in the library is smaller than the set AAA of all the
books in the library, even though both have the same (infinite) size.
Craig concludes that it is absurd to suppose that such a library is
possible in actuality, since the set of red books would
simultaneously have to be smaller than the set of all books and yet
equal in size.

Critics fail to be convinced by these paradoxes of infinity. For
example, Rundle (2004: 170) agrees with Craig that the concept of an
actual infinite is paradoxical, but this, he argues, provides no
grounds for thinking it is incoherent. The logical problems with the
actual infinite are not problems of incoherence, but arise from the
features that are characteristic of infinite sets. When the intuitive
notion of “smaller than” is replaced by a precise
definition, finite sets and infinite sets just behave somewhat
differently, that is all. Cantor, and all subsequent set theorists,
define a set BBB to be smaller than set AAA (i.e., has fewer
members) just in case BBB is the same size as a subset of AAA, but
AAA is not the same size as any subset of BBB. The application of
this definition to finite and infinite sets yields results that Craig
finds counter-intuitive but which mathematicians see as our best
understanding for comparing the size of sets. They see the fact that
an infinite set can be put into one-to-one correspondence with one of
its own proper subsets as one of the defining characteristics
of an infinite set, not an absurdity. Say that set CCC is a
proper subset of AAA just in case every element of CCC is
an element of AAA while AAA has some element that is not an
element of CCC. In finite sets, but not necessarily in infinite
sets, when set BBB is a proper subset of AAA, BBB is smaller
than AAA. But this doesn’t hold for infinite sets—as
above where BBB is the set of squares of natural numbers and AAA
is the set of all natural numbers.

Cantorian mathematicians argue that these results apply to any
infinite set, whether in pure mathematics, imaginary libraries, or the
real world series of concrete events. Thus, Smith argues that Craig
begs the question by wrongly presuming that an intuitive relationship
holds between finite sets and their proper subsets, namely, that a set
has more members than its proper subsets must hold even in the case of
infinite sets (Smith, in Craig and Smith 1993: 85). So while Craig
thinks that Cantor’s set theoretic definitions yield absurdities
when applied to the world of concrete objects, which entails that
infinites cannot be actual, set theorists see no problem so long as
the definitions are maintained. Further discussion is in Oppy 2006:
137–54.

Why should one think
 premise (6)
 is true—that a beginningless series, such as the universe up to
this point, is an actual rather than a potential infinite? For Craig,
an actual infinite is a determinate totality or a completed unity,
whereas the potential infinite is not. Since the past events of a
beginningless series can be conceptually collected together and
numbered, the series is a determinate totality (1979: 96–97).
And since the past is beginningless, it has no starting point and is
infinite. If the universe had a starting point, so that events were
added to or subtracted from this point, we would have a potential
infinite that increased through time by adding new members. The fact
that the events do not occur simultaneously is irrelevant.

Bede Rundle rejects an actual infinite, but his grounds for doing
so—the symmetry of the past and the future—, if sustained,
make
  premise 6
 false. He argues that the reasons often advanced for asymmetry, such
as those given by Craig, are faulty. It is true that the past is not
actual, but neither is the future. Likewise, that the past, having
occurred, is unalterable is irrelevant, for neither is the future
alterable. The only time that is real is the present. Likewise, the
argument that if the past were infinite, there would be no reason why
we arrive at t0t0t_0 now rather than earlier, fails. 

For Rundle, the past and the future are symmetrical; it is only our
knowledge of them that is asymmetrical. Any future event lies at a
finite temporal distance from the present. Similarly, any past event
lies at a finite temporal distance from the present. For each past or
future series of events, beginning from the present, there can always
be a subsequent event. Hence, for both series an infinity of events is
possible, and, as symmetrical, the infinity of both series is the
same. Since the series of future events is not an actual but a
potential infinite (or, better, an “indefinitely
extendible” series, 2004: 168), the series of past events is
also indefinitely extendible. It follows that although the future is
actually finite, it does not require an end to the universe, for there
is always a possible subsequent event (2004: 180). Similarly, although
any given past event of the universe is finitely distant in time from
now, a beginning or initial event can be ruled out; for any given
event there is a possible earlier event. But then, since there is a
possible prior or possible posterior event in any past or future
series respectively, the universe, although finite in time, is
temporally unbounded (indefinitely extendible); both beginning and
cessation are ruled out. (How Rundle [2004: 176–78] gets from
the possibility of a subsequent event to actually ruling out cessation
and beginning is less than clear.) Since there is no time when the
material universe might not have existed, it is not contingent but
necessary. Hence, although the principle of sufficient reason is still
true, it applies only to the components of the material universe and
not to the universe itself. No explanation of the universe is
possible. The universe, as matter-energy, is neither caused nor
destructible; not in the sense that it could have been caused or could
cease, but in the sense that “the notions of beginning and
ceasing to exist are inapplicable to the universe” (2004:
178).

But, one might wonder, are the past series and future series of events
really symmetrical? It is true that one can start from the present and
count either forward and backward in time. Rundle thinks that
…x5x5x_5, x4x4x_4, x3x3x_3, x2x2x_2, x1x1x_1, t0t0t_0, y1y1y_1,
y2y2y_2, y3y3y_3, y4y4y_4, y5y5y_5 are all on the same continuum, so that
we cannot distinguish ontologically the time dimension of the future
and past series. The two series, going into the past and into the
future, would be the same in that however far we count from the
present (t0t0t_0) remains finite although indefinitely extendible. But
is it true that, as he claims, with regard to the past, “any
movement currently terminating can be redescribed as extending
back”, that counting backward from the present is the same as
counting from the past to the present (2004: 176)?

Craig says no, for in the actual world we do not start from now to
arrive at the past; we move from the past to the present. To count
backwards, we would start from a particular point in time, the
present. From where would we start to count were the past indefinitely
extendible? Both to count and to move from the past to the present, we
cannot start from the indefinitely extendible. Indeed, if the past is
indefinitely extendible, no matter where we started, we would have
arrived at t0t0t_0 long before now. 


Before the present event could occur the event immediately prior to it
would have to occur; and before that event could occur, the event
immediately prior to it would have to occur; and so on ad
infinitum. One gets driven back and back into the infinite past,
making it impossible for any event to occur. Thus, if the series of
past events were beginningless, the present event could not have
occurred, which is absurd. (Craig and Sinclair 2009: 118) 


One cannot just reverse the temporal sequence of the past, for we
don’t ontologically engage the sequence from the present to the
past. Rundle’s two movements are quite disparate, such that the
two sequences—of the past and of the future—are not
symmetrical, which leaves intact Craig’s claim that a
beginningless past would result in an actual and not a potential
infinite.

Craig is well aware of the fact that he is using actual and potential
infinite in a way that differs from the traditional usage in Aristotle
and Aquinas. For Aristotle all the elements in an actual infinite exist
simultaneously, whereas a potential infinite is realized over time by
addition or division. Hence, the temporal series of events, as formed
by successively adding new events, was a potential, not an actual,
infinite (Aristotle, Physics, III, 6). For Craig, however, an
actual infinite is a timeless totality that cannot be added to or
reduced. “Since past events, as determinate parts of reality,
are definite and distinct and can be numbered, they can be
conceptually collected into a totality” (Craig, in Craig and
Smith 1993: 25). The future, but not the past, is a potential
infinite, for its events have not yet happened.
6.3 Successive Addition Cannot Form an Actual Infinite

Craig’s second argument addresses this very point.

The temporal series of events is a collection formed
by successive addition.
A collection formed by successive synthesis is not an
actual infinite.
Therefore, the temporal series of events cannot be an
actual infinite (Craig 1979: 103).


The collection of historical events is formed by successively adding
events, one following another. The events are not temporally
simultaneous but occur over a period of time as the series continues
to acquire new members. Even if an actual infinite were possible, it
could not be realized by successive addition; in adding to the series,
no matter how much this is done, even to infinity, the series remains
finite and only potentially infinite. One can neither count to nor
traverse the infinite (Craig and Sinclair 2009: 118).

It might be objected that this sounds very much like Zeno’s
paradoxes that prohibit Achilles or anyone from either beginning to
cross an area or succeeding in doing so. But, notes Craig, significant
disanalogies disallow this conclusion. For one, Zeno’s argument
rests on progressively-narrowing, unequal distances that sum to a
finite distance, whereas in traversing the past the equal distances
continue to the infinity of the future. Second, Zeno’s distances
are potential because of divisibility, whereas the distances from the
past are actual distances or times to be traversed.

Morriston (2003: 290) critiques Craig’s thesis that forming the
infinite series of events by successive addition presupposes a
beginning point. He asks, 


Why couldn’t there have been an infinite series of years in
which there was no first year? It’s true that in such a series
we never “arrive” at infinity, but surely that is only
because infinity is, so to speak, “always already there”.
At every point in such a series, infinitely many years have
already passed by. 


Why do we need to “arrive at infinity?” But
Craig’s point is not that we cannot arrive at infinity in the
past, but that we could not traverse the infinite to arrive at the
present moment. Why this moment rather than another? But maybe,
Morriston replies, that is just the way it is; “the past just
is the series of events that have already happened”. To
require a reason for the series of past events arriving at now is to
appeal to the principle of sufficient reason, which he deems both
suspect and inappropriate for Craig to invoke (Morriston 2003: 293).
Furthermore, he argues, Craig’s argument mistakenly presupposes
two independent series—a series of events and a series of
segments of time they occupy—such that one can ask about how the
former is mapped onto the latter, whereas in fact the two series are
not independent. Craig (2010) replies that it is not a matter of
sufficient reason, but that Morriston simply has not paid sufficient
attention to the distinction between past and present tenses, on which
potential and actual infinites are founded. A finite series that has
the potential for further members, as with future events beginning
with now, is actually finite and only potentially infinite. But a
beginningless series of past events cannot add new members; it is
actually, not potentially, infinite. There is a relevant distinction
between the two series.

To illustrate his conclusion, Craig presents Bertrand Russell’s
example of Tristram Shandy, who writes his autobiography. It takes him
a year to write about one day of his life, so that as his life
progresses so does his autobiography in which he gets progressively
farther behind. Russell concludes that 


if (Shandy) had lived forever, and had not wearied of his task, then,
even if his life had continued as eventfully as it began, no part of
his biography would have remained unwritten. ([1903] 1937: 358) 


But, Oderberg (2002: 310) claims, Russell seems to have fallaciously
moved from (1) For every day, there is a year such that, by the end of
that year, Shandy has recorded that day, which is true, to (2) There
is a year such that, for every day, by the end of that year Shandy has
recorded that day. (2) is needed for Russell’s conclusion but
fails to follow from (1). Shandy’s writing never catches up with
his life; indeed, the longer he lives, even if for infinity, his
writing would never catch up to his life but progressively would get
farther behind. Indeed, if he has been living and writing from
infinity, his autobiography is infinitely behind his life. Contrary to
Russell, there will be days—an infinite number—about which
he will be unable to write. As can be imagined, this example has been
greatly contested, modified, and has generated a literature of its
own. For samples, see Eells (1988), Oderberg (2002), and Oppy
(2003).

Finally, it is objected that Craig’s argument presupposes an
AAA view of time, where time flows from past to present to future
and not all events tenselessly coexist. But can Craig’s argument
be sustained if time is understood in the BBB sense, where all
members of the series tenselessly coexist, being equally real
(Grünbaum 1994)? On a BBB view of time there is no beginning,
and it would seem that on this view the argument would collapse.
Andrew Loke responds that even on a BBB view of time, one cannot
realize the infinite by successive addition. It is impossible to count
an actual infinite at any time because “an actual infinite has a
greater number of elements than what could be counted by the process
of counting”. This feature 


is due to (i) the nature of the number of elements of an actual
infinite set, which is an essential property of such a set, and (ii)
the process of counting one element after another. (Loke 2014a: 76)



This response depends crucially on the distinction between an actual
and a potential infinite.
6.4 The Big Bang Theory of Cosmic Origins

Craig and Sinclair’s a posteriori argument for
 premise 2
 invokes recent cosmology and the Big Bang theory of cosmic origins.
Since the universe is expanding as the galaxies recede from each
other, if we reverse the direction of our view and look back in time,
the farther we look, the denser the universe becomes. If we push
backwards far enough, we find that the universe reaches a state of
compression where the density and gravitational force are infinite.
This unique singularity constitutes the beginning of the
universe—of matter, energy, space, time, and all physical laws.
It is not that the universe arose out of some prior state, for there
was no prior state. Since time too comes to be, one cannot ask what
happened before the initial event. Neither should one think that the
universe expanded from some state of infinite density into
space; space too came to be in that event. Since the Big Bang
initiates the very laws of physics, one cannot expect any scientific
or physical explanation of this singularity.

One picture, then, is of the universe beginning in a singular,
non-temporal event roughly 13–14 billion years ago. Something,
perhaps a quantum vacuum, came into existence. Its tremendous energy
caused it, in the first fractions of a second, to expand and explode,
creating the four-dimensional space-time universe that we experience
today. How this all happened in the first 10−3510−3510^{-35} seconds and
subsequently is a matter of serious speculation and debate; what
advocates of
 premise 2
 maintain is that since the universe and all its material elements
originate in the Big Bang, the universe is temporally finite and thus
had a beginning. (For a detailed consideration of cosmogonic theories
from the kalām perspective, see Craig and Sinclair 2009:
125–182; for the counter discussion see Grünbaum 1991). By
itself, of course, this reasoning, even if accurate, leaves it the
case that
 premise 2
 and hence
 conclusion 3
 are only probably true, dependent on accepted cosmogenic
theories.

Sobel (2004: 198) argues that if the universe began at t1t1t_1, it is
possible that the cause of what came to be itself came to be at
t2t2t_2, and what caused this came to be at t4t4t_4, and so on to
infinity, without ever getting to t=0t=0t=0. The beginning converges to
t=0t=0t=0, but infinitely never reaches it. But this leads to the
paradox that Koons (2014) recently developed, employing reasoning that
parallels the Grim Reaper Paradox. He constructs a reductio of the
assertion that it is possible that there is an infinite past with
infinitely many sub-periods, as well as of the claim that there are an
infinite number of periods of time, each of which is earlier than the
previous. His constructed dilemma is this: 


if time is intrinsically self-measuring, then any extended period of
time is divided (in and of itself) into an infinity of actual
sub-periods, and so no simple unit of time can be extended. If time is
not self-measuring, then a simple period of time (a period in which no
process begins or ends) cannot have temporal extension. Either way, an
infinitely extended simple past is impossible. (Koons 2014: 261)

6.5 The Big Bang Is Not an Event

One critical response to the kalām argument from the Big
Bang is that, given the Grand Theory of Relativity, the Big Bang is
not an event at all. An event takes place within a space-time context.
But the Big Bang has no space-time context; there is neither time
prior to the Big Bang nor a space in which the Big Bang occurs. Hence,
the Big Bang cannot be considered as a physical event occurring at a
moment of time. As Hawking notes, the finite universe has no
space-time boundaries and hence lacks singularity and a beginning
(Hawking 1988: 116, 136). Time might be multi-dimensional or
imaginary, in which case one asymptotically approaches a beginning
singularity but never reaches it. And without a beginning the universe
requires no cause. The best one can say is that the universe is finite
with respect to the past, not that it was an event with a beginning.
(Rundle 2004: chap. 8.)

Grünbaum defends this position by arguing that events can only
result from other events. 


Since the Big Bang singularity is technically a non-event, and t=0t=0t=0
is not a bona fide time of its occurrence, the singularity cannot be
the effect of any cause in the case of either event-causation or agent
causation alike…. The singularity t=0t=0t=0 cannot have a cause.
(Grünbaum 1994; Rundle 2004: 168, writes, “[T]here is no
event—the beginning of the universe—to be explained,
events being possible only in time”)


One response to Grünbaum’s objection is to opt for broader
notions of “event” and “cause”. We might
broaden the notion of “event” by removing the requirement
that it must be relational, taking place in a space-time context. In
the Big Bang the space-time universe commences and then continues to
exist in measurable time subsequent to the initiating singularity
(Silk 2001: 456). Thus, one might consider the Big Bang as either the
event of the commencing of the universe or else a state in which
“any two points in the observable universe were arbitrarily
close together” (Silk 2001: 63). As such, one might inquire why
there was this initial state of the universe in the finite past.
Likewise, one need not require that causation embody the Humean
condition of temporal priority, but may treat causation
counter-factually, or perhaps even, as traditionally, a relation of
production. Any causal statement about the universe would have to be
expressed atemporally, but for the theist this presents no problem
provided that God is conceived atemporally and sense can be made of
atemporal causation.

Furthermore, suppose Grünbaum is correct that the Big Bang
singularity is not an event. Then, by his reasoning that events only
arise from other events, subsequent so-called events cannot be the
effect of that singularity. If they were, they would not be events
either. This result that there are no events is absurd.

Given this understanding of space/time, we might reconceive the
kalām argument.

If something has a finite past, its existence has a
cause.
The universe has a finite past.
Therefore, the universe has a cause of its
existence.
Since space-time originated with the universe and
therefore similarly has a finite past, the cause of the
universe’s existence must transcend space-time (must have
existed aspatially and, when there was no universe, atemporally).
If the cause of the universe’s existence
transcends space-time, no scientific explanation (in terms of physical
laws) can provide a causal account of the origin of the universe.
If no scientific explanation can provide a causal
account of the origin of the universe, the cause must be personal
(explanation is given in terms of a personal agent).


Some critics see a problem with this reformulation of the
kalām argument in
 premise 11.
 Whereas behind
 premise 1
 of the original argument lies the ancient Parmenidean contention that
out of nothing nothing comes, it is alleged that no principle directly
connects finitude with causation. They contend that we have no reason
to think that just because something is finite it must have a cause of
its coming into existence. Theists respond that this objection has
merit only if the critic denies that the Principle of Causation is
true or that it applies to events like the Big Bang.

Grünbaum (1991) also argues that defenders of the
kalām argument cannot make sense of the claim that the
universe began to exist. 


The question of its beginning is not, “If the universe did have
a bounded past of finite duration, what was the cause of its initial
event t=0t=0t=0?” There simply did not exist any instants of
time before t=0t=0t=0! 


One simply cannot ask what happened before t=0t=0t=0; the question makes
no sense. And if we cannot ask that question, then we cannot inquire
whether the Big Bang was an effect, for nothing temporal preceded it.
Questions about creation occur in time in the universe, not outside of
it (Hawking 1987: 650–51).

Grünbaum’s contention is that to begin to exist requires a
previous time, and that there was no time prior to the Big Bang.


[T]here is no first instant of time at all, just as there is
no leftmost point on an infinite Euclidean line that extends in both
directions. Since here as elsewhere, the term ‘always’
refers to all actual past instants of time, the non-existence of time
before t=0t=0t=0 … allows that matter has always
existed, despite the finitude of the age of the universe in both sets
of models. (1991)


But then, as Craig observes, the series is finite, not infinite, even
though it includes all past instants of time. Beginning to exist does
not entail that one has a beginning point in time. Craig
defines “xxx begins to exist” as “xxx exists at
ttt and there is no time immediately prior to ttt at which xxx
exists” (1992: 238). 


Something has a beginning just in case that the time during which it
has existed is finite.… So understood, deleting the beginning
point of a thing’s existence does not imply that the thing no
longer begins to exist and therefore came into being uncaused. (Craig
and Sinclair 2009: 185).


Morriston (2000) suggests that this analysis of the universe’s
coming to be no longer adequately supports
 premise 1,
 for we have no reason to think that something could not just come
into existence. Any appeal to ex nihilo nihil fit is either
tautologous with the first premise or else appears mistakenly to treat
nihilo as if it were “a condition of something”.
In part, what Morriston rejects is the intuitiveness that Craig sees
in the truth of
 premise 1,
 where “beginning to exist” is understood as explicated as
above (see our discussion in
 6.1).
 It is not that 1 is false; it is just that it is unsupported and
hence loses its plausibility. It has the same plausibility (or
implausibility) as creation ex nihilo. Morriston thinks that
 premise 1
 fares equally poorly if Craig attempts to justify it empirically, for
we have many situations where the causes of events have not been
discovered, and even if we could find the causes in each individual
case, it provides no evidence that causation applies to the totality
of cases (the universe). (See our discussion of this argument in
 4.2
 and
 4.3
 above.) Indeed, he argues, the inductive generalization involved in
defending the causal principle stands at odds with similar inductive
generalizations that conflict with the kalām
argument—that something can be made without there being a prior
stuff or that causes can bear no temporal relation to their effects.
However, as Craig (2002) points out, although this may weaken the
argument were the objection sound, it is not fatal to it unless there
is good reason to think that
 premise 1
 actually is false.
6.6 A Non-finite Universe

Some have suggested that since we cannot “exclude the
possibility of a prior phase of existence” (Silk 2001: 63), it
is possible that the universe has cycled through oscillations, perhaps
infinitely, so that Big Bangs occurred not once but an infinite number
of times in the past and will do so in the future. The current
universe is a “reboot” of previous universes that have
expanded and then contracted (Musser 2004).

The idea of an oscillating universe faces significant problems. For
one, no set of physical laws accounts for a series of cyclical
universe-collapses and re-explosions. That the universe once exploded
into existence provides no evidence that the event could reoccur even
once, let alone an infinite number of times, should the universe
collapse. Second, even an oscillating universe seems to be finite
(Smith, in Craig and Smith 1993: 113). Further, the cycle of collapses
and expansions would not, as was pictured, be periodic (of even
duration). Rather, entropy would rise from cycle to cycle, so that
even were a series of universe-oscillations possible, they would
become progressively longer (Davies 1992: 52). If the universe were
without beginning, by now that cycle would be infinite in duration,
without any hope of contraction. Fourth, although each recollapse
would destroy the components of the universe, the radiation would
remain, so that each successive cycle would add to the total. 


The radiation ends up as blackbody radiation. Because we measure a
specific amount of cosmic blackbody radiation in the background
radiation, we infer that a closed (oscillating) universe can have
undergone only a finite number of repeated bounces 


or cycles, no more than 100 and certainly not the infinite number
required for a beginningless series. 


We reluctantly conclude that a future singularity is inevitable in a
closed universe; hypothetical observers cannot pass through it, and so
the universe probably cannot be cyclical. (Silk 2001: 380, 399)


The central thesis of the oscillating theory has been countered by
recent discoveries that the expansion of the universe is actually
speeding up. Observations of distant supernova show that they appear
to be fainter than they should be were the universe expanding at a
steady rate. 


Relative dimness of the supernovae showed that they were 10% to 15%
farther out than expected,… indicating that the expansion has
accelerated over billions of years. (Glanz 1998: 2157) 


The hypothesis that these variations in intensity are caused by light
being absorbed when passing through cosmic dust is no longer
considered a viable explanation because the most distant supernova yet
discovered is brighter than it should be if dust were the responsible
factor (Sincell 2001). Some force in the universe not only counteracts
gravity but pushes the galaxies in the universe apart ever faster.
This increased speed appears to be due to dark energy, a mysterious
type of energy, characterized by a negative pressure, composing as
much as 70% of the universe. Dark matter, it seems, is overmatched by
dark
 energy.[3]

6.7 Personal Explanation

Finally, something needs to be said about
 statement 4,
 which asserts that the cause of the universe is personal. Defenders
of the cosmological argument suggest two possible kinds of
 explanation.[4]
Natural explanation is provided in terms of precedent
events, causal laws, or necessary conditions that invoke natural
existents. Personal explanation is given “in terms of
the intentional action of a rational agent” (Swinburne 2004: 21;
also Gale and Pruss 1999). We have seen that one cannot provide a
natural causal explanation for the initial event, for there are no
precedent natural events or natural existents to which the laws of
physics apply. The line of scientific explanation runs out at the
initial singularity, and perhaps even before we arrive at the initial
singularity (at 10−3510−3510^{-35} seconds). If no scientific explanation
(in terms of physical laws) can provide a causal account of the origin
of the universe, the explanation must be personal, that is, in terms
of the intentional action of an intelligent, supernatural agent.

Morriston (2000) questions whether Craig’s argument for the
cause being personal goes through. Craig argues that if the cause were
an eternal, nonpersonal, mechanically operating set of conditions,
then the universe would exist from eternity. Since the universe has
not existed from eternity, the cause must be a personal agent who
chooses freely to create an effect in time. But, notes Morriston, if
the personal cause intended to create the world, and if the intention
alone to create is sufficient to bring about the effect, then there is
no reason to postulate a personal cause of the universe. Craig (2002)
replies that it is not intention alone that must be considered, but
the personal agent also employs its personal causal power to bring
about the world.

Morriston responds that Craig has equivocated on two notions of
eternity: eternity as timelessness and eternity as beginninglessness
and endlessness of temporal duration. But the issue seems not to be
one of eternity at all, but as in 11–16 above, with finitude. In
one sense the universe is eternal: if time came into being with the
universe, the universe has existed at every time. But since time came
into existence with the universe, both time and the universe are
finite in terms of the past and thus need a cause.

Paul Davies argues that one need not appeal to God to account for the
Big Bang. Its cause, he suggests, is found within the cosmic system
itself. Originally a vacuum lacking space-time dimensions, the
universe “found itself in an excited vacuum state”, a
“ferment of quantum activity, teeming with virtual particles and
full of complex interactions” (Davies 1984: 191–2), which,
subject to a cosmic repulsive force, resulted in an immense increase
in energy. Subsequent explosions from this collapsing vacuum released
the energy in this vacuum, reinvigorating the cosmic inflation and
setting the scenario for the subsequent expansion of the universe. But
what is the origin of this increase in energy that eventually made the
Big Bang possible? Davies’s response is that the law of
conservation of energy (that the total quantity of energy in the
universe remains fixed despite transfer from one form to another),
which now applies to our universe, did not apply to the initial
expansion. Cosmic repulsion in the vacuum caused the energy to
increase from zero to an enormous amount. This great explosion
released energy, from which all matter emerged. Consequently, he
contends, since the conclusion of the kalām argument is
false, one of the premises of the argument—in all likelihood the
first—is false.

Craig responds that if the vacuum has energy, the question arises
concerning the origin of the vacuum and its energy. Merely pushing the
question of the beginning of the universe back to some primordial
quantum vacuum does not escape the question of what brought this
vacuum laden with energy into existence. A quantum vacuum is not
nothing (as in Newtonian physics) but 


a sea of continually forming and dissolving particles that borrow
energy from the vacuum for their brief existence. A vacuum is thus far
from nothing, and vacuum fluctuations do not constitute an exception
to the principle 


enunciated in
 premise 1
 (Craig, in Craig and Smith 1993: 143–4). Hence, he concludes,
the appeal to a vacuum as the initial state is misleading.

One might wonder, as Rundle (2004: 75–77) does, how a
supernatural agent could bring about the universe. He contends that a
personal agent (God) cannot be the cause because intentional agency
needs a body and actions occur within space-time. But acceptance of
the cosmological argument does not depend on an explanation of the
manner of causation by a necessary being. When we explain that the
girl raised her hand because she wanted to ask a question, we can
accept that she was the cause of the raised hand without understanding
how her wanting to ask a question brought about her raising her hand.
As Swinburne notes, an event is “fully explained when we have
cited the agent, his intention that the event occur, and his basic
powers” that include the ability to bring about events of that
sort (2004: 36). Similarly, theists argue, we may never know why and
how creation took place. Nevertheless, we may accept it as an
explanation in the sense that we can say that God created that initial
event, that he had the intention to do so, and that such an event lies
within the power of an omniscient and omnipotent being; not having a
body is irrelevant.

The issues raised by the kalām argument concern not only
the nature of explanation and when an explanation is necessary, but
even whether an explanation of the universe is possible (given the
above discussion). Whereas all agree that it makes no sense to ask
about what occurs before the Big Bang (since there was no prior time)
or about something coming out of nothing, the dispute rests on whether
there needs to be a cause of the first natural existent, whether
something like the universe can be finite and yet not have a
beginning, and the nature of infinities and their connection with
reality.
7. An Inductive Cosmological Argument

Richard Swinburne contends that the cosmological argument is not
deductively valid; if it were, 


it would be incoherent to assert that a complex physical universe
exists and that God does not exist. There would be a hidden
contradiction buried in such co-assertions…. [A]ttempts to
derive obviously incoherent propositions from such co-assertions have
failed through commission of some elementary logical error. (2004:
136) 


Swinburne is correct that if someone believes that a deductive
cosmological argument (proof) for God’s existence is sound, then
it would be incoherent for that same person to then deny that God
exists. But in their respective proofs defenders of the deductive
cosmological arguments make a claim about incoherence, namely, that it
would be contradictory for the same person to affirm the premises of
the argument and to claim that God or a personal necessary being does
not exist. And for them, the respective premises not only have the
intuitiveness or argumentative support that Swinburne deems necessary,
but believe that the argument has not committed some “elementary
error of logic”. 

Has Swinburne shown incoherence? Whereas propositions are true and
deductive arguments are valid independent of anyone’s beliefs
that they are true and valid (the proposition that the earth orbits
the sun is true regardless of whether anyone believes it), the
acceptance of premises as true, of deductive arguments as valid, and
of an argument’s use as a proof is not independent of those same
beliefs. An argument that one person takes as being sound another
might believe not to be sound, in that the person rejects one of the
premises or holds that the conclusion fails to properly follow;
arguments are person-relative in their persuasive value or assessment
of coherence. Swinburne himself notes that arguments of coherence and
incoherence are persuasive only to the extent that someone accepts
other statements inherent to the proof as coherent or incoherent and
that one statement entails another (1993: 39). Elsewhere Swinburne
admits to having 


some doubt about whether men have enough initial consensus about what
is coherent and what entails what, are clever enough and have enough
imagination to reach agreed proofs which would settle all disputes
about whether a statement is coherent or incoherent. (1993: 45) 


As such, Swinburne cannot so easily dismiss deductive cosmological
arguments, although he is justified in wondering whether
“reasons less strong than compelling proofs can be given for
thinking some statements coherent and others incoherent” (1993:
45).

In place of a deductive argument, Swinburne develops an inductive
cosmological argument that appeals to the inference to the best
explanation. Swinburne distinguishes between two varieties of
inductive arguments: those that show that the conclusion is more
probable than not (what he terms a correct P-inductive argument) and
those that further increase the probability of the conclusion (what he
terms a correct C-inductive argument). In The Existence of
God (1979) he presents a cosmological argument that he claims
falls in the category of C-inductive arguments. However, for him this
argument is part of a larger, cumulative case for a P-inductive
argument for God’s existence that includes as its evidence the
orderliness of the universe, the existence of consciousness, miracle
reports, and religious experience.

Swinburne notes that “a cosmological argument argues that the
fact that there is a universe needs explaining” (2004:
9–10). But he emphasizes that his approach differs from those we
have already considered in that he rejects the Principle of Sufficient
Reason understood as “everything not ‘metaphysically
necessary’ has an explanation in something ‘metaphysically
necessary’” (2004: 148), for the PSR leads, as it does in
Leibniz, to a being that is logically necessary, and such a being
cannot explain the logically contingent. From the logically necessary
only the logically necessary follows. In place of using the PSR to
construct a deductive argument, he employs a “basic theorem of
confirmation theory”, Bayes Theorem, to construct an inductive
argument (2004: 67). (In making this claim about the need for
an explanation of the universe, however, it is hard not to see that he
invokes some formulation of the PSR.)

Swinburne begins his discussion with the existence of a physical
universe that (a) contains odd events that cannot be fitted into the
established pattern of scientific explanation (e.g., miracles, the
appearance of conscious beings), (b) is too big in that science cannot
explain why there are states of affairs at all or why the fundamental
natural laws to which science appeals to explain things hold, and (c)
is complex (its matter-energy has relevant powers) (2004: 74,
150). 

It is not logically necessary that the existence of the universe needs
explanation; we could accept this universe as a brute, inexplicable
fact, but Swinburne thinks that to do so fails to accord with the
example of the sciences, which seek the best explanation for any given
phenomena. Since “it is reasonable to suppose” that there
is an explanation (2004: 75), the issue, then, is which view is more
reasonable: that science can provide a natural explanation for the
existence of this universe, or whether the universe and its phenomena
exist because of the intentional causal activity of a personal being
that also is a brute fact.

To find the explanatory hypothesis most likely to be true, especially
about something that might be unobservable, he claims to follow the
example of science. Using Bayes Theorem, he looks for a hypothesis
hhh such that p(e∣h&k)>p(e∣k)p(e∣h&k)>p(e∣k)p(e\mid h \mathbin{\&amp;} k) \gt p(e\mid k) where
ppp is probability, eee is the existence of a complex universe,
and kkk is the background data. A hypothesis is more likely to be
true (1) in so far as it has high explanatory power, in that it makes
probable the evidence of the observation; this may be predictive but
can be postdictive as well (Swinburne 1996: 34, 2001: 80–81),
and insofar as the evidence is very unlikely to occur if the
hypothesis is false. And (2), it has a greater prior probability. The
prior probability of a hypothesis encompasses three features: (a) how
well it fits with our background knowledge (2001: 81). The broader the
scope, the less relevant this criterion becomes (2004: 60). Since
there are no “neighboring fields of inquiry related to the
origin of the universe”, Swinburne treats this condition in the
cosmological argument as irrelevant or reducing to the feature of
simplicity (1996: 29). (b) The scope of the hypothesis (the extent of
its claims)—the broader the scope, the less likely it is to be
true. For example, all crows are black is less likely to be true than
all crows along the upper Mississippi River are black. Since both
scientific naturalism and theism have the same scope—explaining
the universe, this does not factor into his calculations for
explaining the complex universe (2001: 82); and (c) simplicity, which
for Swinburne holds the key (2001: 82–83).

He holds that we are looking for a complete explanation, where 


we may reasonably conclude that the criteria for supposing that
factors have no further explanation (scientific or personal) in terms
of factors acting at the time and so that any explanation is a
complete explanation overall (not just a complete explanation within
scientific or within personal explanation) are that any attempt to go
beyond the factors that we have would result in no gain of explanatory
power or prior probability. (2004: 89) 


A scientific explanation fails to give a complete explanation. It
leaves us not with a simple but with a very complex explanatory
hypothesis, in that “ultimate explanation stops at innumerable,
different stopping points, many of them … having exactly the
same powers and liabilities as each other” (1996: 42). It
presents us with the brute fact of the existence of the universe, not
an explanation for it. It explains in terms of a full cause the events
at any moment, but it cannot provide a complete explanation of the
universe, “for there are no physical causes apart from the
universe itself and parts thereof” (1984: 144).

On the other hand, a personal explanation, given in terms of the
intentional actions of a person, is simpler and no explanatory power
is lost. Further, a personal explanation can be understood, as in the
case of explaining basic actions, without knowing or understanding any
of the natural causal conditions that enable one to bring it about. In
the case of the cosmological argument, personal explanation is couched
in terms of a being that has beliefs, purposes, and intentions, and
possesses both the power to bring about the complex universe and a
possible reason for doing so.

Swinburne argues that a personal explanation of the universe satisfies
the above probability criteria. It satisfies condition (1) in that
appealing to God as an intentional agent has explanatory power. It
leads us to have certain expectations about the universe: that it
manifests order, is comprehensible, and favors the existence of beings
that can comprehend it. It makes probable the existence of the complex
universe because God could have reasons for causing such a universe,
whereas we would have no reasons at all if all we had was the brute
fact of the material universe. Among these reasons is that the
universe would be “a theatre for finite agents to develop and
make of it what they will” (Swinburne 1979: 131).

Michael Martin objects at this point. Martin contends that if
Swinburne is to compare the a priori probability of there
being a complex universe given our background knowledge with the a
priori probability of a complex universe given our background
knowledge and the existence of God, he has to be clear on how he
interprets the probability. Martin notes that herein lies crucial
ambiguity that disables calculating the a priori probability.
If one compares the very many possible complex universes with there
being no universe, on the basis of assigning equal
probability to all possibilities the probability of there being a
complex universe is nearly 1. But if one compares the probability of
there being a complex universe with there being no universe at all, it
is 50 percent (Martin 1986: 155). Furthermore, Martin wonders whether
complexity is an issue at all. According to Swinburne, as free God can
create any kind of world or no world at all. But then the existence of
God is compatible with any number of scenarios: the existence of no
world, a simpler world than we have, one like ours, or any number of
more complex universes. Consequently, the complexity of this
world does not matter in constructing an inductive argument for
God’s existence (1986: 155). Put another way, adding the
existence of God to our background knowledge does not increase the
likelihood of there being a complex universe, let alone of there being
this particular universe or a universe at all (1986: 158). 

In short, Martin does not see how Swinburne can establish an a
priori probability for the existence of a complex universe, to be
compared with an a priori probability for the existence of
God based on simplicity, a feature of Swinburne’s Bayesian
argument. This introduces the theme of simplicity, to which Swinburne
devotes much attention.

Swinburne goes on to argue that a personal explanation in terms of God
satisfies condition (2) because of its simplicity. If one is going to
construct an explanatory hypothesis using the criterion of simplicity,
God rather than science is more likely to be the focus of the true
explanatory hypothesis. God is one and of one kind; polytheism is
ruled out. Moreover, God is the simplest kind of person there can be
because a person is a being with power (to do intentional actions),
knowledge, and freedom (to choose, uncaused, which actions to do), and
in God these properties are infinite, and having infinite properties
is simpler than having properties with limits, as humans do. “It
is always simpler to postulate infinite or zero degrees of some
property than a certain precise finite value of it” (Swinburne
1983: 385). Furthermore, God engages in simple causation, that is,
causation by simple intention. Swinburne concludes that although the
prior likelihood of neither God nor the universe is particularly high,
the prior probability of a simple God exceeds that of a complex
universe. Hence, if anything is to occur unexplained, it would be God,
not the universe.

Consequently, if we are to explain the universe, we must appeal to a
personal explanation 


in terms of a person who is not part of the universe acting from
without. This can be done if we suppose that such a person (God)
brings it about at each instant of time, that (the laws of nature)
LLL operate. (Swinburne 1979: 126, 2004: 142) 


Although for Swinburne this argument does not make the existence of
God more probable than not (it is not a P-inductive argument), it does
increase the probability of God’s existence (is a C-inductive
argument) because it provides a more reasonable explanation for the
universe than merely attributing it to the brute fact of the
universe's existence. 


Theism does not make [certain phenomena] very probable; but nothing
else makes their occurrence in the least probable, and they cry out
for an explanation. A priori, theism is perhaps very
unlikely, but it is far more likely than any rival supposition. Hence,
our phenomena are substantial evidence for the truth of theism.
(Swinburne 1979: 290)


In his critique of Swinburne, J. L. Mackie wonders whether personal
explanations are reducible to natural, scientific explanations. To
implement intentionality requires an entire system of neurological and
macro-biological conditions. Not only does God as nonphysical lack
these biological conditions, but these conditions are exceedingly
complex, not simple. “Only by ignoring such key features [the
role of the body] do we get an analogue of supposed divine
action” (Mackie 1982: 100). When we incorporate these features,
the simplicity disappears.

Swinburne replies that Mackie has misunderstood his argument.
“The simplicity of the relation between intention and its
realization has nothing to do with how our will or intentions are
realized in practice” (Swinburne 1983: 386). Even if we
understand all the neural connections and firings, we may not achieve
any better explanation of why persons intended to act as they did than
simply asking them why they acted as they did. This indicates that the
existence of intermediate physical causal links is not an essential
part of personal explanation. In fact, Swinburne argues, since it is
easier to understand the function of intention without invoking any
physical causal limitations, it makes it easier to understand the case
of God who as nonphysical has no need for intermediary physical
processes. Thus, he claims, Mackie missed the point about God when he
invokes the complexity of physical accounts. The point is that God can
will to act on his intentions directly, and this provides a simple
account or explanation of why things came to exist.

The critical aspect of Swinburne’s argument is his almost total
reliance in his inductive cosmological argument on simplicity as the
deciding factor between competing hypotheses regarding the cause of
the existence of the universe (2004: 333–34; 2010, 9;
Ostrawick). Swinburne has at least six understandings that one
hypothesis is simpler than another. (1) It invokes the fewest number
of entities (2004: 106, 1983: 386, 2001: 87; 2010, 5). This is a
quantitative understanding. (2) It invokes the fewest kinds of
entities—a qualitative understanding (1983: 386, 2001: 87). (3)
It invokes entities with simple or few properties (1983: 386)
Swinburne invokes a subcriterion that explanations are simpler when
the properties they invoke are observable (2010, 6). (4) It invokes
powers, acquisition of beliefs, and consistency of intentions similar
to ours when applied to personal explanation of rational behavior
(2004: 61–64). (5) The explanation invokes the simplest
organization of the features functioning in the explicans, e.g., laws
or variables (2001: 83, 89–90). (6) Simplicity can be found in
the explicans in that it does not invoke extraneous features that are
not necessary to explain the effect (2001: 81).

Swinburne holds that the appeal to God as an explanation is simpler in
all of these
 ways.[5]
 Not only is there one entity and that entity is simple, the
explanation effectively has no organization of the features. The
explanation itself is simple. The appeal to God’s causal
activity satisfies interpretation 6 in that it involves no extraneous
entities to do the explaining and requires no intermediaries. God can
bring about the effect by himself alone.

Several important questions about simplicity arise. First, is
simplicity the criterion we should use to decide between hypotheses?
For one thing, simplicity is not always a reliable criterion for
determining which hypothesis is true or which hypothesis provides the
best explanatory account. The rise of quantum explanations suggests
that the simplest account of the universe, for example, that of
Newton, is not a complete and fully adequate account. The events in
the subatomic realm are far from simply explained. For another,
although an explanation in terms of four factors might make an
explanation simpler, the reverse might hold: an explanation in terms
of ten factors might be simpler than an explanation in terms of four
because the relationships that hold between the ten facts are less
complex than those that hold between the four, making for a simpler
explanation (Ostrowick 2012). In reply, Swinburne might grant this,
but argue that in these much more limited cases explanatory power,
background knowledge, and scope now come into significant play in a
way that they don’t when addressing hypotheses explaining the
oddness, bigness, and complexity of the universe.

Second, why think that theism is simpler than naturalism? Oppy argues
that whereas both naturalism and theism equally fit the data and have
the same scope, naturalism is simpler, for theism is 


committed to two kinds of entities (the natural and the supernatural),
two kinds of external relations (the natural and the supernatural),
two kinds of causation (the natural and the supernatural), two kinds
of non-topic-neutral properties (the natural and the supernatural),
and so on, whereas naturalism is committed to only one kind in each of
these categories. (2013: 52) 


Swinburne’s reply is that naturalism might provide a full
explanation for individual things, but it cannot do so for the
universe itself, for the reasons noted above.

In conclusion, Swinburne contends that it is very unlikely
that a universe would exist uncaused, but more likely that
God would exist uncaused. It is likely that if there is a
God, he will make something like the finite and complex universe. The
puzzling existence of the universe can be made comprehensible
(explicable) if we suppose it is brought about by a personal God with
intentional beliefs and the power to bring intentions to fruition
(2004: 152). Whether simplicity can bear the weight of his argument is
the key matter in question.
8. Necessary Being

Finally, even if the cosmological argument is sound or cogent, the
difficult task remains to show, as part of natural theology, that the
necessary being to which the cosmological argument concludes is the
God of religion, and if so, of which religion. Rowe suggests that the
cosmological argument has two parts, one to establish the existence of
a first cause or necessary being, the other that this necessary being
is God (1975: 6). It is unclear, however, whether the second
contention is an essential part of the cosmological argument. Although
Aquinas was quick to make the identification between God and the first
mover or first cause, such identification seems to go beyond the
causal reasoning that informs the argument (although one can argue
that it is consistent with the larger picture of God and his
properties that Aquinas paints in his Summae). Some
(Rasmussen, O’Connor, Koons) have plowed ahead in developing
this stage 2 process by showing how and what
properties—simplicity, unity, omnipotence, omniscience,
goodness, and so on—might follow from the concept of a necessary
being. It “has implications that bring it into the neighborhood
of God as traditionally conceived” (O’Connor 2008: 67).
Others have proposed a method of correlation, where to give any
religious substance to the concept of a necessary being, one conducts
a lengthy discussion of the supreme beings found in the diverse
religions and carefully correlates the properties of a necessary being
with those of a religious being. This is done to discern
compatibilities and incompatibilities (Attfield 1975).

Regardless of the connection of a necessary being with religion, it is
necessary to flesh out the nature of the necessary being if one is to
hold that the cosmological argument is informative. As O’Connor
notes, the mere concept of a necessary being is “quite
thin”. Along with classical Islamic defenders of the argument
(e.g., al-Baghdadi, c. 1000); O’Connor (2008: 88) concludes that
there is a necessary connection between a personal necessary being and
its nature. He suggests that there is not a contingent but a
“subtle entailment relation” between certain essential
properties like being perfectly powerful, perfectly free, and
perfectly knowledgeable. For example, the 


extent of power seems to be a function of at least two variables: the
amount of work that can be performed in a single task and the range of
tasks one is able to perform in a given circumstance.… Perfect
power and freedom would require an essentially unlimited knowledge,
corresponding to the unlimited range of possibilities. (2008: 89) 


A necessary being must also be causally independent for its existence
and thus transcendent (2008: 92). Similarly, Swinburne ties
God’s perfection to his simplicity that, as we have seen,
functions centrally in his argument.

Two notions of necessity are found in the conclusion to the deductive
argument: “Necessarily, a necessary being exists”. The
first is conditional necessity: the proposition is necessary given
that the premises are true and the argument valid. The other use
concerns what is meant by “necessary being”.
O’Connor writes that God is absolutely necessary, by which he
means that God is “absolutely invulnerable to
nonexistence” (2008: 70). 


The concept of a necessary being is of one that could not have failed
to exist, absolutely speaking. For such a being to be possible, it
must be such that it would exist in every possible circumstance,
including the actual one. That’s precisely why the question of
its existence cannot arise, thereby ending the regress of explanation
nonarbitrarily. (O’Connor 2013: 42) 


For him necessary existence is necessarily tied up with a particular
nature (otherwise the existence would be contingent) but not
derivative from it; God’s existence entails his nature (2008:
88). God’s necessity is not logical (for there is no
contradiction in denying that such a being exists) but made possible
on explanatory grounds (the cosmological argument). But, we might
inquire, if God could not have failed to exist, how does an absolutely
necessary being differ from a logically necessary being?
O’Connor goes on to argue that God’s absolute necessity
does not invoke the ontological argument. He agrees that by S5, if it
is possible that a necessary being exists, it necessarily exists
(2008: 71), but denies that this invokes the ontological argument,
since it “gives no reason to think that the nature in question
is genuinely possible, and not merely logically consistent”.
But, one might wonder, what would one have to establish to show that
it is genuinely possible that a necessary being exists? (see
Plantinga, God, Freedom, and Evil, 1967: 112). Gale himself
admits that, given this view of necessity and S5, the ontological
argument works although we don’t know how to properly construct
it (Gale and Pruss 1999: 462).

One way to understand the necessary being is as factually or
metaphysically necessary. In this understanding, the necessary being
is “sheer, ultimate, unconditioned reality, without beginning or
end” (Hick 1960: 730). God’s necessity refers to his
aseity, in that God does not depend on anything else for his
existence. It is from God’s aseity that his eternity
follows.


God is not one fact amongst others, but is related asymmetrically to
all other facts as that which determines them. This is the ultimate
given circumstance, which it is not possible to go with either
question or explanation. For to explain something means either to
assign a cause to it or to show its place within some wider context in
relation to which it is no longer puzzling to us. But the idea of the
self-existent Creator of everything other than himself is the idea of
a reality which is beyond the scope of these explanatory procedures.
(Hick 1960: 733–34)


Given this reading of “necessary being”, God as the
necessary being possesses metaphysical necessity and logical
contingency (Hick 1960; Swinburne 2004: 79). If the necessary being
exists at any time, then necessarily it exists at all times. If the
necessary being does not exist, it cannot come into existence. Nothing
can bring it into existence or cause it to cease to exist. Thus, if
God exists now, it is not coherent to suppose that any agent can make
it false that God exists (Swinburne 2004: 249, 266). O’Connor
objects that if the necessary being is contingent, it just happens to
exist (2008: 70; see White for further objections). But one might
reply that God does not just happen to exist; God exists because of
his nature (although his nature does not precede his existence).

Much more can be said about necessity and the other properties
associated with a necessary being. While defenders of the cosmological
argument point to the relevance and importance of connecting the
necessary being with natural theology, critics find themselves freed
from such endeavors.