The Neapolitan Benedetto Croce (1860–1952) was a dominant figure
in the first half of the twentieth century in aesthetics and literary
criticism, as well as philosophy generally.  But his fame did not
last, either in Italy or in the English speaking world. He did not
lack promulgators and willing translators into English: H. Carr was an
early example of the former, R. G. Collingwood was both, and
D. Ainslie did the latter service for most of Croce’s principal
works.  But his star rapidly declined after the Second World
War. Indeed it is hard to find a figure whose reputation has fallen so
far and so quickly; this is somewhat unfair not least because
Collingwood’s aesthetics is still studied, when its main ideas
are mostly borrowed from Croce. The causes are a matter for
speculation, but two are likely. First, Croce’s general
philosophy was very much of the preceding century. As the idealistic
and historicist systems of Bradley, Green, and Joachim were in Britain
superseded by Russell and Ayer and analytical philosophy,
Croce’s system was swept away by new ideas on the
continent—from Heidegger on the one hand to deconstructionism on
the other. Second, Croce’s manner of presentation in his famous
early works now seems, not to put too fine a point on it, dismissively
dogmatic; it is full of the youthful conviction and fury that seldom
wears well. On certain key points, opposing positions are
characterized as foolish, or as confused expressions of simple truths
that only waited upon Croce to articulate properly. Of course, these
dismissals carry some weight—Croce’s reading is prodigious
and there is far more insight beneath the words than initially meets
the eye—but unless the reader were already convinced that here
at last is the truth, their sheer number and vehemence will arouse
mistrust. And since the early works, along with his long running
editorship of the journal La Critica, rocketed him to such
fame and admiration, whereas later years were devoted among other
things to battling with while being tolerated by fascists, it’s
not surprising that he never quite lost this habit.


Nevertheless, Croce’s signal contribution to
aesthetics—that art is expression—can be more or less be
detached from the surrounding philosophy and polemics. In what
follows, we will first see the doctrine as connected to its original
philosophical context, then we will attempt to snip the
connections.
 
1. The Four Domains of Spirit (or Mind)


We are confining ourselves to Croce’s aesthetics, but it will
help to have at least the most rudimentary sketch in view of his rather
complex general philosophy.


In Italy at the beginning of the twentieth century, the prevailing
philosophy or ‘world-view’ was not, as in England,
post-Hegelian Idealism as already mentioned, but the early forms of
empiricist positivism associated with such figures as Comte and
Mach. Partly out of distaste for the mechanism and enshrinement of
matter of such views, and partly out of his reaction, both positive
and negative, to the philosophy of Hegel, Croce espoused what he
called ‘Absolute Idealism’ or ‘Absolute
Historicism’. A constant theme in Croce’s philosophy is that he
sought a path between the Scylla of ‘transcendentalism’
and the Charybdis of ‘sensationalism’, which for most
purposes may be thought of as co-extensive with rationalism and
empiricism. For Croce, they are bottom the same error, the error of
abstracting from ordinary experience to something not literally
experienceable. Transcendentalism regards the world of sense to be
unreal, confused or second-rate, and it is the philosopher, reflecting
on the world in a priori way from his armchair, who sees
beyond it, to reality.  What Croce called ‘Sensationalism’, on the
other hand, regards only instantaneous impressions of colour and the
like as existing, the rest being in some sense a mere logical
construction out of it, of no independent reality. The right path is
what Croce calls immanentism: All but only lived human
experience, taking place concretely and without reduction, is
real. Therefore all Philosophy, properly so-called, is Philosophy of
Spirit (or Mind), and is inseparable from history.  And thus Croce’s
favoured designations, ‘Absolute Idealism’ or
‘Absolute Historicism’.


Philosophy admits of the following divisions, corresponding to the
different modes of mental or spiritual activity. Mental activity is
either theoretic (it understands or contemplates) or it is practical
(it wills actions). These in turn divide: The theoretic divides into
the aesthetic, which deals in particulars (individuals or intuitions),
and logic or the intellectual domain, which deals in concepts and
relations, or universals. The practical divides into the
economic—by which Croce means all manner of utilitarian
calculation—and the ethical or moral. Each of the four domains
are subject to a characteristic norm or value: aesthetic is subject to
beauty, logic is subject to truth, economic is subject to the useful
(or vitality), and the moral is subject to the good. Croce devoted
three lengthy books written between 1901 and 1909 to this overall
scheme of the ‘Philosophy of Spirit’:
Aesthetic (1901) and (1907) (revised), Logic (1909)
and the Philosophy of the Practical (1908), the latter
containing both the economic and ethics (in today’s use of term
you might call the overall scheme Croce’s metaphysics,
but Croce himself distanced himself from that appellation).
2. The Primacy of the Aesthetic


Philosophers since Kant customarily distinguish intuitions or
representations from concepts or universals. In one sense Croce
follows this tradition, but another sense his view departs
radically. For intuitions are not blind without concepts; an
intuitive presentation is a complete conscious manifestation just as
it is, in advance of applying concepts (and all that is true a
priori of them is that they have a particular character or
individual physiognomy—they are not necessarily spatial or
temporal, contra Kant). To account for this, Croce supposes
that the modes of mental activity are in turn arranged at different
levels. The intellect presupposes the intuitive mode—which just
is the aesthetic—but the intuitive mode does not presuppose the
intellect. The intellect—issuing in particular
judgements—in turn is presupposed by the practical, which issues
among other things in empirical laws. And morality tells the practical
sciences what ends in particular they should pursue. Thus Croce
regarded this as one of his key insights: All mental activity, which
means the whole of reality, is founded on the aesthetic, which has no
end or purpose of its own, and of course no concepts or
judgements. This includes the concept of existence or reality: the
intuition plus the judgement of existence is what Croce calls
perception, but itself is innocent of it.


To say the world is essentially history is to say that at the lowest
level it is aesthetic experiences woven into a single fabric, a
world-narrative, with the added judgement that it is real, that it
exists. Croce takes this to be inevitable: the subjective present
is real and has duration; but any attempt to determine its exact size
is surely arbitrary. Therefore the only rigorous view is that the
past is no less real than the present. History then represents,
by definition, the only all-encompassing account of reality. What we
call the natural sciences then are impure, second-rate. Consider
for example the concept of a space-time point. Plainly
it is not something anyone has ever met with in experience; it is an
abstraction, postulated as a limit of certain operations for the
convenience of a ‘theory’. Croce would call it a
pseudo-concept, and would not call the so-called ‘empirical
laws’ in which it figures to be fit subjects for truth and
knowledge. Its significance, like that of other pseudo-concepts,
is pragmatic.


In fact the vast majority of concepts—house, reptile,
tree—are mere adventitious collections of things that are
formulated in response to practical needs, and thus cannot, however
exact the results of the corresponding science, attain to truth or
knowledge. Nor do the concepts of mathematics escape the
‘pseudo’ tag. What Croce calls pure concepts, in
contrast, are characterised by their possession of expressiveness,
universality and concreteness, and they perform their office by a
priori synthesis (this accounts for character mentioned
above). What this means it that everything we can perceive or
imagine—every representation or intuition—will necessarily
have all three: there is no possible experience that is not of
something concrete, universal in the sense of being an instance of
something absolutely general, and expressive, that is, admitting of
verbal enunciation. Empirical concepts, then, like
heat, are concrete but not universal; mathematical concepts,
like number, are universal but not concrete. Examples of
pure concepts are rare, but those recognized by Croce are finality,
quality and beauty. Such is the domain of Logic, in
Croce’s scheme.


A critical difference, for our purposes, between Croce’s ideas
and those of his follower Collingwood, emerges when we ask: what are
the constituents of the intuition? For
Collingwood—writing in the mid-1930s—intuitions are
built up out of sense-data, the only significant elaboration of
Russell’s doctrine being that sense-data are never simple,
comprising what analysis reveals as sensory and affective
constituents. For Croce the intuition is an organic whole, such
that to analyze it into atoms is always a false abstraction: the
intuition could never be re-built with such elements. (Although a
deadly opponent of formal logic, Croce did share Frege’s insight
that the truly meaningful bit of language is the sentence; ‘only
in the context of sentence does a word have a meaning’, wrote
Frege in 1884).
3. Art and Aesthetics


With such an account of ‘the aesthetic’ in view, one
might think that Croce intends to cover roughly the same ground as
Kant’s Transcendental Aesthetic, and like Kant will think of art
as a comparatively narrow if profound region of experience.
But Croce takes the opposite line (and finds Kant’s theory of beauty and
art to have failed at precisely this point): art is everywhere, and the
difference between ordinary intuition and that of ‘works of
art’ is only a quantitative difference
(Aes.13). This principle has for Croce a profound
significance:


We must hold firmly to our identification, because among the
principal reasons which have prevented Aesthetic, the science of art,
from revealing the true nature of art, its real roots in human nature,
has been its separation from the general spiritual life, the having
made of it a sort of special function or aristocratic club….
There is not … a special chemical theory of stones as distinct
from mountains. In the same way, there is not a science of lesser
intuition as distinct from a science of greater intuition, nor one of
ordinary intuition as distinct from artistic intuition. (Aes.
14)


But the point is not that every object is to some degree a work of
art. The point is that every intuition has to some
degree the qualities of the intuition of a work of art; it’s just
that the intuition of a work of art has them in much greater
degree.
4. Intuition and Expression


We now reach the most famous and notorious Crocean doctrine
concerning art. ‘To intuite’, he writes, ‘is to
express’ (Aes. 11); ‘intuitive knowledge is
expressive knowledge’. There are several points that have
to be in place in order to understand what Croce means by this, because
it obviously does not strike one as initially plausible.
4.1 The Double Ideality of the Work of Art


For our purposes, it is simplest to regard Croce as an idealist, for
whom there is nothing besides the mind. So in that sense, the work of
art is an ideal or mental object along with everything else; no
surprise there, but no interest either. But he still maintains the
ordinary commonplace distinction between mental things—thoughts,
hopes and dreams—and physical things—tables and trees. And
on this divide, the work of art, for Croce, is still
a mental thing. In other words, the work of art in doubly
ideal; to put it another way,
even if Croce were a dualist—or a physicalist with some
means of reconstructing the physical-mental distinction—the work
of art would remain mental. In what follows, then, except where
otherwise noted, we shall treat Croce is being agnostic as between
idealism, physicalism, or dualism (see PPH 227).


This claim about the ontological status of works of art means that a
spectator ‘of’ a work of art—a sonata, a poem, a
painting—is actually creating the work of art in his mind.
Croce’s main argument for this is the same as, therefore no
better but no worse than, Russell’s argument from the relativity
of perception to sense-data. The perceived aesthetic qualities of
anything vary with the states of the perceiver; therefore in speaking
of the former we are really speaking of the latter (Aes. 106;
Croce does not, it seems, consider the possibility that certain states
of the perceiver might be privileged, but it is evident that he would
discount this possibility).
4.2 The Role of Feeling


Feeling, for Croce, is necessarily part of any (mental)
activity, including bare perception—indeed, feeling is a
form of mental activity (it is part of his philosophy that there
is never literally present to consciousness anything passive). We
are accustomed to thinking of ‘artistic expression’ as
concerned with specific emotions that are relatively rare in the mental
life, but again, Croce points out that strictly speaking, we are
thinking of a quantitative distinction as qualitative. In fact
feeling is nothing but the will in mental activity, with all its
varieties of thought, desire and action, its varieties of frustration
and satisfaction (Aes. 74–6). The only criterion of
‘art’ is coherence of expression, that is, of the movement
of the will.


Because of this, Croce discounts certain aesthetic applications of
the distinction between form and content as confused. The
distinction only applies at a theoretical level, to a posited a
priori synthesis (EA 39–40). At that level, the
irruption of an intuition just is the emergence of a form (we
are right to speak of the formation of intuition, that
intuitions are formed). At the aesthetic level—one
might say at the phenomenological level—there is no
identification of content independently of the forms in which we meet
it, and none of form independently of content. It makes no sense to
speak of a work of art’s being good on form but poor on content, or
good on content but poor on
form.
4.3 Feeling, Expression and the Commonplace


When Croce says that intuition and expression are the same
phenomenon, we are likely to think: what does this mean for a person
who cannot draw or paint, for example? Even if we allow Croce his widened
notion of feeling, surely the distinction between a man who looks at a
bowl of fruit but cannot draw or paint it, and the man who does draw or
paint it, is precisely that of a man with a Crocean intuition but
who cannot express it, and one who has both.


Croce comes at this concern from both sides. On one side,
there is ‘the illusion or prejudice that we possess a more
complete intuition of reality than we really do’ (Aes.
9). We have, most of the time, only fleeting, transitory
intuitions amidst the bustle of our practical lives. ‘The
world which as rule we intuite is a small thing’, he writes;
‘It consists of small expressions … it is a medley of
light and colour’ (Aes. 9). On the other side, if our
man is seriously focussed on the bowl of fruit, it is only a prejudice
to deny that then he is to that extent expressing
himself—although, according to Croce, ordinary direct perception
of things, as glimpsed in photography, will generally be lacking the
‘lyrical’ quality that genuine artists give to their
works.
5. Natural Expression, Beauty and Hedonic Theory


There is another respect in which Croce’s notion of expression
as intuition departs from what we ordinarily think of in connection with
the word ‘expression’. For example we think
unreflectively of wailing as a natural expression of pain or grief;
generally, we think of expressive behaviour or gestures as being
caused, at least paradigmatically, by the underlying emotion or
feelings. But Croce joins a long line of aestheticians in
attempting a sharp distinction between this phenomenon and expression
in art. Whereas the latter is the subject of aesthetics, the
former is a topic for the natural sciences; ‘for instance in
Darwin’s enquiries into the expression of feeling in man and in
the animals’ (PPH 265; cf. Aes. 21,
94–7). In an article he wrote for the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, speaking of such ‘psychophysical
phenomena’, he writes:


…such ‘expression’, albeit conscious, can rank as
expression only by metaphorical licence, when compared with the
spiritual or aesthetic expression which alone expresses, that is to say
gives to the feeling a theoretical form and converts into language,
song, shape. It is in the difference between feeling as contemplated
(poetry, in fact), and feeling as enacted or undergone, that lies the
catharsis, the liberation from the affections, the calming property
which has been attributed to art; and to this corresponds the aesthetic
condemnation of works of art if, or in so far as, immediate feeling breaks
into them or uses them as an outlet. (PPH 219).


Croce is no doubt right to want to distinguish these things, but
whether his official position—that expression is identical to
intuition—will let him do so is another matter; he does not
actually analyze the phenomena in such a way as to deduce, with the
help of his account of expression, the result. He simply asserts
it. But we will wait for our final section to articulate
criticisms.


Croce’s wish to divorce artistic expression from natural
expression is partly driven by his horror at naturalistic theories of
art. The same goes for his refusal to rank pleasure
as the aim, or at least an aim, of art (Aes.
82–6). He does not of course deny that aesthetic pleasures (and
pains) exist, but they are ‘the practical echo of aesthetic value
and disvalue’ (Aes. 94). Strictly speaking, they are
dealt with in the Philosophy of the Practical, that is, in the theory
of the will, and do not enter into the theory of art. That is, if
the defining value of the Aesthetic is beauty, the defining
value of the Practical is usefulness. In the
Essence of Aesthetic (EA 11–13) Croce points
out that the pleasure is much wider than the domain of art, so a
definition of art as ‘what causes pleasure’ will not
do. Croce does speak of the ‘truly aesthetic pleasure’ had
in beholding the ‘aesthetic fact’ (Aes. 80). But
perhaps he is being consistent. The pragmatic pleasure had in
beholding beauty is only contingently aroused, but in point of fact it
always is aroused by such beholding, because the having of an
intuition is an act of mind, and therefore the will is brought into
play.
6. Externalization


The painting of pictures, the scrape of the bow upon strings, the
chanting or inscription of a poem are, for Croce, only contingently
related to the work of art, that is, to the expressed intuition.
By this Croce does not mean to say that for example the painter could
get by without paint in point of fact; nevertheless what he is
doing is always driven by the intuition, and thereby making it possible
for others to have the intuition (or rather, an intuition).
First, the memory—though only contingently—often requires
the physical work to sustain or develop the intuition. Second,
the physical work is necessary for the practical business of the
communication of the intuition.


For example the process of painting is a closely interwoven
operation of positive feedback between the intuitive faculty and the
practical or technical capacity to manipulate the brush, mix paint and
so on:


Likewise with the painter, who paints upon canvas or upon
wood, but could not paint at all, did not the intuited image, the line
and colour as they have taken shape in the fancy, precede, at
every stage of the work, from the first stroke of the brush or sketch
of the outline to the finishing touches, the manual actions. And when
it happens that some stroke of the brush runs ahead of the image, the
artist, in his final revision, erases and corrects it.


 It is, no doubt, very difficult to perceive the
frontier between expression and communication in actual fact, for the
two processes usually alternate rapidly and are
almost intermingled. But the distinction is ideally clear and
must be strongly maintained… The technical does not enter into
art, but pertains to the concept of communication.  (PPH
227–8, emphasis added; cf. Aes. 50–1, 96–7,
103, 111–17; EA 41–7)


He also defines technique as ‘knowledge at the service of the
practical activity directed to producing stimuli to aesthetic
reproduction’ (Aes. 111). Again, we defer
criticism to the conclusion.
7. Judgement, Criticism and Taste


The first task of the spectator of the work of art—the
critic—is for Croce simple: one is to reproduce the intuition, or
perhaps better, one is to realize the intuition, which is the
work of art. One may fail, and Croce is well aware that one may
be mistaken; ‘haste, vanity, want of reflexion,
theoretic prejudices’ may bring it about that one finds beautiful
what is not, or fail to find beautiful what is (Aes.
120). But given the foregoing strict distinction between
practical technique and artistic activity properly so-called, his task
is the same as that of the artist:


How could that which is produced by a given activity be judged a
different activity? The critic may be a small genius, the
artist a great one … but the nature of both must remain the
same. To judge Dante, we must raise ourselves to his level: let
it be well understood that empirically we are not Dante, nor Dante we;
but in that moment of contemplation and judgement, our spirit is one
with that of the poet, and in that moment we and he are one thing.
(Aes. 121)


Leave aside the remark that we become identical with the poet.
If by taste we mean the capacity for aesthetic judgement—that is,
the capacity to find beauty—and by genius we mean the capacity to
produce beauty, then they are the same: the capacity to realize
intuitions.


In Croce’s overall philosophy, the aesthetic stands alone: in
having an intuition, one has succeeded entirely insofar as aesthetic
value is concerned. Therefore there cannot be a real question of
a ‘standard’ of beauty which an object might or might not
satisfy. Thus Croce says:


…the criterion of taste is absolute, but absolute in a
different way from that of the intellect, which expresses itself in
ratiocination. The criterion of taste is absolute, with the intuitive
absoluteness of the imagination. (Aes. 122)


Of course there is as a matter of fact a great deal of variability
in critical verdicts. But Croce believes this is largely due to
variances in the ‘psychological conditions’ and the
physical circumstance of spectators (Aes. 124). Much of
this can be offset by ‘historical interpretation’
(Aes. 126); the rest, one presumes, are due to
disturbances already mentioned: ‘haste, vanity, want of
reflexion, theoretic prejudices’ (Aes. 120).

8. The Identity of Art and Language


The title of the first great book of Croce’s career was
‘Aesthetic as a Science of expression and general
linguistic’ (emphasis added). There are several
interconnected aspects to this.


Croce claims that drawing, sculpting, writing of music and so on are
just as much ‘language’ as poetry, and all
language is poetic; therefore ‘Philosophy of language and
philosophy of art are the same thing’ (Aes. 142;
author’s emphasis). The reason for this is that language is
to be understood as expressive; ‘an emission of sounds which
expresses nothing is not language’ (Aes. 143). From our
perspective, we might regard Croce as arguing thus: (1) Referential
semantics—scarcely mentioned by Croce—necessarily involves
parts of speech. (2) However:


It is false to say that a verb or noun is expressed in definite
words, truly distinguishable from others. Expression is an indivisible
whole. Noun and verb do not exist in it, but are abstractions
made by us, destroying the sole linguistic reality, which is the
sentence. (Aes. 146)


If we take this as asserting the primacy of sentence
meaning—glossing over the anti-abstraction remark which is
tantamount to a denial of syntactic compositionality—then
together with (3) a denial of what in modern terms would be distinction
between semantic and expressive meaning, or perhaps in Fregean terms
sense and tone, then it is not obvious that the resulting picture of
language would not apply equally to, for example, drawing. In that
case, just as drawings cannot be translated, so linguistic translation
is impossible (though for certain purposes, naturally, we can translate
‘relatively’; Aes. 68).


Interestingly, Croce does not think of all signs as natural
signs, as lightning is a sign of thunder; on the contrary, he thinks of
‘pictures, poetry and all works of art’ as equally
conventional—as ‘historically conditioned’
(Aes. 125; authors emphasis).


There is no doubt that on this point Croce was inspired by his great
precursor, the Neapolitan Giambattista Vico (1668–1744).
According to Croce (Aes. 220–34) Vico was the first to
recognise the aesthetic as a self-sufficient and non-conceptual mode of
knowledge, and famously he held that all language is
substantially poetry. The only serious mistake in this that Croce
found was Vico’s belief in an actual historical period when all
language was poetry; it was the mistake of substituting a concrete
history for ‘ideal history’ (Aes. 232).
9. Later Developments


As he became older, there was one aspect of his aesthetics that he
was uneasy with. In the Aesthetic of 1901 (Aes.
82–7, 114), and again in Essence of Aesthetic of 1913
(EA 13–16) , he had been happy to deduce from
his theory that art cannot have an ethical purpose. The only
value in art is beauty. But by 1917, in the essay The
Totality of Artistic Expression (PPH 261–73), his
attitude towards the moral content of art is more nuanced. This
may have been only a shift of emphasis, or, charitably perhaps,
drawing out a previously unnoticed implication: ‘If the
ethical principle is a cosmic [universal] force (as it certainly is)
and queen of the world, the world of liberty, she reigns in her own
right, while art, in proportion to the purity with which she re-enacts
and expresses the motions of reality, is herself perfect’
(PPH 267). In other words, he still holds that to speak
of a moral work of art would not impinge upon it aesthetically;
likewise to speak of an immoral work, for the values of the
aesthetic and moral domains are absolutely incommensurable. It is
not merely an assertion that within the domain of pure
intuition, the concepts simply don’t apply; that would merely beg
the question. He means that a pure work of art cannot be
subject to moral praise or blame because the Aesthetic domain exists
independently of and prior, in the Philosophy of Spirit, to the
Ethical.


In the Encyclopaedia article of 1928, Croce asserts positively that
the moral sensibility is a necessary condition of the artist:


The foundation of all poetry is therefore the human personality, and
since the human personality fulfills itself morally, the foundation of
all poetry is the moral conscience. (PPH 221)


Still it’s possible to read him as not having changed his view. For
instance, Shakespeare could not have been Shakespeare without seeing
into the moral heart of man, for morality is the highest domain of
spirit. But we have to distinguish between the moral
sensibility—the capacity to perceive and feel moral
emotions—and the capacity to act morally. Croce’s
position is that only the first is relevant to art.


The early emphasis on beauty is downplayed in subsequent writing in
favour of the successful work art as expression, as constituting a
‘lyrical intuition’. In Essence of
Aesthetic he writes:


…what gives coherence and unity to the intuition is feeling:
the intuition is really such because it represents a feeling, and can
only appear from and upon that. Not the idea, but the feeling, is what
confers upon art the airy lightness of a symbol: an aspiration enclosed
in the circle of a representation—that is art; and in it the
aspiration alone stands for the representation, and the representation
alone for the aspiration. (EA 30)


Croce still holds that art is intuitive, a-logical or nonconceptual,
and therefore by ‘it represents a feeling’ he does not mean
that our aesthetic mode of engagement involves that concept, and he
does not mean that art is to be understood as symbolic, implying a
relation which would require an intellectual act of mind to
apprehend. Both would imply that our mode of aesthetic engagement
would be something more, or something other than, the aesthetic, which
is as always the intuitive capacity. The point is simply that our
awareness of the form of the intuition in nothing but our awareness of
the unifying currents of feeling running through it. It is a
claim about what it is that unifies an intuition, distinguishes it from
the surrounding, relatively discontinuous or confused intuition.
This is, in effect, a claim about the nature of beauty:


An appropriate expression, if appropriate, is also beautiful, beauty
being nothing but the precision of the image, and therefore of the
expression. …(EA 48).


Expression and beauty are not two concepts, but a single concept,
which it is permissible to designate with either synonymous word
… (EA 49).


Genuinely new in the 1917 essay was Croce’s appealing but
enigmatic claim that art is in a sense ‘universal’, is
concerned with the ‘totality’:


To give artistic form to a content of feeling means, then,
impressing upon it the character of totality, breathing into it the
breath of the cosmos. Thus understood, universality and artistic form
are not two things but one. (PPH 263).

And:

In intuition, the single pulsates with the life of the whole, and
the whole is in the life of the single. Every genuine artistic
representation is itself and is the universe, the universe in
that individual form, and that individual form as the
universe. In every utterance, every fanciful [imaginative] creation, of
the poet, there lies the whole of human destiny, all human hope,
illusions, griefs, joys, human grandeurs and miseries, the whole
drama of reality perpetually evolving and growing out of itself in
suffering and joy. (PPH 262)


Croce—and undoubtedly the political situation in Italy in 1917
played a role in this—was anxious to assert the importance of
art for humanity, and his assertion of it is full of feeling. And the
claim marks a decisive break from earlier doctrine: form is now linked
with universality rather that with particular feelings.  But it is
difficult to see beyond such metaphors as ‘impressing upon it
the character of totality’ (not even with the help of
Croce’s Logic). One is reminded of the Kantian dictum
that in aesthetics we ‘demand universality’ in our
judgements, but there are no explicit indications of such. There is
one piece of Crocean philosophy behind it: Since art takes place prior
to the intellect, so the logical distinction between subject and
predicate collapses; therefore perhaps at least one barrier is removed
from speaking of the ‘universality of art’. But that does
not indicate what, positively, it means. It obvious that there is
something right about speaking of the ‘universal
character’ of a Beethoven or a Michelangelo as opposed to the
pitiful, narrow little spectacle of this month’s pop band, but
Croce doesn’t tell us what justifies or explains such talk (various
others have reached a similar conclusion; see Orsini p. 214). Still,
that doesn’t mean that he had no right to proclaim it, and perhaps not
to count his readers as agreeing to it.
10. Problems


There is a lot of Croce’s aesthetics that we have not discussed,
including his criticisms of the discipline of Rhetoric (Aes.
67–73; PPH 233–35), of the doctrine that there
are aesthetic differences amongst different kinds of art
(Aes. 111–17, EA 53–60, PPH
229–33), of psychological and other naturalistic views of art
(Aes.87–93; EA 41–7); there is also his
magnificent if contentious précis of the history of
aesthetics (Aes. 155–474). But these are points of
relative detail; the theory is whole is sufficiently well before us
now to conclude by mentioning some general lines of criticism.
10.1 Acting versus Contemplation


The equation of intuition with expression is not, in end, plausible.
C. J. Ducasse (1929) put his finger on it. When we look at a vase
full of flowers, it does not matter how closely or in what manner we
attend to it; we do not create a ‘work of art’ unless
we draw or paint it. Croce has lost sight of the ordinary sense of
passively contemplating and doing something; between reading
and writing, looking and drawing, listening and playing, dancing and
watching. Of course all the first members of these pairs involve
a mental action of a kind, and there are important connections
between the first members and the corresponding seconds—perhaps
in terms of what Berenson calls ideated sensations—but
that is not to say that there are not philosophically crucial
distinctions between them.
10.2 Privacy


The equation also defeats the purpose of art criticism or
interpretation, and indeed of the very notion of an aesthetic
community, of an audience. To say that the work of art is
identical with the intuition is to say that it is necessarily
private. It is to say, for example, that since one man’s
intuition of Botticelli’s Venus is necessarily different
from any one else’s, there is no such thing as Botticelli’s
Venus, understood not as a material painting but as a work of
art; there is only Botticelli’s-Venus-for-A,
Botticelli’s-Venus-for-B, and so on. But these intuitions
cannot be compared, and there is no higher standard; thus they cannot
be said to agree or disagree, since any such comparison would be
logically impossible (see Tilghman 1971, Ch. 1, for further
discussion; for at attempt at saving Croce, see Schusterman 1983). The
position is perhaps not contradictory, but it is exceedingly
unattractive; it renders art a diversion away from reality, when as
Freud emphasized—to invoke a figure who is Croce’s opposite in
almost every respect— the artist’s struggle with the medium is
the attempt to conquer reality. Although Croce disowned this
consequence, it’s hard not to conclude that on this view art is a
domain of fancy (in the bad sense), without any check upon vanity
(see Aes. 122 for a point at which Croce almost sees the
point). If we bring back the material painted object into the picture,
of course, then there is no such difficulty: ones
‘intuition’ will be accurate, or one’s interpretation will
be correct, just in case it corresponds to the picture (of course the
notion of ‘corresponds to the picture’ is only a
placeholder for a great deal to be supplied by theories of
representation, perspective, expression and other parts of aesthetics;
but the one thing that plausible theories will share is a commitment
to the object, the material painting).


It’s worth emphasizing again that Croce’s claim that
intuition is expression, and consequently that works art are mental
objects, is not just an application of his general idealism. It
is independent of it. In the Encyclopaedia Britannica
article, for example, he allows himself to speak for convenience of the
‘spiritual’ and ‘physical’, in order to make
the point that the physical object is only of practical, and not of
aesthetic significance (PPH 227–8).
10.3 The View of Language


Undoubtedly Croce was influenced by his lifelong immersion in
literature in his proclamation that all language is poetry. And
perhaps it is true that all language has some poetic qualities, and
perhaps it is true that language ‘in its actuality’
consists of sentential utterances. But as Bosanquet pointed out
in 1919, this does not mean that language is only poetry, or
that the referential dimension of language does not exist. It
must have something that distinguishes a scientific treatise from a
tune—in fact it must be that the same thing, which we are calling
the referential dimension, that serves to distinguish poetry
from a tune (it has to have sound and sense, as we say).
So to say that drawings and tunes are equally good examples of language
seems, at best, strained. Croce would have no doubt said
that the referential dimension does not exist, or is a false
abstraction; but his general philosophical views may be forcing
him down an unprepossessing path. More promising would be a
formalist endeavor to try to isolate the pure sonic aspect of
poetry—comprising metre, alliteration and so on—and then to
search for instantiations or at least analogies in the other
arts.
11. Conclusion


Suppose Croce were to give up the idea that art is
intuition, and agree that the work of art is identical with the
material work—remember this would not prevent him being an
idealist in his general philosophy—and suppose he allowed that he
was wrong about language. What would remain of his theory would
arguably be its essence: that art is expression that we engage
with via the intuitive capacity.


In closing, the reader may find it useful if we summarize the major
differences—narrowly on matters of aesthetics—between
Croce and Collingwood, who is often thought of as Croce’s
follower (see Hospers 1956 and especially Peters 2011 for
more). First, whereas Croce’s theory does not tend to regard the
expressive content of work of art as something ‘in the
artist’, emphasizing instead its form and later its
‘universality’, Collingwood tries to explain expressive
content in terms of a detailed theory of the emotions. Second,
although Croce does devote some energy to discrediting the
‘technical’ theory of art, Collingwood offers a more
organized and detailed analysis of why art is not ‘craft’,
though arguably the main points are Croce’s. Finally,
Collingwood devotes his final sections to a topic left unaddressed by
Croce: the problem of whether or in what way the responses of the
audience can constrain the object presented by the artist.