This article considers several questions concerning death and its
ramifications.

First, what constitutes death? It is clear enough that people
die when their lives end, but less clear what constitutes the ending
of a person’s life.

Second, in what sense might death or posthumous events harm
us? To answer this question, we will need to know what it is for
something to be in our interests.

Third, what is the case for and the case against the harm
thesis, the claim that death can harm the individual who dies,
and the posthumous harm thesis, according to which events
that occur after an individual dies can still harm that individual?


Fourth, how might we solve the timing puzzle? This puzzle is
the problem of locating the time during which we incur harm for which
death and posthumous events are responsible.

A fifth controversy concerns whether all deaths are
misfortunes or only some. Of particular interest here is a dispute
between Thomas Nagel, who says that death is always an evil, since
continued life always makes good things accessible, and Bernard
Williams, who argues that, while premature death is a misfortune, it
is a good thing that we are not immortal, since we cannot continue to
be who we are now and remain meaningfully attached to life
forever.

A final controversy concerns whether or not the harmfulness
of death can be reduced. It may be that, by adjusting our conception
of our well-being, and by altering our attitudes, we can reduce or
eliminate the threat death poses us. But there is a case to be made
that such efforts backfire if taken to extremes.
 
1. Death

Death is life’s ending. To clarify death further, we will need
to say a bit about the nature of life, and ask whether life can be
suspended or restored, and how it relates to our continued existence.
We can also distinguish between the concept of death and criteria by
which death can be detected.
1.1 Life and Death

It is not easy to clarify the nature of life. Suppose we could
construct a machine, the HAL 1.01, with (nearly) all of the
psychological attributes of persons: would HAL 1.01 be alive? Probably
not, given the nature of HAL’s hardware. It seems that being
conscious does not entail being alive. Still, to the extent that we
are puzzled about the nature of life, we will be puzzled about what is
entailed by the ending of life, that is, death.

Things that are alive have a distinctive capacity to develop or
maintain themselves by engaging in various processes including
chemosynthesis, photosynthesis, cellular respiration, cell generation,
and maintenance of homeostasis. Let us call these vital
processes. It is one thing to have the capacity to deploy these
processes and another to actually deploy them, just as there is a
difference between having the ability to run and actually running. For
something to have the property ‘alive’ seems to be a
matter of its having the capacity to sustain itself using processes
that are saliently similar to these. (For accounts of life, see Van
Inwagen 1990 and Bedau 2014.)

By contrast, the property ‘dead’ seems applicable to
something that has lost this capacity. We can call this the loss
of life account of death. The event by which the
capacity to employ vital processes is lost is one thing and the
condition of having lost it is another. ‘Death’
can refer to either. 

Let us add that ‘the ending of life’ is itself potentially
ambiguous. On one hand it might be a process wherein our lives are
progressively extinguished, until finally they are gone. On the other
it might be a momentary event. This event might be understood in three
ways. First, it might be the ending of the dying process—the
loss of the very last trace of life. Call this ‘denouement
death’. Second, it might be the point in the dying process when
extinction is assured, at least given the resources available to
prevent it. Call this moment ‘threshold death’. A third
possibility is that life ends when the physiological systems of the
body have lost the capacity to function as an integrated whole, or
when this loss becomes irreversible (Belshaw 2009; DeGrazia 2014).
Call this ‘integration death’.

Thus death can be a state (being dead), the process of
extinction (dying), or one of three events that occur
during the dying process. Death in all of these senses can be further
distinguished from events—such as being shot with an
arrow—that cause death.
1.2 Death and Suspended Animation

The loss of life account of death has been challenged by theorists who
claim that things placed in suspended animation are not alive (Feldman
1992, Christopher Belsaw 2009, Cody Gilmore 2013, and David DeGrazia
2014). When zygotes and embryos are frozen for later use in the in
vitro fertilization procedure, their vital processes are brought to a
stop, or very nearly so. The same goes for water bears that are
dehydrated, and for seeds and spores. It seems clear that the zygotes
and water bears are not dead, since their vital processes can easily
be restarted—by warming the zygote or by wetting the water bear.
They are not dead, but are they alive? If we deny that they are alive,
presumably we would do so on the grounds that their vital processes
are halted. If something’s life can be ended by suspending its
vital processes without its dying, then we must reject the loss of
life account of death.

However, the loss of life account is thoroughly established in
ordinary usage, and is easily reconciled with the possibility of
suspended animation. In denying that frozen embryos are dead, it is
clear that we mean to emphasize that they have not lost the
capacity to deploy their vital processes. When we say that
something is dead, we mean to emphasize that this capacity
has been lost. Having used ‘dead’ to signal this
loss, why would we want to use the word ‘alive’ to signal
the fact that something is making active use of its vital processes?
Our best option is to use a pair of contrasting terms. We can use
‘viable’ to indicate that something has the capacity to
deploy vital processes and ‘unviable’ to indicate that it
has lost this capacity. When instead we are concerned about whether or
not something is engaging its vital processes, we can use different
contrasting terms, say ‘vital’ and ‘nonvital’,
the former to characterize something that is employing its capacity
for vital processes and the latter to characterize something that is
not making use of its capacity for vital processes. What seems
relatively uncontroversial is that being dead consists in unviability.
To retain the loss of life account, we have only to add that being
alive consists in viability. We can then say that a frozen embryo is
viable and hence alive despite its lack of vitality, and it will die
if its life ends (it will die if it ceases to be viable). Of course,
if we are willing to abandon the loss of life account, we could
instead use ‘alive’ to characterize something that is both
viable and vital. We would then say that a frozen embryo is not alive
(since it lacks vitality) but also that it is not dead (since it
remains viable).
1.3 Resurrection

It will be useful to sharpen the loss of life account if, as seems
conceivable, it is possible to restore life to something that
has died.

Restoration in this sense is quite different from the revival of
something, such as a frozen embryo, whose vital processes have been
halted. Something can be revived only if it is
alive—only if it has the capacity to deploy vital processes, as
in the case of a frozen zygote. It is revived when it regains
vitality. Something’s life can be restored only if it
has lost its capacity for vital processes. Life is restored when this
capacity is regained.

To bring the possibility of restoration into view, imagine a
futuristic device, the Disassembler-Reassembler, that reduces
me to small cubes, or individual cells, or disconnected atoms, which
it stores and later reassembles just as they were before. Many of us
will say that I would survive—my life would continue—after
Reassembly, but it is quite clear that I would not live during
intervals when my atoms are stacked in storage. I would not even exist
during such intervals. If I can be Reassembled, my life would be
restored, not revived. Restoration, not revival, is a way of bringing
a creature back from the dead. Now imagine a device that repairs
corpses: it moves molecules back to where they were prior to the death
of the creature that left the corpse, and restarts its vital
processes. Like the Disassembler-Reassembler, the corpse
reanimator would resurrect the dead—it would restore the
lives of people who have died.

Given the possibilities of restoration and revivification, it seems
best to refine the loss of life account, as follows:

Dying is the loss of a thing’s life—the loss of
its capacity to perpetuate itself using vital processes. A thing dies
at the time it loses this capacity. It is dead at all times
afterwards, except while that capacity is regained. 
1.4 Death and What We Are

Death for you and me is constituted by the loss of our capacity to
sustain ourselves using vital processes. This characterization of
death could be sharpened if we had a clearer idea of what we
are, and the conditions under which we persist. However, the
latter is a matter of controversy. 

There are three main views: animalism, which says that we are
human beings (Snowdon 1990, Olson 1997, 2007); personism,
which says that we are creatures with the capacity for self-awareness;
and mindism, which says that we are minds (which may or may
not have the capacity for self-awareness) (McMahan 2002). Animalism
suggests that we persist over time just in case we remain the same
animal; mindism suggests that we persist just when we remain the same
mind. Personism is usually paired with the view that our persistence
is determined by our psychological features and the relations among
them (Locke 1689, Parfit 1984). 

If we are animals, with the persistence conditions of animals, our
deaths are constituted by the cessation of the vital processes that
sustain our existence as human beings. If we are minds, our deaths are
constituted by the extinction of the vital processes that sustain our
existence as minds. And if persistence is determined by our retaining
certain psychological features, then the loss of those features will
constitute death. 

These three ways of understanding death have very different
implications. Severe dementia can destroy a great many psychological
features without destroying the mind, which suggests that death as
understood by personists can occur even though death as understood by
mindists has not. Moreover, human beings sometimes survive the
destruction of the mind, as when the cerebrum dies but the brainstem
does not, leaving an individual in a persistent vegetative state. It
is also conceivable that the mind can survive the extinction of the
human being: this might occur if the brain is removed from the body,
kept alive artificially, and the remainder of the body is destroyed
(assuming that a bare brain is not a human being). These possibilities
suggest that death as understood by mindists can occur even though
death as understood by animalists has not (and also that the latter
sort of death need not be accompanied by the former.)
1.5 Death and Existence

What is the relationship between existence and death? May people and
other creatures continue to exist after dying, or cease to exist
without dying? 

Take the first question: may you and I and other creatures continue to
exist for some time after our lives end? Fred Feldman (1992, p. 91) coins the term termination thesis to refer to the view that “when a person dies, he or she. . .goes out of existence; subsequently, there is no such thing as that person.” (A version of the thesis applies to any living thing.) The position that we can indeed survive death we might
call the dead survivors view. The dead survivors view has
been defended by various theorists, most notably Feldman (1992,
2000, 2013). One point cited in its favor is that we commonly refer to
‘dead animals’ (and ‘dead plants’) which may
suggest that we believe that animals continue to exist, as animals,
while no longer alive. The idea might be that an animal continues to
count as the same animal if enough of its original components remain
in much the same order, and animals continue to meet this condition
for a time following death (Mackie 1997). On this view, if you and I
are animals (as animalists say) then we could survive for a time after
we are dead, albeit as corpses. In fact, we could survive
indefinitely, by arranging to have our corpses preserved.

However, this way of defending the dead survivors view may not be
decisive. The terms ‘dead animal’ and ‘dead
person’ seem ambiguous. Normally, when we use ‘dead
people’ or ‘dead animal’ we mean to speak of persons
or animals who lived in the past. One dead person I can name is
Socrates; he is now a ‘dead person’ even though his corpse
surely has ceased to exist. However, in certain contexts, such as in
morgues, we seem to use the terms ‘dead animal’ and
‘dead person’ to mean “remains of something that was
an animal” or “remains of something that was a
person.” On this interpretation, even in morgues calling
something a dead person does not imply that it is a person. 

What about the second question: can creatures cease to exist without
dying? Certainly things that never were alive, such as bubbles and
statues, can be deathlessly annihilated. Arguably, there are also ways
that living creatures can be deathlessly annihilated (Rosenberg 1983,
Feldman 1992, Gilmore 2013). Perhaps an amoeba’s existence ends
when it splits, replacing itself with two amoebas, and the existence
of chlamydomonas ends when pairs of them fuse to form a zygote. Yet
when amoebas split, and chlamydomonas fuse, the vital processes that
sustain them do not cease. If people could divide like amoebas,
perhaps they, too could cease to exist without dying. (For a famous
discussion of division, fusion, and their implications, see Parfit
1981.) If such ‘deathless exits’ are possible, we would
have to modify the loss of life account of death.

However, proponents of that account can hold their ground. They can
say that division, fusion, and other apparent examples of deathless
exits are unusual ways of dying, because nonexistence is not brought
about via the destruction of vital processes, but they are not ways of
escaping death altogether. Proponents of the loss of life account
might also turn the tables on its critics, and argue as follows:
nothing can be alive unless it exists, so if something ceases to exist
it ceases to be alive, but to cease to be alive is to die. So there
are no deathless exits after all.
1.6 Criteria for Death

Defining death is one thing; providing criteria by which it can be
readily detected or verified is another. A definition is an account of
what death isisis; when, and only when its definition is met, death
has necessarily occurred. A criterion for death, by contrast, lays out
conditions by which all and only actual deaths may be readily
identified. Such a criterion falls short of a definition, but plays a
practical role. For example, it would help physicians and jurists
determine when death has occurred.

In the United States, the states have adopted criteria for death
modeled on the Uniform Determination of Death Act (developed by the
President’s Commission, 1981), which says that “an
individual who has sustained either (1) irreversible cessation of
circulatory and respiratory functions, or (2) irreversible cessation
of all functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem, is
dead. A determination of death must be made in accordance with
accepted medical standards.” In the United Kingdom, the accepted
criterion is brain stem death, or the “permanent functional
death of the brain stem” (Pallis 1982). 

These current criteria are subject to criticism, even if we put aside
reservations concerning the qualifier ‘irreversible’.
Animalists might resist the criteria since the vital processes of
human beings whose entire brains have ceased to function can be
sustained artificially using cardiopulmonary assistance. Mindists and
personists might also resist the criteria, on the grounds that minds
and all psychological features can be destroyed in human beings whose
brain stems are intact. For example, cerebral death can leave its
victim with an intact brain stem, yet mindless and devoid of
self-awareness.
2. Misfortune

May death or posthumous events harm us? Might they benefit us?
Perhaps; in order to decide, we will need an analysis of
welfare, which tells us what well-being is and how well off
we are. We will also need an account of personal interests,
which tells us what it is for something to be in our interests or
against our interests.
2.1 Comparativism

The most widely accepted account of our interests is
comparativism. In order to clarify comparativism, it is best
to distinguish different senses in which an event can have value.

Some events are intrinsically good (or bad) for a subject; such events
are good (bad) for their own sakes, rather than in virtue of their
contingent effects. By contrast, some events are extrinsically good
(bad) for a subject; they are good (bad) because of their contingent
effects. For example, many people count their pleasure as
intrinsically good and their pain as intrinsically bad; aspirin would
be extrinsically good, since it eliminates pain, and really bad puns
would be extrinsically bad in that they are painful.

Events can have value in a different way: they can be overall good
(bad) for a subject; that is, they can be good (bad) all things
considered. Events are overall good (bad) for me when (and to the
extent that) they make my life better (worse) than it would be if
those events had not occurred. Contrast events that are partially good
(bad) for me: these make my life better (worse) only in some respects.
Partial goods may be overall bad for me. For example, playing video
games every day gives me pleasure, and is hence partially good for me,
but if it also causes me to neglect my job, health and family, it
might well be overall bad for me. 

According to comparativism, the value an event EEE has for me is
roughly EEE’s overall value for me. But let us attempt to
formulate the comparativist account a bit more precisely.

To assess the value for me of an event EEE, we begin by
distinguishing two possible situations, or possible worlds. One of
these is the actual world, which is the world as it actually is, past
present and future. The other is the possible world that is the way
things would be if EEE had not occurred. We can assume that this is
the world that is as similar to the actual world as possible, and in
that way ‘closest’ to the actual world, except that EEE
does not occur, and various other things are different because of
EEE’s nonoccurrence. We can call the actual world WEWEW_{E},
in this way reminding ourselves that world WEWEW_{E}, in this way
reminding ourselves that EEE actually occurred. And by W∼EW∼EW_{{\sim}
E} we can indicate the closest world to the actual world in which
EEE does not occur. Here the tilde, ‘∼∼{\sim}’, stands
for ‘not’. 

The next step is to assess my welfare level in WEWEW_{E} and my
welfare level in W∼EW∼EW_{{\sim} E}. My welfare level in WEWEW_{E} is
the intrinsic value for me of my life in WEWEW_{E}; it is the value my
life actually has for me, measured in terms of intrinsic goods and
intrinsic evils. To calculate my welfare level in WEWEW_{E}, we start
by assigning a value to my intrinsic goods in WEWEW_{E}. This will be
a positive value representing the sum of these goods. Next we assign a
value to my intrinsic evils in WEWEW_{E}; this will be a negative
value. Next we sum these values; the goods will raise this sum, while
the evils will lower it. Some symbolism might help fix ideas (although
it may give the false impression that our subject matter admits of
more precision that is actually possible). Let G(S,W)G(S,W)G(S,W) stand for
the sum of the values of SSS’s intrinsic goods in world W, and
let B(S,W)B(S,W)B(S,W) stand for the sum of the values of SSS’s
intrinsic evils in WWW. So far we have said that SSS’s
welfare level in WEWEW_{E} equals G(S,WE)+B(S,WE)G(S,WE)+B(S,WE)G(S,W_{E}) + B(S,W_{E}). If we
let IV(S,W)IV(S,W)IV(S,W) stand for the intrinsic value of world WWW for
subject SSS, the claim is that
IV(S,WE)=G(S,WE)+B(S,WE).IV(S,WE)=G(S,WE)+B(S,WE).
IV(S,W_{E}) = G(S,W_{E}) + B(S,W_{E}).


My welfare level in W∼EW∼EW_{{\sim} E} is assessed similarly; it is the
sum of my intrinsic goods and evils in W∼EW∼EW_{{\sim} E}.

Finally, we subtract the value for me of my life in W∼EW∼EW_{{\sim} E}
from the value for me of my life in WEWEW_{E}. According to
comparativism, this is the value EEE has for me. Letting V(S,E)V(S,E)V(S,E)
stand for the value of E for subject S, comparativism says that
V(S,E)=IV(S,WE)−IV(S,W∼E).V(S,E)=IV(S,WE)−IV(S,W∼E).
V(S,E) = IV(S,W_{E}) - IV(S,W_{{\sim} E}).


This value determines whether an event is overall bad (good) for a
subject SSS. If EEE’s value for SSS is negative, that is,
if V(S,E)<0V(S,E)<0V(S,E) \lt 0, then EEE is overall bad for SSS. If
EEE’s value is positive, then EEE is overall good for SSS.
The more negative (positive) EEE’s value is, the worse
(better) EEE is for SSS.

Consider an example. Suppose that we are looking to identify the value
for me of drinking this cup of coffee. Call this event Drink.
Then the first step is to distinguish the actual world, WDrinkWDrinkW_{Drink},
in which I drank the coffee, from the closest world in which I did
not, W∼DrinkW∼DrinkW_{{\sim} Drink}. Then we calculate my welfare level in
WDrinkWDrinkW_{Drink}, IV(Luper,WDrink)IV(Luper,WDrink)IV(Luper,W_{Drink}) and in W∼DrinkW∼DrinkW_{{\sim} Drink},
IV(Luper,W∼Drink)IV(Luper,W∼Drink)IV(Luper,W_{{\sim} Drink}). The former, IV(Luper,WDrink)IV(Luper,WDrink)IV(Luper,W_{Drink}),
equals the value of the intrinsic goods I will enjoy in my life plus
the value of the intrinsic evils I will endure. For simplicity, let us
pull a number out of the hat to indicate the value of the goods I will
enjoy in my life before I drink the coffee, say 100, and another
number to indicate the value of the evils I will endure in my life
before I drink the coffee, say −50−50-50. Let us also assume that
drinking the coffee will give me some pleasure for one hour, which has
a value of 10, and drinking the coffee will not cause me to endure any
evils. Finally, let us assume that after that hour of savoring my
coffee, I will go on to enjoy goods with a value of 50, and evils with
a value of −10−10-10. Then
IV(Luper,WDrink)=100+10+50+−50+0+−10=100.IV(Luper,WDrink)=100+10+50+−50+0+−10=100.\begin{align}
IV(Luper,W_{Drink}) &amp;= 100 + 10 + 50 + -50 + 0 + -10 \\
 &amp;= 100.
\end{align}

Assuming that my life one hour after drinking my coffee would
be just like my life would have been were I not to drink my coffee,
more or less, so that drinking my coffee benefits me only during the
hour I savor it, we can say that
IV(Luper,W∼Drink)=100+0+50+−50+0+−10=90.IV(Luper,W∼Drink)=100+0+50+−50+0+−10=90.\begin{align}
IV(Luper,W_{{\sim} Drink}) &amp;= 100 + 0 + 50 + -50 + 0 + -10  \\
 &amp;= 90.
\end{align}

Given these assumptions,
V(Luper,WDrink)=IV(Luper,WDrink)−IV(Luper,W∼Drink)=100−90=10.V(Luper,WDrink)=IV(Luper,WDrink)−IV(Luper,W∼Drink)=100−90=10.\begin{align}
V(Luper,W_{Drink}) &amp;= IV(Luper,W_{Drink}) - IV(Luper,W_{{\sim} Drink}) \\
  &amp;= 100 - 90 \\
  &amp;= 10.
\end{align}

Drinking the coffee, then, was good for me, as 10 is a positive
value.

We can now offer a rough statement of the comparativist account of
interests.

An event EEE is in SSS’s interests just in case EEE
overall benefits (is good for) SSS, making SSS’s life better
than it would have been if EEE had not occurred, which EEE does
just when its value for SSS is positive. An event EEE is against
SSS’s interests just in case EEE overall harms (is bad for)
SSS, making SSS’s life worse than it would have been if
EEE had not occurred, which EEE does just when its value for SSS
is negative. How much EEE benefits (harms) SSS depends on how much
better (worse) SSS’s life is in the actual world than it would
have been if EEE had not occurred: the better (worse) SSS’s
life is, the more beneficial (harmful) EEE is.


In order to refine the comparativist account, we will need to
distinguish between event tokens and event types.
Event tokens are concrete events, such as the bombing of the World
Trade Center. Event types are abstract entities such as bombings,
leapings and burials. One token of the type bombing is the
bombing of the World Trade Center. Earlier we used the letter
‘EEE’ to refer to event tokens rather than event types.
What is more, we assumed that the event tokens to which
‘EEE’ referred were actual events, not merely possible
events. But perhaps we can also offer a comparativist account of the
value of the occurrence of an EEE-type event; that is, a
comparativist account of how valuable it would be for a subject SSS
if an event of type EEE were to occur.

To this end, we might assess the value for SSS of the occurrence of
an EEE-type event by working out SSS’s welfare level in the
actual world (where presumably an EEE-type event did not occur) then
SSS’s welfare level in the closest world in which an
EEE-type event does occur, and subtracting the first from the
second. When the result is a positive value, the occurrence of an
EEE-type event would be good for SSS; when negative, the
occurrence would be bad for SSS. 

In sum, the comparativist view may be stated as follows:

Comparativist Account of Interests:


An event EEE is in SSS’s interests just in case EEE
overall benefits (is good for) SSS, making SSS’s life better
than it would have been if EEE did not occur, which EEE does just
when its value for SSS is positive.
An event EEE is against SSS’s interests just in case
EEE overall harms (is bad for) SSS, making SSS’s life
worse than it would have been if EEE did not occur, which EEE does
just when its value for SSS is negative.
The occurrence of an EEE-type event is in SSS’s
interests just in case it would overall benefit (be good for) SSS.
The occurrence of an EEE-type event would benefit SSS if and only
if its value for SSS is positive.
The occurrence of an EEE-type event is against SSS’s
interests just in case it would overall harm (be bad for) SSS. The
occurrence of an EEE-type event would harm SSS if and only if its
value for SSS is negative.
How much EEE benefits (harms) SSS depends on how much better
(worse) SSS’s life is in the actual world than it would have
been if EEE had not occurred: the better (worse) SSS’s life
is, the more beneficial (harmful) EEE is. Similarly, how much the
occurrence of an E-type event would benefit (harm) SSS depends on
how much worse (better) SSS’s life is in the actual world than
it would have been if an EEE-type event had occurred: the worse
(better) SSS’s life is, the more beneficial (harmful) the
occurrence of an EEE-type event would have been.



We sometimes say things that suggest that we can have interests at
particular times which we lack at others. For example, we might say
that having a tooth drilled by a dentist is not in our interests while
we are undergoing the procedure, even though it is in our long-term
interests. The idea seems to be that what makes a subject SSS better
off at time ttt is in SSS’s interests-at-time-ttt. But it
is important to distinguish interests-at-ttt from
interests. What is in our interests-at-time-t1t1t_{1} need
not be in our interests-at-time-t2t2t_{2}. This is not true of our
interests. Whatever interests we have we have at all times. If
something is in our interests, it is timelessly in our interests.
2.2 Welfare

Comparativism analyses our interests in terms of our welfare, and is
compatible with any number of views of welfare. There are three main
ways of understanding welfare itself: positive hedonism,
preferentialism, and pluralism. Let us briefly consider each of these
three views. 

Positive hedonism is the following position:

Positive Hedonism: for any subject SSS, experiencing
pleasure at ttt is the one and only thing that is intrinsically good
for SSS at ttt, while experiencing pain at ttt is the one and
only thing that is intrinsically bad for SSS at ttt. The more
pleasure (pain) SSS experiences at ttt, the greater the intrinsic
good (evil) for SSS at ttt. 

Positive hedonism has been defended (by J.S.Mill 1863) on the grounds
that it resolves the problem of commensurability. The difficulty
arises when we attempt to equate units of different sorts of goods.
For example, how do we decide when one unit of love is worth one unit
of achievements, assuming that both love and achievements are
intrinsically good? The problem does not arise for hedonists, who
evaluate all things in terms of the pleasure and pain that they give
us.

However, most theorists consider positive hedonism to be implausible.
Nagel argues that I would harm you if I were to cause you to revert to
a pleasant infantile state for the rest of your life, yet by hedonist
standards I have not harmed you at all. Similarly, it would be a grave
misfortune for you if your spouse came to despise you, but for some
reason pretended to love you, so that you underwent no loss of
pleasure. And Nozick notes that we would refuse to attach ourselves to
an Experience Machine that would give us extremely pleasant
experiences for the rest of our lives. By hypothesis, the Machine
would give us far more pleasure (and less pain) than is otherwise
possible. Our reluctance to use the Machine suggests that things other
than pleasure are intrinsically good: it is because we do not wish to
miss out on these other goods that we refuse to use the Machine.

Preferentialism assesses welfare in terms of desire fulfillment. To
desire is to desire that some proposition PPP hold; when we desire
P,PP,PP, P is the object of our desire. According to
preferentialism, our welfare turns on whether the objects of our
desires hold:

Preferentialism: for any subject SSS, it is intrinsically
good for SSS at ttt that, at t,St,St, S desires PPP and PPP
holds; it is intrinsically bad for SSS at ttt that, at t,St,St, S
desires PPP and ∼P∼P{\sim}P holds. The stronger SSS’s desire
for PPP is, the better (worse) it is for SSS that PPP holds
(∼P∼P{\sim}P holds). 

In this, its unrefined form, preferentialism is implausible. Many of
the things we desire do not appear to contribute to our welfare.
Consider, for example, Rawls’ famous example of the man whose
main desire is to count blades of grass. In response to the grass
counter case, Rawls (1971) adopts critical preferentialism,
which says that welfare is advanced by the fulfillment of
rational aims. Assuming that counting grass blades is
irrational because it is pointless, fulfilling the desire to count
grass blades is not intrinsically good. However, even critical
preferentialism seems vulnerable to attack, since the fulfillment of
rational desires need not advance one’s welfare. Parfit (1984)
illustrates the point by supposing that you have the (rational) desire
that a stranger’s disease be overcome: the fulfilment of this
desire advances the stranger’s welfare, not yours. This example
can be handled by egocentric preferentialism, which says that
only desires that make essential reference to the self can advance our
welfare when fulfilled (Overvold 1980). Thus the fulfilment of my
desire that III be happy is intrinsically good for me, but the
fulfilment of my desire that somebody or other be happy is not. A
further variant of preferentialism might be called achievement
preferentialism. This view says that subject SSS’s
accomplishing one of SSS’s goals (or ends) is intrinsically
good for SSS, and that being thwarted from accomplishing such a goal
is intrinsically bad for SSS (Scanlon 1998; Keller 2004; Portmore
2007).

Pluralism is the third main account of welfare. Pluralists can agree
with the hedonist position that a person’s pleasure is
intrinsically good for that person, and with the
preferentialist’s view that the fulfilment of a person’s
desire is intrinsically good for that person. However, pluralism says
that various other sorts of things are intrinsically good, too. Some
traditional examples are wisdom, friendship and love, and honor.
Another example might be engaging in self-determination.
3. The Harm Theses

Typically, those who value life accept the harm thesis: death
is, at least sometimes, bad for those who die, and in this sense
something that ‘harms’ them. (Several theorists, including
Barbara Levenbook (2013), emphasize that, in one sense of the term
‘harm’, events that are only partially bad for me might be
said to harm me. In what follows the term ‘harm’ will be
restricted to events that are overall bad for me.) It is important to
know what to make of this thesis, since our response itself can be
harmful. This might happen as follows: suppose that we love life, and
reason that since it is good, more would be better. Our thoughts then
turn to death, and we decide it is bad: the better life is, we think,
the better more life would be, and the worse death is. At this point,
we are in danger of condemning the human condition, which embraces
life and death, on the grounds that it has a tragic side, namely
death. It will help some if we remind ourselves that our situation
also has a good side. Indeed, our condemnation of death is here based
on the assumption that more life would be good. But such consolations
are not for everyone. (They are unavailable if we crave immortality on
the basis of demanding standards by which the only worthwhile projects
are endless in duration, for then we will condemn the condition of
mere mortals as tragic through and through, and may, as Unamuno (1913)
points out, end up suicidal, fearing that the only life available is
not worth having.) And a favorable assessment of life may be a limited
consolation, since it leaves open the possibility that, viewing the
human condition as a whole, the bad cancels much of the good. In any
case it is grim enough to conclude that, given the harm thesis, the
human condition has a tragic side. It is no wonder that theorists over
the millennia have sought to defeat the harm thesis. We will examine
their efforts, as well as the challenges to the posthumous harm
thesis, according to which events occurring after we die can harm us.
First, however, let us see how the harm theses might be defended.
3.1 The Main Defense

Those theorists who defend the harm theses typically draw upon some
version of comparativism (e.g., Nagel 1970, Quinn 1984, Feldman 1991).
According to comparativism, a person’s death may well harm that
person. Death may also be harmless. To decide whether a person’s
death is bad for that person, we must compare her actual welfare level
to the welfare level she would have had if she had not died. Suppose,
for example, that Hilda died on December 1, 2008 at age 25 and that,
had she not died, she would have prospered for 25 years and suffered
during her final five years. To apply comparativism, we must first
select an account of welfare with which to assess Hilda’s
well-being. For simplicity, let us adopt positive hedonism. The next
step is to sum the pleasure and pain she had over her lifetime.
Suppose that she had considerably more pleasure than pain. We can
stipulate that her lifetime welfare level came to a value of 250. Next
we sum the pleasure and pain she would have had if she had not died on
December 1, 2008. The first 25 years of her life would be just as they
actually were, so the value of these would be 250. We can suppose that
her next 25 years would also receive the value of 250. And let us
stipulate that her final 5 years, spent mostly suffering, carry a
value of −50−50-50. Then, had she not died, her lifetime welfare level
would have been 250+250−50=450250+250−50=450250 + 250 - 50 = 450. Subtracting this value from
her actual lifetime welfare level of 250 gives us −200−200-200. This is
the value for her of dying on December 1, 2008. According to
comparativism, then, her death was quite bad for her. Things would
have been different if the last 30 years of her life would have been
spent in unrelenting agony. On that assumption, her death would have
been good for her.

Our example concerned a particular death at a specific time.
Comparativism also has implications concerning whether dying young is
bad for the one who dies, and whether it is bad for us that we die at
all. In both cases the answer depends on how our lives would have gone
had we not died. Usually dying young deprives us of many years of good
life, so usually dying young is bad for us. As for whether or not it
is bad to be mortal, that depends on whether the life we would lead as
an immortal being would be a good one or not.

According to comparativism, when death is bad for us, it is bad for us
because it precludes our coming to have various intrinsic goods which
we would have had if we had not died. We might say that death is bad
for us because of the goods it deprives us of, and not, or at least
not always, because of any intrinsic evils for which it is
responsible.

So much for the harm thesis. Now let us ask how the posthumous harm
thesis might be defended. 

Note first that we must reject the posthumous harm thesis if we adopt
positive hedonism and combine it with comparativism, for nothing that
happens after we die can boost or reduce the amounts of pleasure or
pain in our lives.

However, posthumous events might well be bad for us on other accounts
of welfare. Suppose that I want to be remembered after I die. Given
preferentialism, something could happen after I die that might be bad
for me, namely my being forgotten, because it thwarts my desire.

These ways of defending the harm theses seem quite plausible.
Nevertheless, there are several strategies for criticizing the harm
theses. Let us turn to these criticisms now, starting with some
strategies developed in the ancient world by Epicurus and his follower
Lucretius.
3.2 The Symmetry Argument

One challenge to the harm thesis is an attempt to show that the state
death puts us in, nonexistence, is not bad. According to the
symmetry argument, posed by Lucretius, a follower of
Epicurus, we can prove this to ourselves by thinking about our state
before we were born:

Look back at time … before our birth. In this way Nature holds
before our eyes the mirror of our future after death. Is this so grim,
so gloomy? (Lucretius 1951)


The idea is clear to a point: it is irrational to object to death,
since we do not object to pre-vital nonexistence (the state of
nonexistence that preceded our lives), and the two are alike in all
relevant respects, so that any objection to the one would apply to the
other. However, Lucretius’ argument admits of more than one
interpretation, depending on whether it is supposed to address death
understood as the ending of life or death understood as the state we
are in after life is ended (or both).

On the first interpretation, the ending of life is not bad, since the
only thing we could hold against it is the fact that it is followed by
our nonexistence, yet the latter is not objectionable, as is shown by
the fact that we do not object to our nonexistence before birth. So
understood, the symmetry argument is weak. Our complaint about death
need not be that the state of nonexistence is ghastly. Instead, our
complaint might be that death brings life, which is a good thing, to
an end, and, other things being equal, what deprives us of good things
is bad. Notice that the mirror image of death is birth (or, more
precisely, becoming alive), and the two affect us in very different
ways: birth makes life possible; it starts a good thing going. Death
makes life impossible; it brings a good thing to a close. 

Perhaps Lucretius only meant to argue that the death state is
not bad, since the only thing we could hold against the death state is
that it is nonexistence, which is not really objectionable, as witness
our attitude about pre-vital nonexistence. So interpreted, there is a
kernel of truth in Lucretius’ argument. Truly, our pre-vital
nonexistence does not concern us much. But that is because pre-vital
nonexistence is followed by existence. Nor would we worry overly about
post-vital nonexistence if it, too, were followed by existence. If we
could move in and out of existence, say with the help of futuristic
machines that could dismantle us, then rebuild us, molecule by
molecule, after a period of nonexistence, we would not be overly upset
about the intervening gaps, and, rather like hibernating bears, we
might enjoy taking occasional breaks from life while the world gets
more interesting. But undergoing temporary nonexistence is not the
same as undergoing permanent nonexistence. What is upsetting is the
permanence of post-vital nonexistence—not nonexistence per
se.

There is another way to use considerations of symmetry to argue
against the harm thesis: we want to die later, or not at all, because
it is a way of extending life, but this attitude is irrational,
Lucretius might say, since we do not want to be born earlier (we do
not want to have always existed), which is also a way to extend life.
As this argument suggests, we are more concerned about the indefinite
continuation of our lives than about their indefinite
extension. (Be careful when you rub the magic lamp: if you
wish that your life be extended, the genie might make you older!) A
life can be extended by adding to its future ororor to its past. Some
of us might welcome the prospect of having lived a life stretching
indefinitely into the past, given fortuitous circumstances. But we
would prefer a life stretching indefinitely into the future.

Is it irrational to want future life more than past life? No; it is
not surprising to find ourselves with no desire to extend life into
the past, since the structure of the world permits life extension only
into the future, and that is good enough. But what if life extension
were possible in either direction? Would we still be indifferent about
a lengthier past? And should our attitude about future life match our
attitude about past life?

Our attitude about future life should match our attitude about past
life if our interests and attitudes are limited in certain ways. If
quantity of life is the only concern, a preference for future life is
irrational. Similarly, the preference is irrational if our only
concern is to maximize how much pleasure we experience over the course
of our lives without regard to its temporal distribution. But our
attitude is not that of the life- or pleasure-gourmand.

According to Parfit, we have a far-reaching bias extending to goods in
general: we prefer that any good things, not just pleasures, be in our
future, and that bad things, if they happen at all, be in our past. He
argues that if we take this extensive bias for granted, and assume
that, because of it, it is better for us to have goods in the future
than in the past, we can explain why it is rational to deplore death
more than we do our not having always existed: the former, not the
latter, deprives us of good things in the future (he need not say that
it is because it is in the past that we worry about the life-limiting
event at the beginning of our lives less than the life-limiting event
at the end). This preference for future goods is unfortunate, however,
according to Parfit. If cultivated, the temporal insensitivity of the
life- or pleasure-gourmand could lower our sensitivity to death:
towards the end of life, we would find it unsettling that our supply
of pleasures cannot be increased in the future, but we would be
comforted by the pleasures we have accumulated.

Whether or not we have the extensive bias described by Parfit, it is
true that the accumulation of life and pleasure, and the passive
contemplation thereof, are not our only interests. We also have
active, forward-looking goals and concerns. Engaging in such pursuits
has its own value; for many of us, these pursuits, and not passive
interests, are central to our identities. However, we cannot make and
pursue plans for our past. We must project our plans (our
self-realization) into the future, which explains our forward bias.
(We could have been devising and pursuing plans in the past,
but these plans will not, I assume, be extensions of our present
concerns.) It is not irrational to prefer that our lives be extended
into the future rather than the past, if for no other reason than
this: only the former makes our existing forward-looking pursuits
possible. It is not irrational to prefer not to be at the end of our
lives, unable to shape them further, and limited to reminiscing about
days gone by. As Frances Kamm (1998) emphasizes, we do not want our
lives to be all over with.

Nevertheless, it does not follow that we should be
indifferent about the extent of our pasts. Being in the grip
of forward-looking pursuits is important, but we have passive
interests as well, which make a more extensive past preferable.
Moreover, having been devising and pursuing plans in the past
is worthwhile. If fated to die tomorrow, most of us would prefer to
have a thousand years of glory behind us rather than fifty. We want to
have lived well.
3.3 Epicurean Challenges: Death Cannot Affect Us

Further challenges to the harm theses are offered by Epicurus
(341–270) in his Letter to Menoeceus:

Death …, the most awful of evils, is nothing to us, seeing
that, when we are, death is not come, and, when death is come, we are
not.


We might restate Epicurus’ brief argument as follows: if death
harms the individual who dies, there must exist a subject who
is harmed by death, a clear harm that is received, and a
time when that harm is received. As to the timing issue,
there seems to be two possible solutions, given that death follows
immediately upon life: either death harms its victims while they are
alive or later. If we opt for the second solution we appear to run
head on into the problem of the subject, for assuming that we do not
exist after we are alive, no one is left to incur harm. We also
encounter the problem of specifying a harm that might be accrued by a
nonexistent person. If we opt for the first solution—death harms
its victims while they are alive—we have a ready solution to the
problem of the subject but we face the problem of supplying a clear
way in which death is bad: death seems unable to have any ill
effect on us while we are living since it will not yet have occurred.
Seeing that there is no coherent solution to all three issues,
Epicurus rejects the harm thesis.

Epicurus focuses on death, but if his argument is good, it applies
more generally, to include all events that follow death. 

In some respects Epicurus’s argument is not clear. One problem
is that what he means by ‘death’ is unclear. For now let
us assume that he meant to refer to the process by which our lives are
ended. Another interpretive problem arises as well: his intent might
be to show that neither death nor posthumous events can
affect us at all. From this claim it would follow
that death and posthumous events are harmless, assuming that an event
harms us only if it somehow affects us at some time (perhaps well
after it occurs).

Let us see if it is possible to show that death and posthumous events
do not affect us. Then we can try out (in the next section) a weaker
thesis: that death and posthumous events cannot affect us in a way
that is bad for us. This weaker claim is easier to defend, but
the stronger claim is worth exploring.

We can start with some assumptions about when an event can affect us.
To this end, let us adopt the causal account of
responsibility:

An event (or state of affairs) can affect some subject (person or
thing) SSS only by having a causal effect on SSS (the causal
impact thesis).
A subject SSS cannot be causally affected by an event while
SSS is nonexistent.
A subject cannot be causally affected by an event before the event
occurs (the ban on backwards causation).


From the causal account, together with some plausible assumptions, it
follows that a post-mortem event, such as the burning of
one’s corpse, cannot affect us after we are dead, since, by (a),
to be affected is to be affected causally, but, by (b), nonexistent
people cannot be causally affected by any event. It also follows that
the state of being dead cannot affect us while we are dead. Here we
are assuming that people cease to exist when they die (the termination
thesis). From the causal account it also follows that neither being
dead, nor any events that follow, can affect us while we are alive,
given the ban on backwards causation:

An event can affect us only by causally affecting us (the causal
impact thesis).
We cannot be causally affected by an event while we are
nonexistent.
We do not exist while dead (the termination thesis).
So neither being dead, nor any posthumous event, can affect us
while we are dead (by 1–3).
We cannot be causally affected by an event before the event occurs
(the ban on backwards causation).
So neither being dead, nor any posthumous event, can affect us
while we are alive (by 1 and 5).
So neither being dead, nor any posthumous event, can ever affect
us (by 4 and 6).


So far so good: neither the state of being dead nor any post-mortem
event can ever affect us. However, it has not been shown that we
cannot be affected by the dying process. Of course, the thesis that we
must exist to be affected, together with the termination thesis, rule
out the possibility that death affects us after it occurs
(after we are nonexistent). And the ban on backwards causation rules
out the possibility that death affects us before it occurs. Thus:

Death cannot affect us after it occurs (by 1–3).
Death cannot affect us before it occurs (by 1 and 5).
So death can affect us, if at all, only when it occurs (by 8 and
9).


But nothing said so far rules out the possibility that death affects
us exactly when it occurs. In particular, the problem of the
subject does not arise since it is a living, existing person who is
harmed by death while it occurs. Is there any way to establish that
death cannot affect us even at the time it occurs? There might be two
ways. First, we might claim that death occurs only after we are
nonexistent. This assumption has the odd consequence that death can
affect us only if posthumous events can. It will follow from (7) that
death cannot ever affect us. Second, we might claim that death is
instantaneous; it happens too quickly to affect us.

Some theorists have indeed defined ‘death’—the
ending of life—in such a way as to imply that it occurs only
after we are nonexistent. For example, Feinberg (1984), following
Levenbook (1984), defines death as “the first moment of the
subject’s nonexistence.” Perhaps this definition is
motivated by the awkwardness of attaching ‘death’ to a
moment in the dying process when a spark of life persists. However, it
is at least as awkward to attach ‘death’ to a moment after
the dying process is over—to suggest that the ending of life
occurs while we are in a state of death. It is also to concede too
much to the Epicurean, who could then establish that death is no evil
merely by showing that posthumous events are innocuous.

What about the suggestion that death happens too quickly to affect
us?

Recall that ‘death’ can be used in the process as well as
the denouement sense (Section 1). Death, in the process sense, unfolds
over a period of time, and it obviously affects us while it
occurs—even if instantly.

What if we opt for the denouement sense of ‘death’? Is it
plausible to say that losing the very last of life can have no affect
on us? It is difficult to see why. If we were correct when we said
that the complete destruction of our vital capacities affects us,
surely we are also affected, albeit less, by losing the very last of
the vital capacities that sustain us.

Let’s review. Granting them some leeway, Epicureans can
show:

Neither being dead, nor any posthumous event, can ever affect us,
and the dying process itself can affect us, if at all, only while it
occurs (by 7 and 10).


They can then argue as follows:

An event harms us only if it somehow affects us at some time.
So neither being dead, nor any posthumous event, can harm us, and
the dying process can harm us, if at all, only while it occurs (by 11
and 12).


For a more rigorous presentation of the above argument, see the
supplementary document:

The Argument: Death and Posthumous Events Don’t Affect Us


But Epicureans lack a convincing argument against the possibility that
the dying process and some of its effects overlap in time; hence they
cannot refute the harm thesis. We have a subject, harm, and time: the
subject of death is a live creature who endures its effects at the
very time the creature dies.
3.4 Epicurean Challenges: Death Is Harmless

Instead of trying to establish that death cannot affect us at all,
Epicureans might argue that death cannot affect us in a way that
is bad for us. To that end, they can provide a condition for
something’s being bad for us and argue that death fails to meet
it.

The condition which Epicurus himself supplied is this: an event (or
state of affairs) harms us only if it causes in us the presence of
some condition we find unpleasant. For simplicity, we can call all
such conditions pain or suffering. That condition, the suffering, need
not occur at the same time as the event that causes its presence in
us. An event may occur long before it has any direct impact on us; it
may occur even before we exist, as when someone times a bomb to go off
150 years later, killing everyone around. Epicurus himself did not
spell out a complete view of welfare. He did not make it entirely
clear when things are, overall, beneficial or harmful to a person. But
he surely did think that something harms us only if it causes us to
suffer.

Some theorists prefer to phrase Epicurus’s condition in terms of
experience, thusly: we are harmed only by what we experience. Given
that one never experiences one’s death, it would follow that it
cannot harm those who die. A variant of this experience
condition was proposed by Rosenbaum (1986): we are harmed only by
what we can experience. Other theorists state
Epicurus’s condition in terms of existence, thus attributing to
him the existence condition: something harms us only at times
when we exist. (For good discussions of the experience condition and
its plausibility, see Nussbaum 2013, Silverstein 2013, and Fischer
2014.)

On the Epicurean view, clearly neither the state nor process of death
is inherently harmful—it is, in itself, not bad for us.
For death is not necessarily painful. One can die painlessly, as when
one dies while unconscious. But Epicurus did not say merely that death
need not be harmful; he claimed that death was never harmful;
on his criterion, this means that death never causes the subject to
suffer.

To show that death can have no salient effect on us, Epicureans might
argue that death cannot be responsible for any
condition’s presence in us, salient or otherwise. It can only be
responsible for our ceasing to be in a condition. However,
this thesis is clearly false on the process sense of
‘death:’ moving from being wholly alive to completely
lacking life might well introduce the presence of some bad condition
in us, such as pain. No doubt Epicureans gravitate to the denouement
sense of death since the ending of the final trace of life might occur
extremely quickly, perhaps so quickly that it has no salient effect on
us while it happens. Nevertheless, Epicureans may argue, with some
degree of plausibility, that denouement death cannot harm us:

Denouement death occurs too quickly to be responsible for the
presence of any unpleasant condition in us at the time it occurs.
Only something responsible for the presence of an unpleasant
condition in us is harmful to us.
So denouement death cannot harm us at the time it occurs (by 14
and 15).


By combining 16 with 13, established earlier, Epicureans may conclude
that:

Neither posthumous events nor the state of death nor denouement
death may ever harm us, and process death may harm us only while it
occurs.


However, this conclusion will disappoint people who wonder whether
dying is a misfortune: they want to know whether losing their
lives is a bad thing, not just whether, having nearly completely
lost life, it is bad to lose the very last of it (Luper 2004). Even
for Epicurus himself this conclusion is not entirely adequate. For it
leaves in place the possibility that the dying process can be
harmful.

So why did Epicurus say that death is nothing to us? He surely knew
that the dying process can be harmful to us. One possibility is that
he did not really intend to show that death is innocuous. Many
commentators insist that he wanted only to show that being
dead, that is, the state of death, is nothing to us, and that he
realized that dying is often a misfortune. It is also possible that
Epicurus did not believe that what we have called ‘process
death’ is part of death; instead, death is what we have called
‘denouement death’. This line of thought would position
him to admit that ‘process death’ is bad for us, but it is
only the precursor to death.

However, if Epicurus meant to show only that denouement death is
harmless, or that the state of being dead is harmless, his efforts are
disappointing given his own goal, which was to enable us to achieve
ataraxia, or complete tranquility. He cannot reach this goal if he
does not free us from our concern about the dying process or the
events leading up to the dying process. 

The best Epicurus could do is to downplay the painfulness of process
death and its cause, and this he appears to do:

Continuous pain does not last long in the flesh; on the contrary,
pain, if extreme, is present a very short time. … Illnesses of
long duration even permit of an excess of pleasure over pain in the
flesh (Principal Doctrines, Doctrine 4)


Unfortunately, Epicurus was wrong; the dying process and its cause can
be excruciating.

There are things other than death that seem bad for us. To prepare us
for complete tranquility in the fact of these things, Epicurus would
need to address them as well. Let us consider some examples, and what
Epicurus might say about them. 

One example is obvious: we suffer when we anticipate death. Epicurus
would probably admit that anticipating death is a bad thing if it
upsets us. But he emphasizes that our (present) anticipatory fear is
not caused by our (future) death, since future events are powerless to
affect the past. Hence, by the painfulness criterion, the fear of
death is not grounds for saying that death is harmful. Moreover, fear
is irrational unless its object is genuinely evil in some way, which
death is not: 

He speaks idly who says the he fears death, not because it will be
painful when present but because it is painful in anticipation. For if
something causes no distress when present, it is fruitless to be
pained by the expectation of it (Letter to Menoeceus).


Something else that is related to death seems bad for us: namely, the
grief others experience when we die. But Epicurus would urge us to
distinguish what is bad for us from what is bad for others. At most,
the fact that your family grieves at your death supports the claim
that your demise harms them, not that it harms you. (Too, your
distress at anticipating your family’s grief over your death is
not grounds for you to regard your death as a bad thing: the suffering
your death brings them cannot affect you, and your anticipatory grief
is irrational.) Furthermore, their grief should be mitigated by the
fact that your death is not bad for you. Their grief is entirely
self-centered, exactly like the self-pity a stamp collector might feel
at the destruction of a treasured stamp, in that the stamp is not
harmed by its own destruction. 

These examples illustrate that Epicurus can address some death-related
concerns by showing that they are misguided, if we grant him his claim
that we can be harmed only by what causes us to suffer. However, some
death-related concerns cannot be handled this way. For example, the
fact that everyone dies causes us distress and is therefore harmful to
us even on Epicurus’ criterion. At most Epicurus can say that
mortality need not be harmful to us, and that it will not be if we can
manage not to be distressed by it (Luper 2009). 
3.5 Further Objections to the Harm Theses

Epicurus’ case against the harm theses hinged on the assumption
that we can be harmed only by what causes us to suffer. However, in
section 3.1 we supported the harm theses by combining comparativism
with one of the three leading accounts of welfare. We noted that death
and posthumous events seem harmful because they deprive us of goods we
would otherwise have had. If our argument was correct, then
Epicurus’ assumption must be mistaken. It must be false that
harm requires incurring pain. Instead, harm can consist in being
deprived of goods.

Are there ways Epicureans could resist the view that being deprived of
goods can be bad for us? Perhaps. Epicureans could criticize
comparativism. They could also defend some view of welfare that is
more congenial to their position. Let us consider each strategy,
starting with the second.

Epicurus may have accepted the following view of welfare:

Negative Hedonism: 
for any subject S,SS,SS, S’s experiencing pain is the one and only
thing that is intrinsically bad for SSS, and nothing is
intrinsically good for SSS. 

When paired with comparativism, this view has implications that
Epicurus would have welcomed. It implies that harm is limited to what
increases our pain, and benefit is limited to what reduces it.
Consequently death is harmless to those who die painlessly, no matter
how good the life they would have had would have been. Moreover, death
can be beneficial: it can preclude our suffering.

However, the implications of negative hedonism are quite absurd. For
example, it implies that we never have reason to endure pain for the
sake of pleasure or any other good. It also implies that we should end
our lives as quickly and painlessly as we can since living on will
harm us and cannot possibly benefit us. The negative hedonist account
of welfare is clearly false.

Perhaps Epicureans would have better success if they were to reject
comparativism itself. To that end, they might adopt one of four
strategies which we will discuss in turn. 
Bifurcated Comparativism

It is quite possible that Epicurus himself rejected comparativism, as
formulated above. Perhaps he thought that the harmfulness of an event
EEE is not a matter of the good it deprives us of, but rather a
matter of how much intrinsic harm it causes, and the goodness of EEE
is a matter of how much intrinsic good it causes. Earlier we let
B(S,W)B(S,W)B(S,W) stand for the sum of the values of the things which are
intrinsically bad for SSS in world WWW, and we let G(S,W)G(S,W)G(S,W)
stand for the sum of the values of the things which are intrinsically
good for SSS in world WWW. Using this symbolism, we can state the
following alternative to comparativism:

Bifurcated Comparativism:
EEE harms SSS if and only if B(S,WE)<B(S,W∼E)B(S,WE)<B(S,W∼E)B(S,W_{E}) \lt B(S,W_{{\sim} E});
EEE benefits SSS if and only if G(S,WE)>G(S,W∼E)G(S,WE)>G(S,W∼E)G(S, W_{E}) \gt G(S,W_{{\sim}
E}). 

Bifurcated comparativism implies that goods do not offset evils, but
might eliminate them: that is, the goods EEE brings do not reduce
the harmfulness of EEE unless they cause us to have less pain or
less of some other evil. Similarly, evils do not offset goods.
Combined with positive hedonism, bifurcated comparativism implies that
we are harmed only by what increases our suffering, and benefitted
only by what increases our pleasure; all else is a matter of
indifference. Epicurus might have been drawn to this combination
because it implies that death can neither harm nor benefit us,
ignoring the pain it can cause while it occurs.

However, bifurcated comparativism is implausible. One problem is its
implication that that goods and evils do not offset each other.
Another worry is that surely some events or states of affairs harm us
without causing us pain or some other intrinsic evil, and benefit us
without giving us pleasure or some other intrinsic good. It is better
to be anaethetized before surgery, but not if bifurcated comparativism
is true. Moreover, if I slip into a temporary coma, which precludes my
suffering from injuries inflicted upon me in a car crash, the coma
benefits me, even though it does not give me pleasure or other goods.
Similarly, a coma that precludes my enjoying a week’s worth of
good life harms me, yet gives me no pain or other evils.

Surely death is capable of benefitting us the same way that
anesthetization and unconsciousness can. It can preclude our enduring
great suffering. Similarly, like anesthetization and unconsciousness,
death can harm us by precluding our living well. Comparativism gets
things right and bifurcated comparativism gets things wrong in all of
these examples.
Temporal Relativism

Comparativism assesses our interests in a temporally neutral way. It
implies that, at each point in my life, it is in my interests that my
welfare be as high as possible across my entire life, so that it is
prudent for me now to do what will boost my welfare later, other
things being equal. Famously, Derek Parfit (compare McMahan 2002)
supplies grounds for assessing our interests in a temporally relative
way instead of a temporally neutral way. Assessing our interests in a
temporally relative way may help Epicureans to undermine the harm
theses.

Consider that sometimes we have no reason whatever to satisfy a
desire. Parfit gives two examples. First, a desire might be implicitly
conditional on its own persistence, in the sense that we want to
satisfy it only on condition that we still have it. The desire to play
cards is like this. We lose all reason to satisfy such desires as soon
as we cease to have them. Compare desires, mentioned earlier, that are
conditional on our persistence. We might have reason to satisfy these
right up until our last day, even if we cease to have them much
earlier. Second, Parfit notes, we might change our values or ideals,
which might lead us to condemn some of our desires. In this case it is
reasonable to forego any opportunity to satisfy them. When a property,
such as conditionality, undermines the importance of satisfying a
desire for PPP, so that PPP’s holding is not intrinsically
good for us (and ∼P∼P{\sim}P’s holding is not intrinsically bad
for us), let us say that it is an undermining feature. 

When we no longer want something, we may speak of a past desire.
Perhaps a desire is undermined by being past, as Parfit has claimed
(compare Suits 2001). Then Epicureans may be able to revive their
attack on the posthumous harm thesis: dying ensures that we cannot be
harmed by posthumous events, since we are without desires long before
these occur (Vorobej, 1998). This strategy does not seem to vindicate
death itself, since death may preclude the fulfillment of some of the
very desires it destroys. However, the die-hard Epicurean might
suggest that a desire is undermined, in passing, at the very moment of
its destruction; if it is later thwarted, no harm is done. 

In any case, it is far from clear that our interests should be
assessed in a temporally relative way. The matter is quite
controversial. Consider Parfit’s claim that our desires are
undermined by their pastness: neutralists, who assess our interests in
the temporally neutral way prescribed by comparativism, can resist
Parfit’s claim by finding a feature other than pastness that
tends to undermine desires that we no longer have. One possibility
becomes evident once we notice that most of our aims are tentative in
the sense that we adopt them in the expectation that we may later
revise them. An extreme way to revise a desire for PPP is to stop
wanting PPP altogether—to end the desire for PPP, say on the
grounds that it conflicts with other, more pressing interests. We
defer to future exercises of our own autonomy, realizing that we may
reassess our priorities, until our life plan matures. In particular,
we are always prepared to revise desires in light of the projects and
commitments with which we identify, and loath to abandon projects and
commitments which have become parts of our identities. We favor some
of the ways our desires change, and take what steps we can to coax
them in preferred directions. As a rough approximation, we may say
that, unless our desires change in ways we (do or) would oppose, the
changes are voluntary (Cf. Harry Frankfurt 1971). For our purposes we
can even count, as voluntary, the intentional elimination of a desire
using artificial means, as when we take pills to remove the desire to
smoke cigarettes. If we voluntarily stop wanting P,∼PP,∼PP, {\sim}P can no
longer harm us. It will not harm us during the time we wanted PPP,
or later, when our desire is thwarted. So we undermine a desire when
we voluntarily abandon it (Luper 1987). On this view, Epicureans
cannot show that desires are harmlessly thwarted by death and
posthumous events on the grounds that such desires are past at the
time death or posthumous events thwart them.
Actualist Comparativism

Comparativism says that the value of my dying at time ttt depends on
the intrinsic goods (and evils) I would have accrued after ttt had I
not died, even though I am actually dead after ttt. Being dead, I am
incapable of accruing any intrinsic goods or evils after ttt, and in
that sense I am unresponsive after ttt. Interest actualism
denies that the value of my dying at ttt can depend on these goods.
It says that the value for SSS of event EEE is not affected by the
intrinsic goods or evils SSS would have accrued had EEE not
occurred, if SSS would have accrued them after SSS has actually
become unresponsive.

Accepting interest actualism would force us to modify comparativism.
The actualist view would be this:

Actualist Comparativism: EEE’s value for SSS equals
the intrinsic value for SSS of SSS’s life in WEWEW_{E}, the
actual world in which EEE occurs, minus the intrinsic value for
SSS of SSS’s life in the closest world, W∼EW∼EW_{{\sim} E}, in
which EEE does not occur excluding any intrinsic value SSS would
accrue in W∼EW∼EW_{{\sim} E} after SSS ceases to be responsive in
WEWEW_{E}. 

However, actualist comparativism does not appear to be more plausible
than standard comparativism. If I die at ttt, accruing goods after
ttt is not in my interests-after−t−t-t, but it does not follow that
it is not in my interests. If developing and fulfilling certain
desires is entailed in making my life as a whole as good as possible,
then it is in my interests to develop and fulfill those desires. Even
though I will die before I develop and fulfill the desires, it is in
my interests to develop and fulfill them, and bad for me not to
develop and fulfill them. 
Moot Preclusion

One other line of thought might be pressed against the comparativist
account of interests. Comparativism says that something harms me when
it makes my life worse than it would have been. However, there seem to
be events and states of affairs that do not harm me even though their
value for me is negative. I am not harmed, it seems, by failing to be
a genius, or rich and beautiful. But compare my life as it is, with my
unimpressive IQ, income and looks, to my life as it would be were I
brilliant or rich or beautiful: the former is considerably worse than
the latter. By failing to be brilliant, rich and beautiful, I am
precluded from having many goods, but we might say that the preclusion
is moot, in the sense that it is harmless to me. Epicureans might
renew their attack on the harm thesis by exploiting examples like
these. The examples appear to show that things can have enormous
negative value for me without harming me. Similarly, Epicureans might
insist, the preclusion of goods by death is moot: cut short, my life
is worse than it would be were I not to die, but this comparative
difference does not show that I am harmed.

It seems that the comparative criteria work well when we evaluate
losses, such as the loss of my arms, and also when we evaluate some
lacks, such as the inability to see or to feel pleasure. But the
criteria have worrisome implications when we evaluate certain other
lacks, such as my lack of genius. It is relatively clear that a person
is harmed by the inability to see but less clear that he is harmed by
the lack of genius. Why is that? 

There are various responses to the problem of moot preclusion. One is
to deny that it makes any sense to speak of
‘negativities’, or events that consist in things not
happening. This does not stop us from evaluating the event or process
of dying (as opposed to the state of death) which is not a
‘negativity’. Comparativists are right to claim that
things harm us by making our lives worse than they would have been
otherwise; negativities are not counterexamples, since they do not
exist. Another response is that moot preclusion involves cases in
which the events or states of affairs that would be good for us if
they held are highly improbable (Draper 1999). A further explanation
involves the relative importance of having some goods rather than
others. In some moods, we may consider it harmful to be deprived of a
good just when it is important for us to have it. The troublesome
lacks we have been discussing might be lacks of goods it is
unimportant to have; such lacks would not be harmful even though we
would be better off without them.
4. The Timing Puzzle

In section 3 we showed that the harm theses can be defended on the
basis of comparativism together with a plausible view of welfare. We
also considered ways of attacking this defense, and some possible
responses. In this section we consider another worry about the view
that death may harm its victims by depriving them of goods (or benefit
them by precluding their incurring evils). Roughly, the worry is this:
suppose we accept the presumption that something can harm a subject
only if there is a (period of) time when it does so. Let us call this
the Epicurean presumption. Then death can harm us by
depriving us of goods only if there is a time during which we are
harmfully deprived. However, it is not clear that there isisis such a
time. If the Epicurean presumption is really true, then proponents of
the harm thesis will need to clarify when it is that being deprived of
goods harms a victim. In this section we will consider several
possibilities. First, however, we will examine the Epicurean
presumption itself.
4.1 The Epicurean Presumption

There is more than one way to understand the Epicurean presumption. It
might mean this: 

(P1) An event EEE
harms a subject SSS only if there is a time when EEE is against
SSS’s interests. 


On this reading, the presumption is surely true. But it is also quite
easy to supply the time when something such as death is against the
interests of its victim. All it takes for an event to be against my
interests is that it makes my life as a whole worse than it would have
been had the event not occurred. Suppose, for example, that I will be
infected tomorrow and, because of its effects on me during next week,
the infection will worsen my life as a whole. Then being infected is
against my interests, period. That means it is against my interests
now and at all other times I exist. This may seem mysterious, unless
we notice that something’s being against my interests, according
to the terms of comparativism, is not an event, and hence not an event
occurring at some time.

There is another way to understand the Epicurean presumption. Recall
the distinction made earlier (at the end of 2.1) between my interests,
on one hand, and my interests-at-time-ttt, or what makes me better
or worse off at time ttt, on the other. The Epicurean presumption
might be that harm affects my interests-at-ttt, at some time ttt,
rather than my interests. That is, the presumption might be understood
as follows: 

(P2) EEE harms SSS
only if at some time ttt, EEE is against SSS’s
interests-at-time-ttt. 


Now, if comparativism is true, this version of the Epicurean
presumption is false. To see why, let us distinguish between two ways
in which something might be bad for me. On the one hand, something
might bring it about that, for a while, I am worse off than I would
have been. For example, a coma might prevent me from enjoying a
week’s worth of pleasant activities, so that, while comatose, my
welfare level would be lower than it would have been had I not fallen
into a coma. On the other hand, something might cause it to be the
case that my life as a whole is worse than it would have been.
Usually, things that make our lives as wholes worse (such as comas) do
so by making us worse off for a while. However, what makes our lives
worse need not make us worse off for any period of time. Death can
prevent me from enjoying years of pleasant activities, making my life
as a whole worse than it would have been had I not died, even if I am
not worse off at any time during my life. Death is an injury to my
life as a whole.

The Epicurean presumption can be sustained if it is equated with P1,
but it is easy to point to the time when death is against the
interests of its victims: if it is against their interests at all, it
is timelessly against their interests, according to comparativism. We
might call this view atemporalism, borrowing the term from
Jens Johansson (2013). (Johansson defines atemporalism this way:
‘death is bad for the deceased but not at any time.’) If,
by contrast, we equate the presumption with P2, we will look for the
time during which we are worse off because of death than we would have
been had we not died, and worry about the fact that it is difficult to
supply that time. However, there is good reason to reject P2. We have
already seen that comparativism is extremely plausible, and P2 is
false if comparativism is true. 

Even if P2 is false, and death can harm us without leaving us worse
off, there might still be times when, due to death or posthumous
events, we are worse off. Many theorists have offered explanations of
when it is that we incur such harm. There seem to be five
possibilities (and various combinations thereof):

at all times (eternalism)
after they occur (subsequentism)
before they occur (priorism)
at the time they (the mortem events) occur (concurrentism)
at an indeterminate time (indefinitism).


Let us consider each of the five.
4.2 Eternalism

According to some theorists, Feldman (1991) argues for the eternalist
view that my death is always bad for me if bad for me at all (but he
might instead intend to defend atemporalism, defined in section
4.1). If my death harms me, it harms me while I am alive, while I am
dead, and even before I came into existence. However, theorists (among
them Lamont 1998, Silverstein 2000 and Feit 2002) who interpret
Feldman this way argue that he is wrong to accept eternalism. Suppose
I stubbed my toe, and we ask ‘when was the stubbing bad for
me?’ What exactly do we want to know? Perhaps we want to know
when it is true that the stubbing was bad for me. If so, the answer
is: ‘eternally, if ever.’ However, our question might be:
‘at which times do I incur harm for which the stubbing was
responsible?’ If so, the answer is: ‘I incur that harm at
all and only those times when my toe is throbbing as a result of the
stubbing.’ A question concerning the timing of death’s
harmfulness might be similarly ambiguous. In asking, ‘when is
Lincoln’s death bad for him?’ we might want to know when
it is true that his death is bad for him. The answer is presumably
that it is an eternal truth.  Feldman appears to answer this first
question. But his critics are looking for an answer to a second
question, namely this: ‘at which times does Lincoln incur the
harm for which his death is responsible?’ To this latter
question it is absurd to reply that Lincoln is always incurring
harm.
4.3 Subsequentism

The termination thesis poses a significant obstacle to the
subsequentist view that, due to death and posthumous events, we may
incur harm while we are dead. If, after a person dies, there is no such thing as that person, it appears to follow that there is no subject
who is a candidate for further harm. How can we make sense of the idea
that death or posthumous events can harm an individual after she has
died? 

Subsequentists might adopt a metaphysical view that is sometimes
called metaphysical eternalism (defended by Nagel 1970 and
Silverstein 1980, among others). On this view, past and future objects
are ontologically on a par with present objects. Existing things are
spread out in both space and time. Suppose it is possible to refer to
anything that is ontologically on a par with present objects. Then,
given metaphysical eternalism, we can still refer to Socrates even
though ‘Socrates’ refers to something whose existence is
temporally located wholly in the past, and say of him that he is not
alive. Perhaps, then, we can also make sense of the idea that people
undergo harm while dead, assuming that harm can consist in the absence
of some salient good: we can interpret “Socrates’ death
harmed him while his life was over” as “The living
Socrates lacked various salient goods during a time following his
death.”

Is it plausible to argue that dead people can still incur harm? There
are significant obstacles to this view. Here are some relevant
considerations:

Many kinds of things whose reality few would question—boulders,
numbers, and my shoe, for example—cannot be harmed at all, and
certainly cannot incur harm at particular times, yet clearly lack
goods at particular times. Hence its lacking goods at some time does
not imply, of a thing, that it is incurring harm at that time. Let us
say that a creature is responsive at ttt just in case it
has the capacity to accrue at ttt the intrinsic goods or evils in
which welfare consists. At those times when (living) people are
responsive, they may incur harm; because shoes are never responsive,
they can never incur harm. It seems reasonable to assume that while
Socrates is dead he is not responsive, even if, by virtue of existing
in the past, Socrates is ontologically on a par with things that exist
while he is dead. Assuming he is unresponsive while dead, it is hard
to take seriously the idea that he incurs harm then.

Recent defenses of subsequentism seem vulnerable to the charge from
unresponsiveness. According to Neil Feit (2002), Lincoln’s death
was bad for him, if at all, throughout the period he was deprived of
life. To determine whether, and when, dying at time ttt harms me, we
compare the situation in which I die at ttt to the situation (the
nearest possible world W)W)W) I would be in were I not to die at
ttt. If I would fare better in WWW, my dying at ttt harms me;
roughly, it begins to harm me at the time when I begin to fare better
in WWW, and ends at the time when I cease to fare better in WWW.
Ben Bradley (2004, 2009) refines Feit’s version of
subsequentism. According to Bradley, “death is bad for the
person who dies at all and only those times when the person would have
been living well, or living a life worth living, had she not died when
she did.” Is subsequentism defensible on the Feit-Bradley
approach? Perhaps, but they owe us an explanation of how it is that we
can incur harm, albeit by deprivation, during a stretch of time when
we are unresponsive.

Many theorists who reject subsequentism assume that because death
takes a person out of actual existence, the dead are not
“there” to be harmed.  Palle Yourgrau (2019) rejects this
assumption.  He combines modal realism (the view that, like the actual
world, other possible worlds are concrete objects) with the thesis of
transworld identity (one and the same object exists in more than one
possible world), and says that although a dead person no longer exists
in the actual world, one and the same person is still alive, and
exists, in other possible worlds.  We may deny that, after a person
has died, she is no longer real at all—not “there”
to be harmed—because she still exists in other worlds, according
to Yourgrau.  
4.4 Concurrentism

Concurrentism says we incur mortal harm precisely when death occurs.
It also says that those posthumous events that are bad for us harm us
precisely when they occur. One concurrentist, Julian Lamont (1998),
puts the view this way: we incur deprivation harm at the time some
event ensures that we will not retain or attain some good that is
otherwise available. Call such an event an ensuring event.
Death may itself be an ensuring event, so death and at least many
deprivation harms may occur simultaneously. Similar reasoning might
support the concurrentist story about when posthumous events harm us,
for, like death, posthumous events ensure that we will not attain some
goods we otherwise would have had, such as our not being slandered
posthumously. The upshot is a unified story about when death and
posthumous events harm us.

However, the concurrentist story about when posthumous events harm
their victims seems worrisome. The view is that posthumous events that
are bad for us harm us precisely when they occur. The problem, of
course, is that by the time posthumous events occur nothing remaining
of us is capable of incurring harm. This is the point that was just
pressed against subsequentism. Nevertheless, concurrentists could be
correct about when death harms us even if they are wrong about the
time we incur harm from posthumous events. Indeed, they could say that
while death can harm us, posthumous events cannot.
4.5 Priorism

To solve the timing puzzle, we might try rejecting one or more
elements of the Epicurean’s causal account of responsibility,
and see if there is a way to defend the priorist claim that death and
posthumous events can harm the living. To defend priorism, we
will need to deny the assumption that a thing can affect us only
causally. For that assumption, together with the ban on backwards
causation, forces us to dismiss the idea that harm can occur
before the event that precipitates it takes place. Yet, as
George Pitcher (1984) says, this is precisely the idea we need in
order to understand the harmfulness of post-mortem events. They can
harm us by being responsible for truths that affect our interests. For
example, being slandered while I am dead makes it true that my
reputation is to be damaged, and this harms me at all and only those
times when I desire that my reputation be untarnished. It is while I
am alive that I care about my reputation’s always being intact,
and it is while I am alive that my well-being is brought lower by
posthumous slander. The posthumous events themselves harm me only
indirectly; directly I am harmed by their making things true that bear
on my interests. 

Pitcher’s idea can be applied to death as well as post-mortem
events. Death can harm us by making things true that negatively affect
our interests, in which case we incur harm during such time as our
well-being is lower than it otherwise would have been. For example,
dying before I complete some treasured project ensures that “I
shall never complete my project” is true of me; because of this,
my well-being is lower than it would have been, at such times as I am
interested in the success of my project. 

Assuming that comparativism is correct, priorism is not a complete
account of the harmfulness of death and posthumous events, for
comparativism, supplemented with some form of the preferentialist
account of welfare, implies that death can be objectionable, in part,
because it thwarts desires which we would have had and fulfilled had
we not died. Because we never actually will have such desires, we can
never be worse off if they are thwarted. Comparativism also suggests
that death is objectionable insofar as it precludes the pleasure which
we would have enjoyed had we not died, even if we never desired the
pleasure of which death deprives us.

There is another way to extend priorism. We might object to the
state of death, since coming to be dead makes it true of us
that we have desires that will be unfulfilled. But instead of saying
that being dead is objectionable, it seems better to say something
else, once we notice that the state of death is simply the state of
nonexistence initiated by the event of death. Perhaps being dead is
powerless to harm us since any harm that might be associated with it
is entailed in, and brought about by, death itself, which is
responsible for limiting the duration of our lives, and all that that
entails.
4.6 Indefinitism

The last possibility—that death and posthumous events harm us
but at no determinate time (Nagel 1970; Silverstein 1980)—is
criticized by Julian Lamont (1998) on the grounds that it implies that
some events take place but at no particular time. But William Grey
(1999) counters that Lamont has misunderstood Nagel’s (and
Grey’s) indefinitist position, which is that the harm death
causes is incurred during a stretch of time that has blurry boundaries
(compare: the time of the onset of baldness).

As Grey understands it, indefinitism is correct only if subsequentism,
priorism or concurrentism is true (Grey opts for subsequentism), for
even a period of time with blurry edges must occur before, after or at
the same time as a mortem event (eternalism is an exception since an
infinite period has no boundaries to blur).
4.7 Summing Up

Eternalism, the position that those who are harmed by death are always
incurring harm, is surely wrong. Subsequentism is more plausible, but
it is hard to make sense of the idea of incurring harm posthumously,
since we are not responsive while dead. The indefinitist view, as we
have understood it, is also unhelpful; it tells us that the boundaries
of the time death harms us are blurry, yet fails to say when that time
is. Concurrentism or priorism, or some combination of the two, seem to
provide the most promising answers to the timing problem (the problem
of specifying when a victim incurs the harm for which death and
posthumous events are responsible). It does seem reasonable to say
that death may harm us while it occurs. It is far less plausible to
say that posthumous events may harm us while they occur, since we are
not responsive then. It is also plausible to say that both death and
posthumous events may harm us while we are alive, for living people
may have interests that depend on what happens in the future.

At this time it is worth repeating what was stated in section 4.1:
proponents of the harm theses do not need a solution to the timing
puzzle, for something can harm us timelessly; that is, it can be
against our interests even if there is no time ttt at which, because
of it, we are worse off at ttt than we would have been otherwise. As
comparativism says, anything that makes our lives worse than they
otherwise would have been is against our interests. This death usually
does. But at no time after death are we worse off than we would have
been had we not died, for the simple reason that we do not exist.
Death might make us worse off while it occurs; however, it, and a
posthumous event, might also make us worse off before it occurs, since
it may be against the interests we once had.
5. Is Death Always a Misfortune?

Are all deaths misfortunes? Perhaps, but there is a strong case to the
contrary.
5.1 Only Premature Death Is a Misfortune

To support the conclusion that death is not always a misfortune, we
might adopt some version of preferentialism. Perhaps it is not bad to
die at an advanced enough age, for people who live long enough may be
ground down by life until they give up many of their goals. Also, they
will have attained many of their aspirations. If already satisfied, or
given up, a desire cannot be thwarted, even by death, so as we lose
our motivation for living, death ceases to be objectionable to us.
Perhaps death is bad for us only if premature in the sense that it
comes when we still have interests such as salient desires that propel
us forward in life, and only if meeting these interests is a real
prospect.
5.2 Immortality Is a Misfortune

We are left to wonder whether death would ever cease to be
objectionable were we not ravaged by bad health and other
hardships. Bernard Williams (and others, such as Kagan 2012) argues that it would be bad to live
forever, even under the best of circumstances. His view is based on an
assumption about the relationship between our identities and the
desires that motivate us to live.

Consider a woman who wants to die. She might still take the view that
if she is to live on, then she should be well fed and clothed. She
wants food and clothing on condition she remain alive. In this sense
her desires are conditional, and do not give her reason to
live. Contrast a father who is committed to rearing a beloved
daughter: he desires unconditionally that the child do well, and his
desire gives him reason to live, because he can rear his child only if
he survives. In this sense, his desire is categorical, or
unconditional. Williams thinks that categorical desires are essential
to identity, and give meaning to life. Through categorical desires, we
are attached to projects or relationships that are definitive of the
self; faced with their destruction, we would feel our lives are
meaningless, and that in an important sense we cannot survive as the
persons we once were.

The bearing on death, according to Williams, is, first, that people
have good reason to condemn a death that is premature in the sense
that it thwarts their categorical desires. Second, mortality is good,
since people who live long enough eventually will lose the categorical
desires with which they identify. Life will lose its novelty, and
oppressive boredom will set in. To avoid ennui, superseniors would
have to replace their fundamental desires, again and again. But this
is to abandon their identities; it is tantamount to death.

As Williams says, lives of unimaginative routine will eventually grow
stale if extended long enough. Of course, this is not supposed to
comfort ordinary mortals, most of whom will die long before routine
undermines the joy in living. However, as several theorists, including
Nagel (1986, p. 224, n. 3) Glover (1977, p. 57), and Fischer (1994)
have suggested, it is not obvious that life must become dull. Williams
may have overlooked how rich and complex life can be, especially for
superseniors who pursue multiple open-ended projects in the company of
other superseniors. His response to this kind of criticism is that
even rich and open-ended projects eventually will become routine (say
after a few billion years), so our pursuits must be replaced
periodically if we are to remain interested in life. But to phase in
wholly new projects is to lose our identity.

Williams’s response faces objections. First, we might avoid
boredom by adding to our pursuits, and varying the way we approach
them, without abandoning certain core interests that define us.
Second, Williams is working with a view of identity that may be too
narrow. Many of us would welcome a possibility that he downplays:
gradually transforming our interests and projects over time.
Transformation is not death. It is distinct from, and preferable to,
annihilation. Transformation would be death only if identity were
wholly a matter of retaining (most of) our psychological features over
time. However, it is questionable that persistence requires this kind
of connectedness. Even if our persistence hinges on our psychological
features, transformation need not be death, since transformation is
consistent with the gradual, continuous change of our psychological
features. If we could live endlessly, the stages of our lives would
display reduced connectedness, yet they could be continuous, which is
a property that is important in the kind of survival most of us prize.
Even after drinking at the fountain of eternal youth, we would tend to
focus on relatively short stretches of our indefinitely extensive
lives, and over these periods we would prize connectedness, since we
are animated by specific projects and relationships that can be
developed only if there are strong interconnections among the temporal
stages of our lives. However, sometimes we would turn our attention to
relatively long stretches of life, and then, prizing continuity, we
would phase in new and worthwhile undertakings that build upon, and do
not wholly replace, the old.
6. Can Death’s Harmfulness be Reduced

Even if death is usually bad for those who die, perhaps it
need not be bad for us, if we prepare ourselves suitably.
This might be possible if some form of preferentialism is true, and
if, by altering our desires, we could cease to have any interests that
dying would impair. For then we might be able to thanatize
our desires, in this sense: abandon all desires that death might
thwart. Among these are desires we can satisfy only if we live on for
a few days, but also desires we cannot possibly satisfy within the
span of a normal lifetime, and the desire for immortality itself.
Instead of desiring that some project of mine succeed, which is a
desire that might be thwarted by my death, I might instead adopt a
conditionalized version of this desire, namely: should I live on, let
my project succeed. If all goes well, thanatizing would insulate us
from harm from death by leaving us with no interests with which dying
interferes. 

Unfortunately, this strategy will backfire. The main problem is that
death can interfere with desire fulfillment not just by falsifying the
objects of our desires but also by precluding our having desires
(Luper 2013). So even if we resolve, from now on, to limit ourselves
to desires whose objects cannot be falsified by death, we are still
vulnerable to the harm death will do us if it precludes our having and
fulfilling desires. Hence thanatizing would force us to avoid having
any desires whose fulfillment would have benefitted us, and to deny
ourselves such desires would be as bad for us as the harm we are
trying to avoid.

However, the core idea of adapting our desires is useful, if not taken
to an extreme. It is prudent to avoid taking on goals we cannot
possibly attain, and hence prudent to eschew projects that cannot
possibly be completed during the course of a normal lifetime.