In many Western jurisdictions, the law presumes that adult persons,
and sometimes children that meet certain criteria, are capable of
making their own health care decisions; for example, consenting to a
particular medical treatment, or consenting to participate in a
research trial. But what exactly does it mean to say that a subject has
or lacks the requisite capacity to decide? This last question has to do
with what is commonly called “decisional capacity,” a
central concept in health care law and ethics, and increasingly an
independent topic of philosophical inquiry.


Decisional capacity can be defined as the ability of health
care subjects to make their own health care decisions. Questions of
‘capacity’ sometimes extend to other contexts, such as
capacity to stand trial in a court of law, and the ability to make
decisions that relate to personal care and finances. However, for the
purposes of this discussion, the notion of decisional capacity will be
limited to health care contexts only; most notably, those where
decisions to consent to or refuse treatment are concerned.


The combined theoretical and practical nature of decisional capacity
in the area of consent is probably one of the things that makes it so
intellectually compelling to philosophers who write about it. But this
is still largely uncultivated philosophical territory. One reason is
the highly interdisciplinary and rapidly changing nature of the field.
Clinical methods and tests to assess capacity are proliferating. The
law is also increasingly being called upon to respond to these clinical
developments. All of this makes for a very eclectic and challenging
field of inquiry. Philosophers must tread carefully if their
contributions are to be timely and relevant.
 
1. Informed Consent


The origins of our contemporary concept of decisional capacity lie
in a varied configuration of historical developments in health care law
and ethics that accompany the rise of the doctrine of informed consent.
That doctrine is intended to promote and protect the autonomy of health
care subjects (Faden & Beauchamp 1986). It is commonly observed
that autonomy in this context ‘flows from the recognition that
all persons have unconditional worth, each having the capacity to
determine his or her own moral destiny’ (Beauchamp &
Childress 2001, 63–4). To respect autonomy in this case means that
‘we have a fundamental obligation to ensure that patients have
the right to choose, as well as the right to accept or decline
information’ (Beauchamp & Childress 2001, 63). Allowing adult
persons and some children to make their own health care decisions is an
essential component of this conception of autonomy.


Typically, in order to be deemed legally and ethically valid, an
individual's consent must be properly informed and free of
coercion (Faden & Beauchamp, 1986). A third requirement is that the
individual whose consent is being sought is actually able to accomplish
the decisional task at hand; in other words, they must have the ability
to make that particular decision. This condition is sometimes referred
to as ‘competence’ on the grounds that what is at issue is
‘the ability to perform a task’ (Beauchamp & Childress
2001, 70). It is also sometimes referred to as ‘capacity’,
since the task in question involves the capacity to make a decision
(Buchanan & Brock 1989, 84). We return to these exegetical issues
once we have a better idea of what the concept of “decisional
capacity,” as defined, is meant to capture.


The concept of decision-making capacity is therefore evidently broad
in scope, emerging from a rich history that spans health care law,
ethics, and philosophy. Debates surrounding the correct definition and
application of the concept take place in all three domains, and many
discussions endeavor to accommodate and integrate all three
perspectives. There is a fourth item we must add to our list. This is
the fact that there now exist an impressive variety of clinical tests
and methods to assess capacity (Dunn et al. 2006; Vellinga et al. 2004;
Welie 2001), which adds yet another dimension to the evaluation of
claims about capacity. Tests for capacity need to be assessed for their
reliability and major concepts and theories need to be empirically
validated. This last element of capacity addresses the epistemic
question how we can know an individual meets certain standards for
capacity. Such questions must be distinguished from the conceptual and
normative task of determining what capacity is and how it should be
defined.


The fact that the concept of decisional capacity must serve many
masters is important to keep in mind when assessing theories of
decisional capacity and individual determinations of capacity. One must
be careful to acknowledge the divergent methodological aims and limits
of different methods and theories. This still leaves a large role for
philosophy, since many of the challenges that face the theory of
decisional capacity are inextricably philosophical in nature. The role
of rationality in decision-making, and the role of values and emotion
in choice, are among some of the more central philosophical questions
we shall consider.
2. Elements of Capacity


Comprehensive theories of decisional capacity fall into two main
groups. Some discussions remain at a very philosophical level
(Buchanan & Brock 1989; Culver & Gert 1987, 1999, 2004; Drane
1985; Freedman 1981). In more empirically oriented discussions, a
concerted effort is made to define concepts operationally and
specialized psychometric tests are proposed (Etchells 1999; Kim 2010;
Grisso & Appelbaum 1998; Welie 2001). The law also has its own
history of tests and procedures that bear on the assessment of
capacity (Roth et al. 1977; Zapf & Roesch 2005). Indeed, the
manner in which clinical assessments of capacity interface with the
relevant law constitutes an important topic of its own (Owen et
al. 2009; Richardson 2010).


Despite this variety of approaches, it is possible to identify some
shared posits in leading contemporary work on decisional capacity. Very
often, decisional capacity is divided into four sub-capacities. These
are: (1) Understanding; (2) Appreciation; (3) Reasoning; (4) Choice. In
some instances, capacity is also said to include: (5) Values. But not
always. The basic elements of capacity and their rationale are the
following:


(1). Understanding. Perhaps the most basic element of capacity is
understanding (Buchanan & Brock 1989, 23). Obviously, in
order to be capable of consenting to or refusing a given treatment, a
subject must have some basic understanding of the facts involved in
that decision. Yet this apparently simple requirement can turn out to
be rather complex depending on how ‘understanding’ itself
is defined (Drane 1985). Basic comprehension and knowledge or cognition
of facts is one minimal interpretation (Grisso & Appelbaum 1998,
37–42). However, most commentators recognize that this level of mental
ability is not enough for generating the sort of health care decisions
we are concerned with.


(2). Appreciation. In addition to understanding in the basic factual
sense alluded to above, most writers on capacity agree that subjects
must also have some appreciation of the nature and
significance of the decision that they are faced with (Grisso &
Appelbaum 1998, 42–52). The reason is that in order to understand what
the facts in a decision really ‘are’, they must mean
something to the decision-maker. Very basically, subjects must
recognize that this really is their decision to make, that it
is their life and values and future that are at stake. Thus,
in addition to understanding, subjects must be able ‘to
appreciate the nature and meaning of potential alternatives —
what it would be like and “feel” like to be in possible
future states and to undergo various experiences — and to
integrate this appreciation into one's decision making’
(Buchanan & Brock, 1989, 24). This element of capacity is sometimes
held to derive from the legal requirement that each subject must have
‘insight’ into the circumstances of a given decision (Glass
1997).


(3). Reasoning. Without the mental ability to engage in
reasoning and manipulate information rationally, it is
impossible for understanding and appreciation to issue in a decision
(Buchanan & Brock 1989, 24–25; Grisso & Appelbaum 1998, 52–58).
The concept of reasoning is often left vague in discussions of
decisional capacity. Probably this is because insisting on too high and
specific a normative standard of reasoning might risk making a majority
of health care subjects decisionally incapable; a reductio ad
absurdum of any theory of decisional capacity that implied such a
result. Yet normative standards of reasoning sometimes do get
mentioned, for example, consistency and the ability to derive
conclusions from premises (Freedman 1981). Reasoning is also usually
said to include the ability to weigh risks and benefits and evaluate
putative consequences. Again, no specific normative criteria for
success are spelled out. Difficult cases must therefore be assessed
individually.


(4). Choice. It is possible to imagine a case where understanding
and appreciation and reasoning are all intact, but where a subject has
no way to express or communicate their intended decision. It is
impossible for them to express a choice. Yet unless a subject's
preferred choice can be expressed to others in some outward way, it is
impossible to know their intended decision. The condition is not
trivial, since some patients — for example, stroke victims
— can have an active mental life and satisfy our first three
conditions for capacity, but are unable to express anything verbally or
through gestures (e.g. blinking the eyes, lifting a finger etc.). This
has led some commentators to add the ability to express a choice to the
list of elements that comprise capacity (Grisso & Appelbaum 1998,
34–37). This is perhaps the least mental of the sub-capacities that
constitute capacity, which may explain why it is not considered an
element of capacity by some authors.


(5). Values. In addition to these four elements of capacity, some
theorists explicitly state that capacity requires a set of values
(Buchanan & Brock 1989, 24–25). Since a subject's values can
be expected to change over time, what is required is not an
immutable, fixed, set of values, but a minimally consistent and stable
set of values (Buchanan & Brock 1989, 24). Another way of
expressing this point is to say that capacity requires ‘a
conception of what is good’ (Ibid). The reason for this
last requirement should be obvious. Weighing the risks and benefits of
various alternative choices requires values (Charland 1998a). So does
selecting one option over others. Yet some leading accounts of capacity
are strangely silent over the role and place of values in capacity
(Grisso & Appelbaum 1998). Perhaps this is because the formulation
and elaboration of values to guide choice usually involves emotion. As
we shall see, this is an aspect of capacity that some theorists would
prefer to downplay.
3. Assumptions


Two central assumptions underlie virtually all contemporary work on
decisional capacity. These derive largely from the requirements that
the law imposes on the ethics of informed consent .


The first assumption is that decision-making capacity is
decision relative (Buchanan & Brock 1989, 18–20). The
significance of this assumption is that capacity is always assessed
relative to a specific decision, at a particular time, in a particular
context. Note that this differs markedly from the era when capacity was
thought to extend globally over time and place, irrespective of context
(Buchanan & Brock 1989, 20–23). One important consequence of this
assumption is that traditional psychometric instruments for judging
‘mental status’, like the mini-mental state examination,
are no longer deemed acceptable for assessing capacity in the context
of consent (Folstein et al. 1975). The mini-mental state examination is
a simple psychometric tool that helps clinicians ask and rank
patient's responses to questions that inquire into their mental
‘status’. The questions have to do with orientation
(‘Where are you right now?’) and also address basic
perceptual and mental skills (‘Can you count back from 100
subtracting 7 at a time?). Although extremely popular and practical,
the mini-mental state examination is now thought to be too global and
general for a proper assessment of a patient's mental capacity to
make treatment decisions. Indeed, by law, assessments of capacity must
now be more ‘case-specific’ and responsive to
‘situational variations in demands’ (Grisso & Appelbaum
1998, 22). Thus ‘decisional relativity’ now requires
that the assessment of the mental capacity to make a treatment decision
must be directly tied to a particular decision, for a particular
patient, at a specific place and time.


A second assumption that pervades contemporary work on decisional
capacity is that decision-making capacity is a threshold
concept (Buchanan & Brock 1989, 26–29). Of course, depending
on the nature and sophistication of the tools used to assess capacity,
it is sometimes possible to meaningfully speak of ‘degrees’
of capacity. The problem is that, in practice, what is required of a
determination of capacity is a practical judgment of a bivalent type.
This bivalent character of capacity judgments derives from the special
practical function of capacity determinations, which is to issue an
‘all-or-nothing’ and ‘yes-or-no’ verdict about
whether a person can make a particular decision for herself or not
(Buchanan & Brock 1989, 27).
4. Terminology


As defined above, the term “decisional capacity” is
meant to capture a component of informed consent. This is the ability
of subjects to make health care decisions; primarily decisions to
consent to or refuse treatment. Yet while there is some agreement on
what the sub-capacities that underlie decisional capacity are supposed
to be, the same cannot be said of the term “decisional
capacity” itself. In fact, there is a large amount of
disagreement and confusion over whether “decisional
capacity” is an appropriate term to refer to this element of
informed consent. The other candidate is the term
“competence.” Generally, in these discussions,
‘capacity’ and ‘competence’ are
understood to mean ‘decisional capacity’ and ‘mental
competence’, respectively. These terminological infelicities can
cause considerable confusion but are often overlooked. There are a
number of strategies in the literature for addressing them.


One way to settle our problem is to use the terms
“capacity” and “competence” interchangeably and
warn against exceptions. This usually is done by adding a minor proviso
or caveat at the beginning of a discussion to that effect (Charland
2002, 37 note 1; Checkland 2001, 53, note 2; National Bioethics
Advisory Commission 1998, Ch1. Note 4). The strategy has the virtue of
avoiding the cumbersome repeated substitution of one term for the other
in or across discussions where both are used. But it can also
inadvertently perpetuate confusion of just the sort it is meant to
obviate.


Another strategy for addressing our terminological problem can be
gleaned from a leading reference work in the area, entitled
Deciding for Others. In this pioneering book, Allen Buchanan
and Dan Brock write that ‘competence is competence for some
task, competence to do something’ (Buchanan &
Brock 1989, 84; emphasis in original). They then specify their own
focus, which is ‘competence to make a decision’
(Ibid.). This leads to a lengthy discussion of what the
authors call “decision-making competence” and its
standards, as well as the specific ‘decision-making
capacities’ that are said to underlie what they call
“decision competence.” According to this strategy, the
introduction of a new term — “decisional competence”
— is the proposed solution. Unfortunately, this stipulative
solution arguably compounds rather than simplifies our problem, since
it is more common to speak of “decisional capacity”
than “decisional competence.”


A third strategy is to attempt to reconcile the usage of our two
terms — “competence” and “capacity”
— by establishing their independence and then paying heed to
those differences. For example, in their landmark study, Competence
to Consent to Treatment, Thomas Grisso and Paul Appelbaum consider
the following approach:


… we talk of “decision-making capacities” when we
refer to the abilities related to decisions. We use the term
“competence,” however, to denote the state in which a
patient's decision-making capacities are sufficiently intact for their
decisions to be honored (and conversely for incompetence) regardless
of who makes the determination. (Grisso & Appelbaum 1998,
11)


This last suggestion is reasonable enough, but it is hard to see why
it should be preferred to the stipulative solution proposed above.


Finally, a fourth strategy for solving our terminological problem is
to focus on who makes the determination of a subject's decisional
ability. On one interpretation, this approach leads to the view that
‘decision making capacity is a clinical assessment of a
patient's ability to make specific health care decisions, whereas
competency is a legal determination of the patient's ability to
make his or her own decisions in general’ (Ganzini et al., 2004,
264). Against this option, it can be argued that, while attractive in
principle, the proposed distinction breaks down in practice. Indeed, as
Thomas Grisso and Paul Appelbaum aptly remind us, physicians often make
assessments of capacity that effectively carry the weight of legal
judgments, even though the courts are not directly involved (Grisso
& Appelbaum 1998, 11).


Despite this last rebuttal, it remains true that in some legal
jurisdictions, like Britain, the term “capacity” is usually
taken to be a legal one (Bielby 2005; Tan & Elphik 2002). On the
other hand, in the United States, it is the terminology of
“competence” that is often said to carry legal connotations
and authority (Buchanan 2004; Berg et al. 1996). So, the law does offer
some manner to choose between our two terms. However, this is not very
helpful, since as soon as we switch jurisdictions or engage in
comparative work, terms change.


What all of this means is that anyone researching the concept of
decisional capacity should be wary of taking key terms at face value
and must make sure to examine their underlying origins and assumptions.
In this discussion, we assume that the concepts of
“decisional capacity” and “mental competence”
are interchangeable, unless specified otherwise. However, in the name
of simplicity and consistency, we use the terminology of
“decisional capacity” for the purposes of exposition.
5. Rationality


A theory of decisional capacity must allow for the fact that health
care subjects can make unpopular decisions, even ones that are
considered highly irrational by others. A good example of such a
decision is the refusal of life-saving transfusion due to doctrinal
religious reasons (Charland 2001, 137). Indeed, it is considered
axiomatic in most theoretical work on decisional capacity that
‘clinicians should not conclude that patients lack
decision-making capacity just because they make a decision contrary to
medical advice’ (Ganzini 2004, 264). The challenge is that, while
a theory of decisional capacity must allow for such apparently
irrational decisions, it must also embody a clear and robust test of
capacity. It is therefore an important desideratum of an adequate
theory of decisional capacity that it permit some kinds of highly
irrational decisions, but forbid others.


The most widely accepted solution to the requirement that a
theory of decisional capacity permit some irrational decisions but
forbid others, is to construe decisional capacity as a matter of
process (Buchanan & Brock 1989; Freedman 1981). On this
view, capacity has more to do with the nature of the reasoning process
whereby one arrives at a decision, rather than the content or outcome
of the actual decision itself. What counts is the ‘internal
rationality’ of the reasoning process. ‘Internal
rationality’ in this sense is supposed to be distinguishable from
‘external rationality’. There is in fact a division among
theories of decisional capacity between those that stress
‘internal rationality’ and process as a major criterion of
capacity, and those that insist instead on the primacy of
‘external rationality’ and outcomes (Charland 2001).


Consider, again, the example of refusal of life-saving
transfusion based on adherence to religious doctrine. It can plausibly
be argued that, in such a case, a subject is decisionally capable to
make a decision of this sort as long as it is rational according to
internal reasons they recognize as theirs (Freedman 1981). This is an
example of internal rationality. To this example one can add the
condition that the decision must accord with the subject's basic
goals and values (Buchanan & Brock 1989). In cases where criteria
like these are said to be satisfied, subjects are sometimes deemed to
be decisionally capable to refuse treatment and their decisions are
honored. Decisional capacity in such cases is ultimately a matter of
internal rationality. In such theories, capacity is allegedly assessed
without evaluating the content or outcome of the decision. But of
course to be meaningful, the decision must have some
‘content’ — what it is about — which
may be called its ‘putative’ content (Charland 2001).


Theories that construe decisional capacity as a matter of internal
rationality are sometimes criticized on the grounds that they ignore
the importance of ‘external rationality’ as a criterion of
capacity. Consider the example of a subject who refuses
electroconvulsive treatment for depression because of an irrational
fear of the procedure, even though they have consented to and benefited
from it in the past (Culver & Gert 1987, 2004). In this case, the
outcome of the decision to refuse treatment can plausibly be said to be
irrational; so irrational, indeed, that the subject should be deemed
incapable to refuse treatment and the decision overruled. On this view,
‘internal rationality’ and the mental processes involved in
understanding and appreciation are not sufficient for establishing
decisional capacity, although they may be necessary (Culver & Gert
1997). Some standard of ‘external capacity’ is also
required. It is necessary to consider the outcome of decisions in order
to rule on capacity. According to one such prominent theory of
‘external rationality’, capacity should be defined as the
ability to make rational decisions, in this external sense (Culver
& Gert 2004, 265).
6. Risk and Symmetry


Part of what is involved in reasoning about a particular course of
action and reaching a decision is weighing the risks and benefits and
consequences of proposed options. In health care contexts where consent
is at issue, this normally amounts to a decisional problem that is
framed in symmetrical terms: either one consents to a given treatment
option, or one refuses that same treatment option. This way of framing
things seems to assume that both poles of the decision are symmetrical
and that mental capacity necessarily remains fixed as one evaluates the
two options. Yet this is an assumption that can be philosophically
challenged.


It is sometimes argued that treatment decisions and refusals are not
symmetrical. The reason is that the risks respectively associated with
consenting to or refusing treatment are not the same. From this it is
inferred that the decisions are not the same; hence, that decisions to
consent to or refuse treatment are not symmetrical. There have been
substantial debates over the symmetricality question (Brock 1991;
Buller 2001; Cale 1999; Checkland 2001; Skene 1991; Wicclair, 1991,
1999; Wilks 1997, 1999). An interesting aspect of these debates is
whether decisional capacity should be considered a fixed mental
commodity, or instead assessed according to a ‘sliding
scale’ that varies with the associated risks and circumstances
(Buchanan & Brock 1989, 60). However, while it may seem plausible
to say that riskier decisions ought to require higher standards or
levels of capacity, critics respond that there is something
counterintuitive about claiming that mental capacities can vary
according to external circumstances in this way (Culver & Gert
2004, 264).
7. Dual Nature of Competence


In assessing claims about capacity, it is important to distinguish
between descriptive and factual aspects of capacity on the one hand,
and prescriptive and normative aspects on the other. As one commentator
explains: ‘a psychiatrist may give expert testimony, in his
capacity as a trained observer, about a person's competence seen
as a factual matter, and the judge may or may not give this testimony
practical effect in deciding how we ought to treat that person’
(Freedman 1981, 55). In this example, the first claim addresses the
issue whether the individual is decisionally capable. The
second claim addresses the issue whether the individual should
be considered decisionally capable. Note that this dual nature of
capacity goes beyond individual judgments of capacity and extends to
theories of capacity as a whole. It is especially important not to
conflate or equivocate between these two aspects of capacity when
assessing theories and determinations of capacity. At the same time,
paying heed to the distinction makes the concept of capacity both
philosophically problematic and empirically elusive.


Consider, first, individual determinations of capacity. There are
now a number of published studies that report on the decisional
capacity of different patient groups to consent to treatment or
research. In some cases, depressed patients are found to be
decisionally capable and compare well with matched controls (Appelbaum
& Grisso 1995). At the same time, some clinicians warn that we
should be wary of such results. The reason is that the ability of
depressed patients to weigh risks and benefits is most likely
compromised due to their depressed mood, even though cognitively their
reasoning may be intact (Elliott 1999; Rudnick 2001). There are two
ways to interpret the claims that are at odds in this dispute. First,
there is the descriptive claim that the subjects are capable.
Second, there is the normative claim that, notwithstanding this
descriptive fact of the matter, the subjects nonetheless probably
should not be declared capable. Note that what critics are
arguing is not that a better use of the same tests would yield a more
accurate set of descriptive results, namely, a determination of
incapacity rather than a determination of capacity. Instead, the point
is that it may be the test and its underlying theory that need to be
reexamined.


A rather different situation occurs in debates about whether
addicted subjects have the capacity to consent to research that employs
their drug of choice, notably, heroin (Charland 2002). Compared to the
above case, what is different about this example is the fact that the
debate lies at the descriptive level only. The issue is what a given
test will yield, if it is applied, and that it must be applied; not, as
above, that we probably should not accept the results of a test, since
there are normative grounds to doubt the appropriateness of the
test.


There is in fact a surprising absence of empirical research on the
ability of addicted individuals to consent to treatment or research
(Anderson & Du Bois 2007; Charland 2011). Until such research is conducted, we
cannot say with certitude whether subjects of this sort are capable to
consent or not. Debates of this descriptive sort also occur in the
literature on the capacity of schizophrenic subjects to consent to
research (Carpenter 2000; Weijer 1999). But in this case, many of the
requisite studies have been carried out and the empirical data base is
much richer than in the case of addiction.


In debates like the above, it is easy to equivocate between the
descriptive claim that a subject is or is not capable, and the
normative judgment that they should or should not be considered
capable. Yet since the two kinds of claims are so interdependent, it is
easy to inadvertently conflate or confuse one level of argument with
the other. Explicitly acknowledging and respecting the dual nature of
capacity is an important safeguard for avoiding these pitfalls. It
helps distinguish cases where what is at issue is primarily a
descriptive matter, namely, the application of a given theory or test
of capacity, from cases that are essentially normative in nature, for
example, where what is at issue is the empirical validity of the
concept of capacity embodied in a given test.
8. Empirical Validity


At the origin of any theory of capacity, there lies a set of
paradigm examples around which the theory is built and which it must
account for. Thus, in the initial instance, a theory is built around a
selection of paradigm examples of what capacity and incapacity
should be taken to be. With few notable exceptions, these
normative origins of the theory of decisional capacity are seldom
explicitly stated or debated (Culver & Gert 1987). The focus,
instead, appears to be on ensuring that specific tests are
statistically reliable, and on generating empirical data on the
decisional capacity of various patient groups (Appelbaum & Grisso,
1995; Grisso et al. 1995; Grisso & Appelbaum 1995). We saw above
that there are instances where the assessment of results yielded by
specific tests for capacity start to merge into normative evaluative
questions that bear on the empirical validity of those tests. In fact,
questions of empirical validity are a matter of increasing concern in
the recent literature on capacity (Appelbaum 2007, 1838; Howe 2009).


In a study that assesses the capacity of anorexic patients to
consent to and refuse treatment, psychiatrist Jacinta Tan and her
colleagues have compiled evidence which suggests that one of the most
popular empirical tests of capacity may embody a faulty theoretical
conception of decisional capacity (Tan et al., 2003a, 2003b, 2007, 2009).
First, Tan and colleagues apply the MacCAT-T test for competence
developed by Tom Grisso and Paul Appelbaum to their research subjects
(Grisso & Appelbaum 1998, 173–200). Then, based on the results of
additional qualitative data collected from those subjects, Tan and her
colleagues challenge the individual capacity determinations of the
MacCAT-T. Thus, claims that the subjects are capable to
consent to or refuse treatment according to the MacCAT-T, are
challenged on the basis that there is convincing independent evidence
that those same subjects should not be considered decisionally
capable.


While Tan and her colleagues do not argue that their study shows
that the MacCAT-T and its supporting theory are entirely empirically
invalid, philosophically, this is a legitimate interpretation of what
is at issue (Charland 2006). The problem is not simply that the
MacCAT-T may be off base on a few problematic cases; a tension that
further applications of the test might resolve. Rather, the point is
that the MacCAT-T appears to be profoundly off the mark; that there is
a foundational problem with the theory. In her study, Tan asks subjects
who wish to refuse treatment for their reasons. Reponses by subjects
reveal that often their putative decision is based on fundamental
overvaluations of their fatness and deeply entrenched iatrogenic
assumptions about personhood. These pathological valuations, Tan
argues, are a direct causal result of severe anorexia. So the
irrationality here is due to the disease. Because the MacCAT-T is not
designed to incorporate such data on reasons and values, it predicts
that the subjects are capable to refuse treatment, even though, in
Tan's view, her own evidence suggests the opposite.
9. Value and Emotion


The example of anorexia above shows that concerns about the empirical
validity of theories and tests of decisional capacity are not always
simply based on a clash of intuitions over paradigm cases.  Evidence
about a subjects' underlying values is also relevant. A similar case
can be made for the centrality of values in conceptualizations of
voluntarism, another pivotal ingredient of informed consent. Which
brings us back to the topic of emotion and the status of value as an
element of capacity.


Leading clinical theories and tests of decisional capacity tend to
be exclusively cognitive in nature and orientation (Grisso &
Appelbaum 1998; Etchells 1999). As a result, those tests and theories
ignore the positive contribution of emotion to capacity (Charland
1998a). Of course, emotions and their associated feelings can conflict
with and impair the mental functions that underlie capacity. But what
is rarely acknowledged is that emotions and feelings also have a
positive role to play; indeed, that capacity without emotion is
impossible.


Philosophers have been stressing the positive importance of emotion
for the theory of decisional capacity for some time (Buchanan &
Brock, 1989; Drane 1985; White 1997). After all, it seems obvious that
most decisions to consent to or refuse treatment are made largely on
the basis of emotion, or at least have important contributing
emotional factors. Thus, there is the hope or despair that one will
get well; or there can be anger, fear, or joy that one will undergo a
given procedure. In such cases emotions and their underlying
valuations often function as reasons for action (Charland 1998b). Not
surprisingly, concerns over the absence of emotion from leading models
of capacity have started to emerge in the clinical literature on
capacity (Berghmans 2004; Roberts 2002b; Torsten & Vollman 2004;
Vellinga et al. 2004).  Here it is important not to forget that
decisional capacity in the context of consent is invariably a matter
of ‘practical judgment’ (Pepper-Smith et al., 1996). This
makes the contribution of emotion doubly important. The reason is that
in practical judgment emotions are ‘on-line’ and therefore
usually have a marked felt bodily dimension (Charland 1998b).


Emotions and their associated feelings both embody and promote core
values of the organism. Thus an important corollary of the fact that
emotions are central to decisional capacity, is that values as well are
equally important (Charland 2001). Yet most leading theories of
capacity have very little to say about value, preferring instead to
stick to ostensibly more tangible and ‘objective’ matters
of fact (Grisso & Appelbaum 1998). As a result, subjects are seldom
asked ‘why’ questions that probe into the values behind
their expressed preferences (Tan 2007). Yet in the case of mental
disorders that impair valuation, there are good reasons to think this
information highly clinically relevant. Indeed, pathologically-induced
changes in values appear to play a large role in a number of medical
conditions where capacity is thought to be impaired.


For example, in the case of anorexia, pathologically induced
overvaluation of thinness may be a central contributing factor
underlying impaired decision-making capacity (Tan 2007). Conversely, in
addiction, pathological overvaluation of addictive substances probably
contributes to impaired capacity (Charland 2002, 2007). Recall, also,
the case of depression, where the fact that subjects may undervalue
risks arguably impairs capacity (Elliott 1997; Rudnick 2002). Finally,
there is Alzheimer's disease, which poses particularly vexing
challenges that implicate value and capacity (Jaworska 1999).


In all of the above examples, the mental disorder in question can
cause pathological alternations in value that may impair
decision-making capacity. When those changes in value are sufficiently
pervasive and severe, they may even threaten personal identity, since
it is no longer clear that the valuations which inform decision-making
are authentically chosen by the subject. Instead, they are caused and
imposed by the disease. At this point, we can legitimately wonder
whether we have crossed the line from capacity to accountability. The
point is no longer merely whether a subject is capable to consent to or
refuse treatment. There is now the further question whether a subject
can be considered accountable for her decision; whether, that is,
the decision is truly her own (Elliott 1991).


Evidently, further empirical research on how valuation contributes
to capacity is required before we can devise tests that declare
subjects to be incapable due to pathological valuations. But that
valuation should be considered a contributing factor in decisional
capacity seems both philosophically and clinically indisputable. None
of this removes the cognitive bias of the law, which remains stubbornly
institutionally and historically entrenched: a legal noose around the
theoretical neck of capacity. And so, until such a time as the law
changes, the theory of decisional capacity will remain in a state of
tension: torn between new clinical developments and empirical research
that increasingly call for the inclusion of values and emotion in the
theory of capacity, and the cognitive inertia of the law (Appelbaum
1998). Philosophy is sure to play a critical role in articulating and
meeting these challenges. However, right now we have to wonder whether
it is ethically appropriate for the theory of decisional capacity to
treat health care subjects as if they were only cognizers, when in fact
they are also emoters. That seems a dismal failure of the principle of
respect for autonomy — which, ironically, is what led us to
inquire into capacity in the first place.
10. Revival of Voluntarism


Together with decision-making capacity and the provision of relevant
information, the capacity for voluntary choice — voluntarism
— is one of the three fundamental pillars of informed
consent. Indeed, the very first principle of the Nuremberg Code states
that, “the voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely
essential” (U.S.A. vs. Karl Brandt, 1949). The Code goes on to
specify that, “the person involved…should be so situated
as to be able to exercise free power of choice, without the
intervention of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress,
overreaching, or other ulterior form of constraint or coercion
…” (ibid.). This principle, which is meant to
protect the inviolability of the capacity for voluntary choice in the
context of research, is also fundamental in the ethical and legal
principles that govern the doctrine of informed consent in the context
of treatment.


Until recently, there has been a remarkable paucity of empirical
research on the capacity for voluntary choice in the context of
consent, and the means to assess it (Appelbaum et al. 2009, 31; Roberts
2002b, 705). Fortunately, that situation is changing, and there is now
a limited but important revival of scholarly work on voluntarism in the
relevant literature (Appelbaum et al. 2009; Weiss Roberts 2002b;
Geppert 2007). There is of course a long and valuable tradition of
philosophical work on voluntarism in the biomedical and ethical
literature on consent. What distinguishes the revival we are concerned
with from this long venerable tradition, is a sharp clinical focus on
empirical theoretical construction and conceptualization, as well as
the attempt to develop assessment tools.


The reasons for taking voluntarism in this clinical sense seriously
should be obvious. In the early days of psychiatry, it was widely
recognized that there could be lesions of the will, just as there
could be lesions of the understanding and the affective
faculties. Towards the end of the last century, the French
philosopher-psychologist Théodule Ribot published a highly
influential book on the topic, entitled Les maladies de la
volonté — later translated as ‘Diseases of the
Will’ (Ribot 1883). Ribot argued that the capacity for voluntary
choice could sometimes be compromised, perverted, or even virtually
obliterated, by disease, and that the various impairments that
resulted deserved to be scientifically studied and classified. While
it is no longer popular to speak of ‘diseases of the will’
in this way, contemporary clinicians and researchers do recognize that
human will and agency can be impaired in various ways by diseases of
many sorts. The problem is that how exactly these deficits impact on
decision-making capacity, and what they mean for the doctrine of
informed consent, remains largely unclear.


Addiction is a case in point. We have seen that there are a number of
ways in which choice may be compromised in severe forms of substance
dependence. Some of these impairments, like pathological hyperbolic
fluctuations and deviations in values, might be classified as problems
with decision-making capacity, strictly speaking; in particular,
appreciation and reasoning (Charland 2002). Other impairments, such as
those stemming directly from disordered impulse or compulsion, might
more helpfully be addressed by adopting the perspective of voluntarism
(Roberts 2002a). A big problem with attempting to settle such
questions is that, “voluntarism, as a capacity has not
been adequately examined or empirically studied for its ingredient
elements” (Roberts 2002a, 58). Until we know how to
conceptualize the capacity for voluntary choice, it is hard to know
exactly how to distinguish it from decision-making capacity, and
therefore hard to understand its role in informed consent as a
whole. The issues are certainly not limited to addiction, but extend
to psychopathology generally. Clearly, new developments in the
conceptualization and assessment of the capacity for voluntary choice
are directly relevant to parallel efforts to understand and assess
decision-making capacity and consent.


Contemporary theoretical approaches to voluntarism tend to highlight
and begin with one of two theoretical perspectives: legal or ethical.
Currently, the legal perspective is best exemplified in recent work by
Paul Appelbaum and his collaborators (Appelbaum et
al. 2009). According to this view, the existing law on informed
consent is taken as a fundamental given; an essential desideratum for
the theoretical viability of any conceptualization of voluntarism that
aims to have practical legal import. In contrast, Laura Weiss Roberts
proposes a conceptualization of voluntarism where ethical theoretical
desiderata play a much larger role than legal ones. It is the law,
here, that is expected to be subservient to ethics, and not the
reverse. These two perspectives give rise to two quite different
definitions of voluntarism.
10.1 Legal Approach to Voluntarism.


Appelbaum and his collaborators state that, “for legal purposes, a
decision is presumed voluntary if no evidence exists that someone else
has unduly influenced it or coerced the person deciding” (Appelbaum
2009, 32). They go on to specify that “a decision is involuntary only
if it is subject to a particular type of influence that is
external, intentional, illegitimate, and causally linked to the choice
of the subject” (33). The discussion then turns to specific examples of
constraints on voluntariness that can arise in research settings.
Appeals to shared values, inducements, persuasion, and force, are the
four principal types of external influences that are discussed. A full
review of the very interesting and detailed examples of types of
influence that Appelbaum and his colleagues provide cannot be provided
here. However, it is intriguing to note that these examples are
virtually all taken from the realm of addiction research; a theoretical
fact that begs for elaboration but receives none. Are we to believe
that constraints on voluntary choice in this domain are greater than
elsewhere?


A great virtue of the conceptualization of voluntariness proposed by
Appelbaum and his colleagues is that it is accompanied by a
psychometric instrument designed to assess patient's perceptions of
coercion. This is the MacArthur Perceived Coercion Scale (PCS). The
instrument was originally developed in the context of psychiatric
hospitalization. However, we are told that, “a slightly modified
version of this questionnaire may be helpful to uncover the extent to
which subjects believe that their decisions are not their own, and our
experience suggests that this modified version can also be helpful in
research consent settings” (36). Admittedly, this is just a start.
Improvements are said to require inquiring into “the nature of the
influences on respondents' decisions, or their legitimacy” (37). That,
in turn, is said to begin with “a general inquiry into the motivations
for a person's decision to enrol in research” (37). For this, it will
be necessary to ask questions such as, “What made you decide to
participate in the research project?” (37).


Questions of the above sort — “Why?” questions
— bring us back to the central role of values and reasons among
the factors that need to be considered in assessments of
decision-making capacity generally (Charland 2001, 2006). It is clear
that inclusion of such factors makes the assessment of decision-making
capacity, and now voluntariness, much more difficult than
consideration of cognitive factors alone. However, this appears to be
the price that must be paid in exchange for an empirically valid
theoretical conceptualization that is sufficiently rich to do justice
to the facts and practical tasks at hand. To give the law and its
exclusively cognitive perspective the first and final word on such
matters is, in the end, to abdicate on the possibility of attaining an
empirically adequate theory of both decision-making capacity, and now
voluntariness. No doubt, Appelbaum and his collaborators believe that
it is imperative to respect the letter of the law as much as
possible when engaged in theoretical conceptualization in these
areas. However, others differ and we now have the makings of a
vigorous debate.
10.2 Ethical Approach to Voluntarism.


Psychiatrist Laura Weiss Roberts proposes a definition and
conceptualization of voluntariness that explicitly cites and embraces
the role of values and reasons in informed consent. Unlike Appelbaum and
his colleagues, she focuses on the ethical, rather than the legal,
foundations of informed consent in framing her account of
voluntariness. According to Roberts, traditional accounts of
voluntarism tend to focus on cognitive influences at the expense of
factors like “…emotional maturity and the emergence of
distinct personhood” (Roberts 2002, 705–706; see also Gebbert
& Abbot 2007, 412). Other non-traditional influences include,
“[e]motional experience, life history, and personal
psychological issues … [s]uffering and pain due to physical or
mental health problems … emotional distress … and
distinct psychological experiences of power relationships”
(Roberts 2002, 706). Recognizing such non-traditional influences
requires additional safeguards, she argues.


Not surprisingly, the recognition of such non-traditional factors
among the theoretical and practical desiderata that an empirically
adequate conceptualization of voluntariness must include, yields a
very different definition of “voluntariness” than the one
proposed by Appelbaum and his colleagues. Somewhat ironically, Roberts
purports to borrow from the insights of Grisso and Appelbaum's (1998)
analysis of decision-making capacity in formulating her account of
voluntariness (Roberts 2002, 707). The situation is ironic, because
she arrives at a definition of voluntariness that is not only
incompatible with the one proposed by Appelbaum, but also one that he
explicitly rejects on the grounds that it “…does not
reflect the law and could not be implemented in a research
setting” (Appelbaum 2009, 34).


Roberts defines voluntariness “… as ideally encompassing
the individual's ability to act in accordance with one's authentic
sense of what is good, right, and best in light of one's situation,
values, and prior history” (707). On her view, voluntarism
“…involves the capacity to make this choice freely and in
the absence of coercion“ (707). She goes on to add that,
“[d]eliberateness, purposefulness of intent, clarity,
genuineness, and coherence with one's prior life decisions are
implicitly recognized in this construction” (707). Among the
domains of influence that need to be considered, Roberts cites:
developmental factors, illness-related considerations, psychological
issues and cultural and religious values, and external features and
pressures (707–709). It is impossible to provide a full review of
Robert's examples and the manner in which she argues they can impair
or compromise the capacity for voluntary choice. Suffice it to say
that her selection of examples differs markedly from those proposed by
Appelbaum.


The difference between the two definitions of voluntarism outlined
above should occasion little surprise in light of the different
approaches they derive from. Appelbaum and his colleagues begin their
account of voluntarism with a commitment to the ‘legal
doctrine’ of informed consent (Appelbaum 2009, 30). In contrast,
Roberts begins her account of voluntarism with a commitment to the
‘ethical meaning’ of informed consent (Roberts 2002,
705). It is therefore no wonder that their conceptualizations and
examples are different. It is interesting that both accounts point to
the need to include considerations that relate to values in the
assessment of voluntariness. This is a matter on which Appelbaum and
his collaborators appear to be making increased concessions, as they
simultaneously attempt to preserve the cognitive bias of the law.


Clarification in the area of values — their nature, their origin,
their role in consent — is sure to be an important prerequisite of
future work in this domain, as scholars endeavour to develop improved
theories, while at the same time being mindful of the need to address
the practical exigencies of clinical reality with reliable and valid
assessment tools. It is worth noting that the time required for
assessments of capacity is already a significant concern for
clinicians, especially in complicated cases, where assessment risks
turning into a separate therapeutic intervention of its own (Szmukler
2010). While theoretically laudable, the proposal that we expand the
scope of assessment tools designed to evaluate the capacity for
voluntarism to include values, risks adding to these woes. Likewise
with decision-making capacity. On the other hand, there may be no other
option if we wish to have assessment tools for assessing voluntarism
and decision-making capacity that truly reflect the clinical realities
they are meant to capture.