Richard Dedekind (1831–1916) was one of the greatest
mathematicians of the nineteenth-century, as well as one of the most
important contributors to algebra and number theory of all time. Any
comprehensive history of mathematics will mention him for his
investigation of the notions of algebraic number, field, ring, group,
module, lattice, etc., and especially, for the invention of his theory
of ideals (see, e.g., Dieudonné 1985, Boyer & Merzbach
1991, Stillwell 2000, Kolmogorov & Yushkevich 2001, Wussing 2012).
Dedekind's more foundational work in mathematics is also widely known,
at least in parts. Often acknowledged in that connection are: his
analysis of the notion of continuity, his introduction of the real
numbers by means of Dedekind cuts, his formulation of the
Dedekind-Peano axioms for the natural numbers, his proof of the
categoricity of these axioms, and his contributions to the early
development of set theory (Grattan-Guinness 1980, Ferreirós
1996, 1999, 2016b, Jahnke 2003).

While many of Dedekind's contributions to mathematics and its
foundations are thus common knowledge, they are seldom discussed
together. In particular, his foundational writings are often treated
separately from his other mathematical ones. This entry provides a
broader and more integrative survey. The main focus will be on his
foundational writings, but they will be related to his work as a
whole. Indeed, it will be argued that foundational concerns are at
play throughout, so that any attempt to distinguish sharply between
his “mathematical” and his “foundational” work
is artificial and misleading. Another goal of the entry is to
establish the continuing relevance of his contributions to the
philosophy of mathematics, whose full significance has only started to
be recognized. This is especially so with respect to methodological
and epistemological aspects of Dedekind's approach, which ground the
logical and metaphysical views that emerge in his writings.
 

1. Biographical Information

Richard Dedekind was born in Brunswick (Braunschweig), a city in
northern Germany, in 1831. Much of his education took place in
Brunswick as well, where he first attended school and then, for two
years, the local technical university. In 1850, he transferred to the
University of Göttingen, a center for scientific research in
Europe at the time. Carl Friedrich Gauss, one of the greatest
mathematicians of all time, taught in Göttingen, and Dedekind
became his last doctoral student. He wrote a dissertation in
mathematics under Gauss, finished in 1852. As was customary, he also
wrote a second dissertation (Habilitation), completed in
1854, shortly after that of his colleague and friend Bernhard Riemann.
Dedekind stayed in Göttingen for four more years, as an
unsalaried lecturer (Privatdozent). During that time he was
strongly influenced by P.G.L. Dirichlet, another renowned
mathematician in Göttingen, and by Riemann, then a rising star.
(Later, Dedekind did important editorial work for Gauss, Dirichlet,
and Riemann.) In 1858, he moved to the Polytechnic in Zurich (later
ETH Zürich), Switzerland, to take up his first salaried position.
He returned to Brunswick in 1862, where he became professor at the
local university and taught until his retirement in 1896. In this
later period, he published most of his major works. He also had
interactions with other important mathematicians; thus he was in
correspondence with Georg Cantor, collaborated with Heinrich Weber,
and developed an intellectual rivalry with Leopold Kronecker. He
stayed in his hometown until the end of his life, in 1916. (Cf. Landau
1917, ch. 1 of Dugac 1976, Scharlau 1981, Mehrten 1982, ch. 1 of
Ferreirós 1999, and Harborth et al. 2007 for more
biographical information.)

Dedekind's main foundational writings are: Stetigkeit und
irrationale Zahlen (1872) and Was sind und was sollen die
Zahlen? (1888a). Equally important, as emphasized by historians
of mathematics, is his work in algebraic number theory. That work was
first presented in an unusual manner: as supplements to Dirichlet's
Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie. The latter text was
based on Dedekind's notes from Dirichlet's lectures, edited further by
him, and published in a series of editions. It is in his supplements
to the second edition, from 1871, that Dedekind's famous theory of
ideals was first presented. He modified and expanded it several times,
with a fourth edition published in 1893 (Lejeune-Dirichlet 1893,
Dedekind 1964). An intermediate version of Dedekind's theory was also
published separately in a French translation (Dedekind 1877). Further
works by him include: a long article on the theory of algebraic
functions, written jointly with Heinrich Weber (Dedekind 1882); and a
variety of shorter pieces in algebra, number theory, complex analysis,
probability theory, etc. All of these were re-published, together with
selections from his Nachlass, in Dedekind (1930–32).
Finally, lecture notes from some of his own classes were made
available later (Dedekind 1981, 1985), as were further selections from
his Nachlass (Dedekind 1982, also Dugac 1976, Sinaceur 1990,
Schlimm 2000) and from his correspondence (Noether &
Cavaillès 1937, Lipschitz 1986, Meschkowski & Nilson 1991,
Scheel 2014).

As this brief chronology indicates, Dedekind was a wide-ranging and
very creative mathematician, although he tended to publish slowly and
carefully. It also shows that he was part of a distinguished tradition
in mathematics, extending from Gauss and Dirichlet through Riemann,
Dedekind himself, Weber, and Cantor in the nineteenth century, on to
David Hilbert, Ernst Zermelo, Emmy Noether, B.L. van der Waerden,
Nicolas Bourbaki, and others in the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries. With some partial exceptions, these mathematicians did not
publish explicitly philosophical treatises. At the same time, all of
them were very sensitive to foundational issues in mathematics
understood in a broad sense, including the choice of basic concepts,
the kinds of reasoning to be used, and the presuppositions build into
them. Consequently, one can find philosophically pregnant remarks
sprinkled through their works, as exemplified by Dedekind (1872) and
(1888a).

Not much is known about other intellectual influences on Dedekind,
especially philosophical ones. While a student in Göttingen, he
did attend a lecture class by Hermann Lotze, called "Deutsche
Philosophie seit Kant" ("German philosophy since Kant"), as is clear
from notes he took that were rediscovered not long ago. His short
biography of Riemann (Dedekind 1876a) also contains a reference to the
post-Kantian philosopher and educator J.F. Herbart, professor in
Göttingen from 1833 to 1841, as an influence on Riemann; and in
his correspondence, Dedekind mentions the German Idealist J.G. Fichte,
in passing (Scharlau 1981). However, he does not aligns himself
explicitly with either of them, nor with any other philosopher or
philosophical school. In fact, little is known about which
philosophical texts might have shaped Dedekind's views, especially
early on. A rare piece of information we have in this connection is
that he became aware of Gottlob Frege's most philosophical work,
Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (published in 1884), only after
having settled on his own basic ideas; similarly for Bernard Bolzano's
Paradoxien des Unendlichen (Dedekind 1888a, preface to the
second edition). Then again, German intellectual life at the time was
saturated with discussions of Kantian and Neo-Kantian views, including
debates about the role of intuition for mathematics, and there is
evidence that Dedekind was familiar with at least some of them.
2. Overtly Foundational Work
2.1 The Foundations of Analysis

The issues addressed in Dedekind's Stetigkeit und irrationale
Zahlen (Continuity and Irrational Numbers) grow out of
the “rigorization” and “arithmetization” of
analysis (the mathematical theory) in the first half of the nineteenth
century. But their roots go deeper, all the way down, or back, to the
discovery of incommensurable magnitudes in Ancient Greek geometry
(Jahnke 2003, ch. 1). The Greeks' response to this startling discovery
culminated in Eudoxos' theory of ratios and proportionality, presented
in Chapter V of Euclid's Elements (Mueller 1981, ch. 3). This
theory brought with it a sharp distinction between discrete quantities
(numbers) and continuous quantities (magnitudes), thus leading to the
traditional view of mathematics as the science of number, on the one
hand, and of magnitude, on the other hand. Dedekind's first
foundational work concerns, at bottom, the relationship between the
two sides of this dichotomy.

An important part of the dichotomy, as traditionally understood, was
that magnitudes and ratios of them were not thought of as numerical
entities, with arithmetic operations defined on them, but in a more
concrete geometric way (as lengths, areas, volumes, angles, etc. and
as relations between them). More particularly, while Eudoxos' theory
provides a contextual criterion for the equality of ratios, it does
not include a definition of the ratios themselves, so that they are
not conceived of as independent objects (Stein 1990, Cooke 2005). Such
features do little harm with respect to empirical applications of the
theory; but they lead to inner-mathematical tensions when solutions to
various algebraic equations are considered (some of which could be
represented numerically, others only geometrically). This tension came
increasingly to the fore in the mathematics of the early modern
period, especially after Descartes' integration of algebra and
geometry. What was called for, then, was a unified treatment of
discrete and continuous quantities.

More directly, Dedekind's essay was tied to the arithmetization of
analysis in the nineteenth century—pursued by Cauchy, Bolzano,
Weierstrass, and others—which in turn was a reaction to tensions
within the differential and integral calculus, introduced earlier by
Newton, Leibniz, and their followers (Jahnke 2003, chs. 3–6). As
is well known, the inventors of the calculus relied on appeals to
“infinitesimal” quantities, typically backed up by
geometric or even mechanical considerations, although this was seen as
problematic from early on. The initial “arithmetizers”
found a way to avoid infinitesimals (in terms of the epsilon-delta
characterization of limits familiar from current introductions to the
calculus). Yet this again, or even more, led to the need for a
systematic characterization of various quantities conceived of as
numerical entities, including a unified treatment of rational and
irrational numbers.

Dedekind faced this need directly, also from a pedagogical
perspective, when he started teaching classes on the calculus at
Zurich in 1858 (Dedekind 1872, preface). Moreover, the goal for him
was not just to supply a unified and rigorous account of rational and
irrational numbers; he also wanted to do so in a way that established
the independence of analysis from mechanics and geometry, indeed from
intuitive considerations more generally. This reveals a further
philosophical motivation for Dedekind's work on the foundations of
analysis, not unconnected with the mathematics involved, and it is
natural to see an implicit anti-Kantian thrust in it. Finally, the way
in which to achieve all of these objectives was to relate arithmetic
and analysis closely to each other, indeed to reduce the latter to the
former.

While the general idea of reducing analysis to arithmetic, as opposed
to geometry, was not new at the time—Dedekind shared it with,
and adopted it from, his teachers Gauss and Dirichlet
(Ferreirós 1999, ch. 4)—the particular manner in which he
proceeded was quite original. The crucial issue, or the linchpin, for
him was the notion of continuity. To get clearer about that notion, he
compared the system of rational numbers with the points on a geometric
line. Once a point of origin, a unit length, and a direction have been
picked for the latter, the two systems can be correlated
systematically: each rational number corresponds, in a unique and
order-preserving way, with a point on the line. But a further question
then arises: Does each point on the line correspond to a rational
number? Crucially, that question can be reformulated in terms of
Dedekind's idea of “cuts” defined directly on the rational
numbers, so that any geometric intuition concerning continuity can be
put aside. Namely, if we divide the whole system of rational numbers
into two disjoint parts while preserving their order, is each such
division determined by a rational number? The answer is no, since some
correspond to irrational numbers (e.g., the cut consisting of {x:x2<2}{x:x2<2}\{x :
x^2 \lt 2\} and {x:x2>2}{x:x2>2}\{x : x^2 \gt 2\} corresponds to 2–√2\sqrt{2}). In
this explicit, precise sense, the system of rational numbers is not
continuous, i.e. not line-complete.

For our purposes several aspects of Dedekind's procedure, at the start
and in subsequent steps, are important (cf. Ferreirós 1999, ch.
4). As indicated, Dedekind starts by considering the system of
rational numbers seen as a whole. Noteworthy here are two aspects: Not
only does he accept this system as an “actual infinity”,
i.e. a complete infinite set that is treated as a mathematical object
in itself; he also considers it “structurally”, as an
example of a linearly ordered set closed under addition and
multiplication (an ordered field). In his next step—and
proceeding further along set-theoretic and structuralist
lines—Dedekind introduces the set of arbitrary cuts on his
initial system, thus working essentially with the bigger and more
complex infinity of all subsets of the rational numbers (the full
power set). It is possible to show that the set of those cuts can in
turn be endowed with a linear ordering and with operations of addition
and multiplication, thus constituting a totally new “number
system”.

It is not the cuts themselves with which Dedekind wants to work in the
end, however. Instead, for each cut—those corresponding to
rational numbers, but also those corresponding to irrational
quantities—he “creates” a new object, a “real
number”, determined by the cut (cf. Dedekind 1876b, 1888b).
Those objects, together with an order relation and arithmetic
operations defined on them (in terms of the corresponding cuts), form
the crucial system for him. Next, two properties of the new system are
established: The rational numbers can be embedded into it, in a way
that respects the order and the arithmetic operations (a corresponding
field homomorphism exists); and the new system is continuous, or
line-complete, with respect to its order. What we get, overall, is the
long missing unified criterion of identity for rational and irrational
numbers, both of which are now treated as elements in an encompassing
number system (isomorphic to, but distinct from, the system of cuts).
Finally Dedekind indicates how explicit and straightforward proofs of
various facts about the real numbers can be given along such lines,
including ones that had been accepted without rigorous proof so far.
These include: basic rules of operation with square roots; and the
theorem that every increasing bounded sequence of real numbers has a
limit value (a result equivalent, among others, to the more well-known
intermediate value theorem.)

Dedekind's published this account of the real numbers only in 1872,
fourteen years after developing the basic ideas on which it relies. It
was not the only account proposed at the time; indeed, various
mathematicians addressed this issue, including: Weierstrass, Thomae,
Méray, Heine, Hankel, Cantor, and somewhat later, Frege
(Dieudonné 1985, ch. 6, Boyer & Merzbach 1991, ch. 25,
Jahnke 2003, ch. 10). Most familiar among their alternative treatments
is probably Cantor's, also published in 1872. Instead of using
“Dedekind cuts”, Cantor works with (equivalence classes
of) Cauchy sequences of rational numbers. The system of such (classes
of) sequences can also be shown to have the desired properties,
including continuity. Like Dedekind, Cantor starts with the infinite
set of rational numbers; and Cantor's construction again relies
essentially on the full power set of the rational numbers, here in the
form of arbitrary Cauchy sequences. In such set-theoretic respects the
two treatments are thus equivalent. What sets apart Dedekind's
treatment of the real numbers, from Cantor's and all the others, is
the clarity he achieves with respect to the central notion of
continuity. His treatment is also more maturely and elegantly
structuralist, in a sense to be spelled out further below.
2.2 The Foundations of Arithmetic

Providing an explicit, precise, and systematic definition of the real
numbers constitutes a major step towards completing the
arithmetization of analysis. Further reflection on Dedekind's
procedure (and similar ones) leads to a new question, however: What
exactly is involved in it if it is thought through fully, i.e., what
does this account of the real numbers rely on ultimately? As noted,
Dedekind starts with the system of rational numbers; then he uses a
set-theoretic procedure to construct, in a central step, the new
system of cuts out of them. This suggests two sub-questions: First,
how exactly are we to think about the rational numbers in this
connection? Second, can anything further be said about the relevant
set-theoretic procedures and the assumptions behind them?

In his published writings, Dedekind does not provide an explicit
answer to our first sub-question. What suggests itself from a
contemporary point of view is that he relied on the idea that the
rational numbers can be dealt with in terms of the natural numbers
together with some set-theoretic techniques. And in fact, in
Dedekind's Nachlass explicit sketches of two now familiar
constructions can be found: that of the integers as (equivalence
classes of) pairs of natural numbers; and that of the rational numbers
as (equivalence classes of) pairs of integers (Sieg & Schlimm
2005, earlier Dugac 1976). It seems that these constructions were
familiar enough at the time for Dedekind not to feel the need to
publish his sketches. (There is also a direct parallel to the
construction of the complex numbers as pairs of real numbers, known to
Dedekind from W.R. Hamilton's works, and more indirectly, to the use
of residue classes in developing modular arithmetic, including in
Dedekind 1857. For the former cf. Ferreirós 1999, ch. 7, for
the latter also Dugac 1976.)

This leads to the following situation: All the material needed for
analysis, including both the rational and irrational numbers, can be
constructed out of the natural numbers by set-theoretic means. But
then, do we have to take the natural numbers themselves as given; or
can anything further be said about those numbers, perhaps by reducing
them to something even more fundamental? Many mathematicians in the
nineteenth century were willing to assume the former. A well-known
example is Leopold Kronecker, for whom the natural numbers are
“given by God” while the rest of arithmetic and analysis
is “made by mankind” (Ferreirós 1999, ch. 4). In
contrast Dedekind, and independently Frege, pursued the latter
option—they attempted to reduce arithmetic and the natural
numbers to “logic”. This is the main goal of Was sind
und was sollen die Zahlen? (The Nature and Meaning of
Numbers, or more literally, What are the numbers and what are
they for?). Another goal is to answer the second sub-question
left open above: whether more can be said about the set-theoretic
procedures used. For Dedekind, again similar to Frege, these
procedures are founded in “logic”. But what are the basic
notions of logic?

Dedekind's answer to this last question is: Basic for logic are the
notions of object (“Ding”), set (or system,
“System”), and function (mapping,
“Abbildung”). These notions are, indeed, fundamental for
human thought—they are applicable in all domains, indispensable
in exact reasoning, and not reducible further. While thus not
definable in terms of anything even more basic, the fundamental
logical notions are nevertheless capable of being elucidated, thus of
being understood better. Part of their elucidation consists in
observing what can be done with them, including how arithmetic can be
reconstructed in terms of them (more on other parts below). For
Dedekind, that reconstruction starts with the consideration of
infinite sets, as in the case of the real numbers, but now in a
generalized and more systematic manner.

Dedekind does not just assume, or simply postulate, the existence of
infinite sets; he tries to prove it. For that purpose, he considers
“the totality of all things that can be objects of my
thought” and argues that this “set” is infinite
(Dedekind 1888a, section v). He also does not just presuppose the
concept of infinity; he defines it (in terms of his three basic
notions of logic, as well as the definable notions of subset, union,
intersection, etc.). The definition is as follows: A set of objects is
infinite—“Dedekind-infinite”, as we now say—if
it can be mapped one-to-one onto a proper subset of itself. (A set can
then be defined to be finite if it is not infinite in this sense.)
Moving a step closer to arithmetic, this leads to the notion of a
“simple infinity” (or “inductive set”). A
rigorous introduction of that notion involves Dedekind's innovative
idea of a “chain”. As one would say in contemporary
terminology, a chain is the minimal closure of a set A in a
set B containing A under a function f on
B (where being “minimal” is conceived of in terms
of the general notion of intersection).

What it means to be simply infinite can now be captured in four
conditions: Consider a set S and a subset N of
S (possibly equal to S). Then N is called
simply infinite if there exists a function f on S
and an element 1 of N such that: (i) f maps
N into itself; (ii) N is the chain of {1}{1}\{1\} in
S under ff\,f; (iii) 1 is not in the image of N
under fff; and (iv) fff is one-to-one. While at first
unfamiliar, it is not hard to see that these Dedekindian conditions
are a notational variant of Peano's axioms for the natural numbers. In
particular, condition (ii) is a version of the axiom of mathematical
induction. These axioms are thus properly called the Dedekind-Peano
axioms. (Peano, who published his corresponding work in 1889,
acknowledged Dedekind's priority; cf. Ferreirós 2005.) As is
also not hard to see, any simple infinity will consist of a first
element 1, a second element f(1)f(1)f(1), a third f(f(1))f(f(1))f(f(1)), and so on,
just like any model of the Dedekind-Peano axioms.

Given these preparations, the introduction of the natural numbers can
proceed as follows: First, Dedekind proves that every infinite set
contains a simply infinite subset. Then he establishes that any two
simply infinite systems, or any two models of the Dedekind-Peano
axioms, are isomorphic (so that the axiom system is categorical).
Third, he notes that, as a consequence, exactly the same arithmetic
truths hold for all simple infinities; or closer to Dedekind's actual
way of stating this point, any truth about one of them can be
translated, via the isomorphism, into a corresponding truth about the
other. (That is to say, all models of the Dedekind-Peano axioms are
“logically equivalent”, which means that the axiom system
is “semantically complete”; cf. Awodey & Reck 2002).
In those respects, each simply infinity is as good as any other.

As a further step, Dedekind appeals again to the notion of
“creation”. Starting with some simple infinity constructed
initially—it doesn't matter which one we start with, given their
isomorphism—he “creates” new objects corresponding
to its elements, thereby introducing a special simple infinity,
“the natural numbers”. As we saw, this last step has an
exact parallel in the case of the real numbers (see again Dedekind
1888b). However, in the present case Dedekind is more explicit about
some crucial aspects. In particular, the identity of the newly created
objects is determined completely by all arithmetic truths, i.e., by
those truths transferable, or invariant, in the sense explained above.
In other words, Dedekind's natural numbers are characterized by their
“relational” or “structural” properties alone;
unlike the elements in other simply infinite systems, they have no
non-arithmetic or “foreign” properties (cf. Reck 2003; but
see Sieg & Morris forthcoming for an alternative take on
Dedekind's procedure in his 1888 essay).

What Dedekind has introduced is the natural numbers conceived of as
finite “ordinal” numbers (or counting numbers: the first,
the second, etc.). Later he adds an explanation of how their usual
employment as finite “cardinal” numbers (answering to the
question: how many?) can be recovered. This is done by using initial
segments of the number series as tallies: for any set we can ask which
such segment, if any, can be mapped one-to-one onto it, thus measuring
its “cardinality”. (A set turns out to be finite in the
sense defined above if and only if there exists such an initial
segment of the natural numbers series.) Dedekind rounds off his essay
by showing how several basic, and formerly unproven, arithmetic facts
can now be proved too. Especially significant is his purely
“logical” justification of the methods of proof by
mathematical induction and definition by recursion (based on his
theory of chains).
2.3 The Rise of Modern Set Theory

As indicated, set-theoretic assumptions and procedures already inform
Dedekind's Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen. In particular,
the system of rational numbers is assumed to be composed of an
infinite set; the collection of arbitrary cuts of rational numbers is
treated as another infinite set; and when supplied with an order
relation and arithmetic operations on its elements, the latter gives
rise to a new number system. Parallel moves can be found in the
sketches, from Dedekind's Nachlass, of how to introduce the
integers and the rational numbers. Once more we start with an infinite
system, here that of all the natural numbers, and new number systems
are constructed out of it set-theoretically (although the full power
set is not needed in those cases). Finally, Dedekind uses similar
set-theoretic techniques in his other mathematical work as well (e.g.
in his treatment of modular arithmetic and his construction of ideals
as infinite sets, to be discussed more below). It should be emphasized
that the application of such techniques was quite novel and bold at
the time. While a few mathematicians, such as Cantor, used them too,
many others, like Kronecker, rejected them. In fact, by working
seriously with actual infinities Dedekind took a stance incompatible
with that of his teacher Gauss, who had allowed for the infinite only
as a “manner of speaking” (Ferreirós 1999, ch. 7,
earlier Edwards 1983).

What happens in Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?, in the
context of Dedekind's logicist reconstruction of the natural numbers,
is that the adoption of set-theoretic techniques is raised to a new
level of clarity and explicitness. Dedekind not only presents
set-theoretic definitions of various mathematical notions, he also
adds a systematic reflection on the means used thereby (and he expands
that use in certain respects). Consequently, the essay constitutes an
important step in the rise of modern set theory. We already saw that
Dedekind presents the notion of set, together with those of object and
function, as fundamental for human thought. Here an object is anything
for which it is determinate how to reason about it, including having
definite criteria of identity (Tait 1996). Sets are a kind of objects
about which we reason by considering their elements, and this is all
that matters about them. In other words, sets are to be identified
extensionally, as Dedekind is one of the first to emphasize. (Even as
important a contributor to set theory as Bertrand Russell struggles
with this point well into the twentieth century.) Dedekind is also
among the first to consider, not just sets of numbers, but sets of
various other objects as well.

Functions are to be conceived of extensionally too, as ways of
correlating the elements of sets. Unlike in contemporary set theory,
however, Dedekind does not reduce functions to sets. (Not
unreasonably, he takes the ability to map one thing onto another, or
to represent one by the other, to be fundamental for human thought;
see Dedekind 1888a, preface). Another important aspect of Dedekind's
views about functions is that, with respect to their intended range,
he allows for arbitrary functional correlations between sets of
numbers, indeed between sets of objects more generally. (For the
gradual development of his views in this connection, see Sieg &
Schlimm 2005.) He thus rejects previous, often implicit restrictions
of the notion of function to, e.g., functions presented by familiar
formulas, to functions representable in intuition (via their graphs),
or to functions decidable by a formal procedure. That is to say, he
works with a generalized notion of function. In this respect he
adopts, and expands on, the position of another of his teachers:
Dirichlet (Stein 1988, Ferreirós 1999, ch. 7). Dedekind's
notion of set is general in the same sense.

Such general notions of set and function, together with the acceptance
of the actual infinite that gives them bite, were soon attacked by
finitistically and constructively oriented mathematicians like
Kronecker. Dedekind defended his approach by pointing to its
fruitfulness (Dedekind 1888a, first footnote, cf. Edwards 1983,
Ferreirós 1999, ch. 7). But eventually he came to see one
feature of it as problematic: his implicit acceptance of a general
comprehension principle (another sense in which his notion of set is
unrestricted). We already touched on a specific way in which this
comes up in Dedekind's work. Namely, in Was sind und was sollen
die Zahlen? he introduces “the totality of all things that
can be objects of my thought” (his “universal set”),
together with arbitrary subsets of that totality (a general
“Aussonderungsaxiom” is used); but then, any
collection of objects counts as a set.

As already noted, Dedekind goes beyond considering only sets of
numbers in his 1888 essay. This is a significant extension of the
notion of set, or of its application, but it is not where the main
problem lies, as we know now. A more worrisome aspect consists of the
particular way in which his all-encompassing totality is introduced,
namely by reference to “human thought”, since this leads
to the question of whether crude psychologistic features are involved
(more on that topic later). However, the most problematic
feature—and the one Dedekind came to take seriously
himself—is a third one: his set theory is subject to the
set-theoretic antinomies, including Russell's antinomy. (If any
collection of objects counts as a set, then also Russell's collection
of all sets that do not contain themselves; but this leads quickly to
a contradiction.) Dedekind seems to have found out about that problem
from Cantor in the late 1890s (who informed him that the collection of
all ordinal numbers is an “inconsistent totality”, as is
the collection of all “objects of thought”). This news
shocked Dedekind initially. Thus he delayed republication of Was
sind und was sollen die Zahlen?; he even expressed doubts about
“whether human thinking is fully rational” (Dedekind
1930–32, Vol. 3, p. 449, Dedekind 1996a, p. 836). Later he
regained belief in the “inner harmony” of his approach,
although he was not able to provide a resolution to the problem
himself (Dedekind 1930-32, Vol. 3, p. 343, Preface to the third
edition of his essay, published in 1911).

Russell's antinomy and related problems establish that Dedekind's
original conception of set is untenable. However, they do not
invalidate his other contributions to set theory. Dedekind's analysis
of continuity, the use of Dedekind cuts in the characterization of the
real numbers, the definition of being Dedekind-infinite, the
formulation of the Dedekind-Peano axioms, the proof of their
categoricity, the analysis of the natural numbers as finite ordinal
numbers, the justification of mathematical induction and recursion,
and most basically, the insistence on extensional, general notions of
set and function, as well as the acceptance of the actual
infinite—all of these contributions can be isolated from the
set-theoretic antinomies. As such, they have been built into the very
core of contemporary axiomatic set theory, model theory, recursion
theory, and other parts of logic.

And there are further contributions to set theory we owe to Dedekind.
These do not appear in his published writings, but in his
correspondence. Especially significant here is his exchange of
letters, starting in 1872, with Cantor (Noether & Cavaillès
1937, Meschkowski & Nilson 1991). These letters contain a
discussion of Cantor's and Dedekind's respective treatments of the
real numbers. But more than that, they amount to a joint exploration
of the notions of set and infinity. Among the specific contributions
Dedekind makes in this context are: He impressed Cantor with a proof
that not only the set of rational numbers but also the set of all
algebraic numbers is countable (Ferreirós 1999, ch. 6). This
led, at least in part, to Cantor's further study of infinite
cardinalities and to his discovery, soon thereafter, that the set of
all real numbers is not countable. Dedekind also provided a proof of
the Cantor-Bernstein Theorem (that between any two sets which can be
embedded one-to-one into each other there exists a bijection, so that
they have the same cardinality), another basic result in the modern
theory of transfinite cardinals (Ferreirós 1999, ch. 7).

Finally, in the further development of set theory during the twentieth
century it became clear that several of Dedekind's results and
corresponding procedures can be generalized in important ways. Perhaps
most significantly, Zermelo and von Neumann succeeded in extending his
analysis of mathematical induction and recursion to the higher
infinite, thus expanding on, and establishing more firmly, Cantor's
theory of transfinite ordinals and cardinals. Looking back at all of
these contributions, it is no wonder that Zermelo—who knew the
relevant history well—considered the modern theory of sets as
having been “created by Cantor and Dedekind” (quoted in Ferreirós 2016b).
3. Logicism and Structuralism

So far we have focused on Dedekind's contributions in his overtly
foundational writings. We reviewed his innovative approaches to the
natural and real numbers; we also reconsidered his role in the rise of
modern set theory. Along the way, some philosophical issues have come
up. A more extended reflection on them seems called for, however,
especially concerning Dedekind's “logicism” and
“structuralism” (both contested topics in the recent
secondary literature).

Like for Frege, the other main logicist in the nineteenth century,
“logic” is more encompassing for Dedekind than often
assumed today (as comprising only first-order logic). Both thinkers
take the notions of object, set, and function to be fundamental for
human thought and, as such, to fall within the range of logic. Each of
them then develops a version of set theory (a theory of
“systems”, “extensions”, or
“classes”) as part of logic. Also for both, logic in this
encompassing sense is independent of intuitive considerations, and
specifically, of traditional geometry, understood to be grounded in
intuition itself. A main goal in reducing analysis and arithmetic to
logic is, thus, to establish that those fields too are independent of
intuition (Demopoulos & Clark 2005, Klev 2011).

The view that analysis is not dependent on geometry, since it falls
within the realm of arithmetical and basic logical thought, was not
entirely new at the time—Gauss and Dirichlet already held such a
view, as mentioned above (cf. also Ferreirós 2007). What Frege's and
Dedekind's crucial contributions consisted in were original, detailed
reductions of, on the one hand, analysis to arithmetic and, on the
other hand, arithmetic to logic. Moreover, each of them complemented
these reductions with systematic elaborations of logic. As Dedekind's
work was better known than Frege's at the time, probably because of
his greater reputation as a mathematician, he was seen as the main
representative of “logicism” by interested contemporaries,
such as C.S. Pierce, Ernst Schröder, and David Hilbert (cf.
Ferreirós 1999, ch. 7, and Ferreirós 2009; but see the
debate in Benis-Sinaceur 2015 and Ferreirós forthcoming about
whether Dedekind should be interpreted as a logicist in the end).

In addition to these general commonalities in Dedekind's and Frege's
versions of logicism, the two thinkers also agreed on a methodological
principle encapsulated in the following remark by Dedekind: In
science, and especially in mathematics, “nothing capable of
proof ought to be accepted without proof” (Dedekind 1888a,
preface). This principle ought to be adhered to not so much because it
increases certainty; rather, it is often only by providing an
explicit, detailed proof for a result that the assumptions on which it
depends become evident and, thus, its range of applicability
established. Both Frege and Dedekind had learned that lesson from the
history of mathematics, especially nineteenth-century developments in
geometry, algebra, and the calculus (cf. Reck 2013a, which builds on
Wilson 1992, 2010, Tappenden 1995, 2006, Ferreirós 1999, and
Detlefen 2011).

Besides where they are in agreement, it is instructive to consider
some of the differences between Dedekind and Frege too. First and put
in modern terminology, a major difference is that, while Frege's main
contributions to logic concern syntactic, proof-theoretic aspects,
Dedekind tends to focus on semantic, model-theoretic aspects. Thus,
nothing like Frege's revolutionary analysis of deductive inference, by
means of his “Begriffsschrift”, can be found in Dedekind's
works. Dedekind, in turn, is much more explicit and clear than Frege
about issues such as categoricity, completeness, independence, etc.
This allows him to be seen as a precursor of the “formal
axiomatic” approach championed later by Hilbert and Bernays
(Hallett 1994, 1995, Sieg & Schlimm 2005, 2014, and Sieg
2010).

Compared to Frege, Dedekind also has much more to say about the
infinite, not just by formulating a definition of that notion, but
also by exploring the possibility of different infinite cardinalities
with Cantor. And he shows more awareness of the challenge posed by
Kroneckerian computational and constructivist strictures to logicism.
The differences between Frege's and Dedekind's respective treatments
of the natural and real numbers are noteworthy too. As we saw,
Dedekind conceives of the natural numbers primarily as ordinal
numbers; he also identifies them purely “structurally”.
Frege makes their application as cardinal numbers central; and he
insists on building this application into the very nature of the
natural numbers, thus endowing them with non-structural,
“intrinsic” properties. The case of the real numbers
illustrates this divergence further. Finally, Frege's and Dedekind's
underlying conceptions of logic and language differ significantly, as
becomes evident if one studies them in more detail (cf.
Benis-Sinaceur, Panza & Sandu 2015).

Apart from Frege, it is illuminating to compare Dedekind's approach
more with later set-theoretic ones. We noted in the last section that
many of his innovations have been built into axiomatic set theory. Yet
here too, several differences emerge if one looks more closely. To
begin with, Dedekind does not start with an axiom of infinity as a
fundamental principle; instead, he tries to prove the existence of
infinite sets. This can be seen as another application of the
methodological rule to prove everything “capable of
proof”. However, few set theorists today will want to go back to
this aspect of Dedekind's approach.(Dedekind's argument in this
connection is similar to an earlier one in Bolzano's posthumously
published work; cf. Ferreirós 1999, ch. 7.) 

A second marked difference between Dedekind and current set theory has
already come up too, but deserves further comment. This is his appeal
to “abstraction”, and with it to “creation”,
in the last step of his introduction of both the natural and the real
numbers (“Dedekind-abstraction”, as it is called in Tait
1996). For the real numbers, the standard procedure in axiomatic set
theory is to follow Dedekind up to this last step, but then to work
with the Dedekind-cuts themselves as “the real numbers”.
While aware of this option (Dedekind 1876b, 1888b), Dedekind tells us
to “abstract away” from the cuts insofar as they consist
of complex sets, and to “create” additional mathematical
objects determined by, but not identical with, them. Likewise, in the
case of the natural numbers it is standard today to construct a
particular simple infinity, usually the set of finite von Neumann
ordinals, and then to identify the natural numbers with them (thus:
0=∅0=∅0 = \emptyset, 1={0}1={0}1 = \{0\}, 2={0,1}2={0,1}2 = \{0, 1\}, etc.). Once again,
the step involving “abstraction” and
“creation” of Dedekind's procedure is avoided by such
identification.

In current approaches it is sometimes added that any other
set-theoretically constructed system that is isomorphic to the system
of Dedekind cuts or to the system of finite von Neumann ordinals,
respectively, would do as well, i.e. be usable mathematically as
“the real numbers” or “the natural numbers”.
This means that contemporary set theory is, often implicitly and
without further elaboration, supplemented by a “set-theoretic
structuralist” view about the nature of mathematical objects
(Reck & Price 2000). The resulting philosophical position is
different from Dedekind's. (Nor does Dedekind's position coincide with
several other forms of structuralism prominent in contemporary
philosophy of mathematics, e.g., those defended by Geoffrey Hellman,
Michael Resnik, and Stewart Shapiro; cf. Reck 2003. However, see again
Sieg & Morris forthcoming for an interpretation according to which
Dedekind changes his relevant views over time and adopts a position
close to set-theoretic structuralism in the end.)

Why do most mathematicians and philosophers not follow Dedekind more
closely in this respect? Here the following difficulties play a role
(cf. Boolos 1990, among others): How exactly should his notions of
“abstraction” and “creation” be understood, if
they can be made sense of at all? Also, why did Dedekind insist on
their use in the first place, since we seem to be able to do without
them? A partial answer to the latter question is: For Dedekind, the
real numbers should not be identified with the corresponding cuts
because those cuts have “wrong properties”; namely, as
sets they contain elements, something that seems “foreign”
to the real numbers themselves. Similarly, the natural numbers should
not be ascribed set-theoretic or other “foreign”
properties; they too should be conceived of “purely
arithmetically” (see again Dedekind 1876b, 1888b). Can anything
further be said in this connection?

By his critics, Dedekind's procedure is often interpreted as follows:
As his language of “abstraction” and
“creation” suggests, he is appealing to psychological
processes. And the resulting entities—“the real
number” and “the natural numbers”—must then be
psychological or mental entities (existing in people's subjective
consciousness). If the latter is correct, his position amounts to a
form of psychologism about mathematics that is deeply problematic, as
Frege, Husserl, and others have taught us. Partly to avoid such a
damning conclusion, partly to attribute more philosophical depth to
Dedekind in other respects too, the following reply can be found in
the literature: While he does not say so explicitly, Dedekind's
psychologistic-sounding language indicates a commitment to Kantian
assumptions, in particular to Kant's transcendental psychology
(Kitcher 1986, McCarty 1995). Then again, it is not clear that this
takes care of the psychologism charge fully (often also directed
against Kant), i.e., such a response would have to be spelled out
further (cf. Reck 2013b, Yap 2014, both picking up on Cassirer 1907,
1910). In itself, it also leaves unexplained the precise form of
Dedekind's “abstraction” and “creation”.

Recently another suggestion for how to get clearer about the nature of
“Dedekind abstraction” and, at the same time, avoid crude
forms of psychologism has been offered. Namely, instead of taking such
abstraction to amount to a psychological process, it should be
understood as a logical procedure (Tait 1996; see also Linnebo &
Pettigrew 2014 and Reck forthcoming for technical elaborations).
Consider again the case of the natural numbers, where Dedekind is most
explicit about the issue. What we are provided with by him is this:
First, the language and logic to be used are specified, thus the kinds
of assertions and arguments that can be made concerning the natural
numbers; second, a particular simple infinity is constructed; third,
this simple infinity is used to determine the truth values of all
arithmetic sentences (by equating them with the truth values of
corresponding sentences for the given simple infinity); and fourth,
this determination is justified by showing that all simple infinities
are isomorphic (so that, if a sentence holds for one of them, it holds
for all).

The core of the procedure just described is the following: Something
is true for the natural numbers exactly when the corresponding
statement holds for all simple infinities (i.e., is a semantic
consequence of the Dedekind-Peano axioms). What, then, are the natural
numbers? They are those mathematical objects whose properties are
determined completely by all arithmetic truths (and only by
those—we “abstract away” from everything else).
Along such lines, all that matters about mathematical objects, indeed
all that is built into their identity and nature, is what the
corresponding mathematical truths determine. Consequently, it is by
specifying those truths that we “create”, or better fully
characterize, them. The resulting position seems clearly not
psychologistic, and it might be called “logical
structuralism” (Reck 2003, Yap 2009a).

Interpreted along such lines, Dedekind's approach is related to that
of the “American Postulate Theorists”: E. Huntington, O.
Veblen, etc. There is also again a close connection to, and a clear
influence on, the formal axiomatics developed by Hilbert and Bernays
later. For all of these thinkers, what is crucial in, and sufficient
for, mathematics is that the completeness and consistency of certain
basic concepts, or of the corresponding systems of axioms, are
established. In Dedekind's case, completeness is to be understood in a
semantic sense, as based on categoricity; likewise, consistency is to
be understood semantically, as satisfiability (Dedekind 1890; cf.
Awodey & Reck 2002, also Hallett 1994, 1995, 2003, Reck 2003, Sieg
& Schlimm 2005, 2014, Ferreirós 2009, and Sieg 2010).

The syntactic study of such issues, especially of consistency, that
became a core part of Hilbertian “proof theory” is not
present in Dedekind's work. As already noted, the proof-theoretic side
of logic is not pursued much by him. Nor is the “finitism”
characteristic of Hilbert & Bernays' later work present in
Dedekind (an aspect developed in response to the set-theoretic
antinomies and to intuitionist challenges), especially if it is
understood in a metaphysical sense. Such finitism might have been
acceptable to Dedekind as a methodological stance, but in other
respects his position is strongly infinitary. In fact, the finite is
explained in terms of the infinite in his work (the notion of finitude
by that of infinity, the natural numbers in terms of infinite sets,
etc.). Finally, the particular structuralist position to which
Dedekind is led by such considerations is different from that in
Hilbert & Bernays (but see again Sieg & Morris forthcoming for
a different interpretation of Dedekind in his later writings.)

The summary of Dedekind's position in this section highlighted logical
issues (his basic logical notions and procedures, compared both to
Frege and to axiomatic set theory) and metaphysical issues
(Dedekindian abstraction and creation, the structural nature of
mathematical objects). However, there is another dimension of his
position—another sense in which Dedekind is a logicist and
structuralist—that has not yet been brought to light fully. That
side involves primarily methodological and epistemological issues.
Some of those issues already played a role in our discussions of
Dedekind's foundational writings. In order to shed more light on them,
it helps to turn to his other mathematical work, starting with
algebraic number theory.
4. Other Mathematical Work
4.1 Algebraic Number Theory

While historians of mathematics have long emphasized the influence
that Dedekind's contributions to algebraic number theory had on the
development of twentieth-century mathematics, the philosophical
significance of these contributions has only started to be probed
recently (with some early exceptions: Dugac 1976, Sinaceur 1979,
Edwards 1980, 1983, Stein 1988). We should begin here by reviewing two
related aspects: the roots of Dedekind's number-theoretic
investigations in the works of Gauss, Dirichlet, and Ernst Kummer; and
the contrast between Dedekind's approach and that of Leopold
Kronecker.

The starting point for all of these number theorists is the solution
of algebraic equations, especially their solution in terms of
integers. A famous example is Fermat's Last Theorem, which concerns
the (non-)solubility of the equation xn+yn=znxn+yn=znx^n + y^n = z^n by integers,
for different exponents nnn. The approach to the problem developed
by Gauss, clarified and refined by Dirichlet, and pushed further by
Kummer involves considering extensions of the (field of) rational
numbers, as well as of the (ring of) “integers” contained
in such extensions. Thus, Gauss studied the “Gaussian
integers” (a+bia+bia + bi, where aaa and bbb are regular
integers and i=−1−−−√i=−1i = \sqrt{-1}) within the field of all complex
numbers; Kummer considered more complicated “cyclotomic
integers” in corresponding cyclotomic number fields (Edwards
1977, Stillwell 2000).

What became clear along such lines is that in some of these extensions
the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic—asserting the unique
factorization of all integers into powers of primes—fails. If it
had been available generally, solutions to important problems would
have been within reach, including Fermat's Last Theorem. The question
became, then, whether a suitable alternative to the Fundamental
Theorem could be found. Kummer's response, obtained in a close study
of certain cases, was to introduce “ideal numbers” in
terms of which unique factorization could be recovered. While this
move led to striking progress, the precise nature of these new
mathematical objects was left unclear, as were the basis for their
introduction and the range of applicability of the technique.

Both Dedekind and Kronecker knew this earlier work well, especially
Kummer's, and they tried to build on it. Kronecker's strategy was to
examine in concrete detail, and by exploiting computational aspects,
some kinds of extensions. Crucial for him was to proceed
finitistically and constructively, thus in a self-consciously
restricted way. This led to his “divisor theory”, an
extension of Gauss' and Kummer's “theory of forms”
(Edwards 1980, 1990). Dedekind, in contrast, approached the issue in a
more encompassing and abstract way. He considered algebraic number
fields in general, thereby introducing the notion of a
“field” for the first time (Edwards 1983, Haubrich 1992,
and Stillwell 1996, 1999).

Dedekind also replaced Kummer's “ideal numbers” by his
“ideals”—set-theoretically constructed objects
intended to play the same role with respect to unique factorization.
Dedekindian ideals are infinite subsets of the number fields in
question, or of the ring of integers contained in them, which again
gives his approach an infinitary character. (An ideal I in a
ring R is a subset such that the sum and difference of any
two elements of I and the product of any element of
I with any element of R are also in I.)
This led him to introduce other fruitful notions, such as that of a
“module”. A particular problem Dedekind struggled with for
quite a while, in the sense of finding a fully satisfactory solution,
was to specify a suitable version, not only of the notion of
“integer”, but also of “prime number”
(Ferreirós 1999, ch. 3, Avigad 2006, Haffner 2014).

Both Kronecker, with his divisor theory, and Dedekind, with his ideal
theory, were able to obtain immediate results. Each theory had a
strong influence on later developments—Dedekind's by shaping the
approaches to modern algebra (field theory, ring theory, etc.) of
Hilbert, Emmy Noether, B.L. van der Waerden, Nicolas Bourbaki, and
others (Alten et al. 2003, Corry 2004, McLarty 2006, Gray 2008);
Kronecker's by partly influencing Hilbert's work as well, and by being
revived later in, among others, André Weil's and Alexander
Grothendieck's work (class field theory, algebraic geometry) (Weil
1950, Edwards 1990, Reed 1995, Corfield 2003). The contrast between
their approaches provides a clear example—historically the first
significant example—of the opposition between
“classical” and “constructivist” conceptions
of mathematics, as they came to be called.

Not infrequently this opposition is debated in terms of which approach
is “the right one”, with the implication that only one of
them but not the other is legitimate. (This started with Dedekind and
Kronecker. We already noted that Dedekind explicitly rejected
constructivist strictures on his work, although he did not rule out
corresponding projects as illegitimate in themselves. Kronecker, with
his strong opposition to the use of set-theoretic and infinitary
techniques, went further in the other direction.) But another question
is more basic: Can the contrast between the two approaches to
algebraic number theory, or to mathematics more generally, be captured
more sharply and revealingly; and in particular, what is its
epistemological significance?

An initial, rough answer to that question is already contained in our
discussion so far: Dedekind's approach is set-theoretic and
infinitary, while Kronecker's is constructivist and finitary. However,
that leaves us with a deeper problem: What exactly is it that a
set-theoretic and infinitary methodology allows us to accomplish that
Kronecker's doesn't, and vice versa? The specific strength of
a Kroneckerian approach is often summed up thus: It provides us with
computational, algorithmic information (Edwards 1980, 1990, Avigad
2008). But what is the characteristic virtue of a Dedekindian
approach? Here an articulate answer is harder to find, especially one
that is philosophically satisfying.

What tends to get in the way is that the set-theoretic and infinitary
methodology Dedekind championed was so successful, and shaped
twentieth-century mathematics so much, that it is hard to reach the
analytic distance needed. Often all one gets, then, are platitudes:
that it is “general” and “abstract”. Or one is
left with negative characterizations: that it fails to be
finitistically and constructively acceptable. Beyond that, there is
the suggestion that Dedekind's approach is
“structuralist”. But as this term is now used to
characterize a methodology, rather than a metaphysical position, one
wonders what exactly it implies. Before attempting a clarification and
elaboration, let us briefly consider some of Dedekind's other
mathematical works, since this will make certain crucial features
stand out more.
4.2 Functions, Groups, Lattices

For our purposes, it suggests itself to consider three additional
areas in which Dedekind applied his set-theoretic, infinitary, and
structuralist approach: the theory of algebraic functions, group
theory, and lattice theory.

Dedekind realized early on that several of the notions and techniques
he had introduced in algebraic number theory could be transferred to
the study of algebraic functions (algebraic function fields, in later
terminology). This realization came to fruition in “Theorie der
algebraischen Funktionen einer Veränderlichen”, a long and
substantive article co-written with Heinrich Weber and published in
1882. The approach in it led, among others, to a better understanding
of Riemann surfaces, including a purely algebraic proof of the
celebrated Riemann-Roch Theorem (Geyer 1981, Kolmogorov &
Yushkevich 2001, ch. 2, Stillwell 2012, Haffner 2014). As these were
issues of wide interest among mathematicians, the success gave
Dedekind's approach significant legitimacy and publicity (cf. Edwards
1983, Dieudonné 1985).

Second, Dedekind's contributions to algebraic number theory were
connected, in a natural and fruitful way, with Evariste Galois'
revolutionary group-theoretic approach to algebra. In fact, Dedekind's
early and systematic study of Galois theory—he was the first to
lecture on it at a German university, already during his time as a
Privatdozent in Göttingen—led to a transformation
of that theory itself. It turned from the study of substitutions in
formulas and of functions invariant under such substitutions into the
study of field extensions and corresponding automorphisms (Mehrtens
1979b, Stein 1988). Dedekind also introduced additional applications
of Galois theory, e.g., in the study of modular equations and
functions (Gray 2000, ch. 4, Alten et al. 2003, ch. 8).

As a third spin-off, Dedekind's number-theoretic investigations led to
the introduction of the notion of a “lattice” (under the
name “Dualgruppe”). He examined that notion
further, as a topic in itself, in two relatively late articles:
“Über Zerlegungen von Zahlen durch ihre größten
gemeinsamen Teiler” (1897) and “Über die von drei
Moduln erzeugte Dualgruppe” (1900). While these articles did not
have the same immediate and strong impact that several of his other
works had, they were later recognized as original, systematic
contributions to lattice theory, especially to the study of modular
lattices (Mehrtens 1979a, ch. 2, Burris 1983, Alten et al. 2003, ch.
10, Schlimm 2009).

None of these mathematical contributions by Dedekind can be treated in
any detail here (and various others have to be ignored completely),
but a general observation about them can be made. Namely, while they
again exemplify a set-theoretic and infinitary perspective, they also
display the following closely related features: the focus on entire
systems of objects and on general laws for them, in such a way that
results can be transferred from one case to another; the move away
from particular formulas, or from particular symbolic representations,
to more general characterizations of the underlying systems of
objects, specifically in terms of relational and functional
properties; the consideration of homomorphisms, automorphisms,
isomorphisms, and features invariant under such mappings; and the
investigation of novel, abstract concepts, introduced in connection
with specific cases but then studied in themselves.

These features are, in fact, characteristic for Dedekind's works
overall, including his studies in algebraic number theory and his
foundational investigations. It is by taking them into account that
calling his methodology, not just “general” and
“abstract”, but “structuralist” starts to
acquire further content. It also helps us to recognized in which way
Dedekind's approach played a crucial role in the emergence of
“modern” mathematics. Looking back on the corresponding
history of algebra, B.L. van der Waerden, himself a major contributor
to this field, concluded: “It was Evariste Galois and Richard
Dedekind who gave modern algebra its structure; that is where its
weight-bearing skeleton comes from” (Dedekind 1964, foreword,
quoted in Mehrtens 1979b; cf. also Gray 2008).
5. Methodology and Epistemology

In earlier sections we considered Dedekind's overtly foundational
writings. This led to a discussion of the logicist and metaphysical
structuralist views emerging in them. In the last few sections, the
focus shifted to his other mathematical works and the methodological
structuralism they embody. Now we are in a position to provide a more
explicit, systematic elaboration of the latter. Beyond just calling
Dedekind's approach set-theoretic, infinitary, and non-constructive,
the methodology that informs it can be analyzed as consisting of three
parts.

The first part is closely tied to Dedekind's employment of
set-theoretic tools and techniques. He uses these to construct new
mathematical objects (the natural and real numbers, ideals, modules,
etc.) or whole classes of such objects (various algebraic number
fields, rings, lattices, etc.). Even more important and
characteristic, both in foundational and other contexts, is another
aspect. Not only are infinite sets used by Dedekind; they are also
endowed with general structural features (order relations, arithmetic
and other operations, etc.); and the resulting systems are studied in
terms of higher-level properties (continuity for the real number
system, unique factorization in algebraic number fields, etc.).

Once more, philosophically relevant is not just that this procedure is
infinitary (his acceptance of actual infinities) and non-constructive
(the added features are not necessarily grounded in algorithms). A
whole variety of relational systems, including many new ones, can now
be investigated; and this brings with it a significant extension of
the subject matter of mathematics. Overall, Dedekind leads us far
beyond what is empirically or intuitively given (concrete numbers of
things, geometric magnitudes, etc.); mathematics becomes the study of
relational systems much more generally (based on a new “logic of
relations”, as Russell will later put it).

The second characteristic part of Dedekind's methodology consists of
persistently (from early on, cf. Dedekind 1854) attempting to identify
and clarify fundamental concepts (continuity, infinity, natural
number, real number, generalized concepts of integer and of prime
number, the new concepts of ideal, module, lattice, etc.). In this
context, it is crucial for Dedekind to find “the right
definitions”; and this involves not just basic adequacy, but
also desiderata such as: fruitfulness, generality, simplicity, and
“purity”, i.e., the elimination of “foreign”
aspects. (Geometric notions are foreign to the natural and real
numbers, the definition of prime number must be at just the right
level of generality, etc.; cf. Avigad 2006, Reck 2009, and Haffner
2014, also Sieg & Schlimm 2014.)

The third main part of Dedekind's approach connects and complements
the first two. Not only does he study systems of objects or whole
classes of such systems; and not only does he attempt to identify
basic concepts applicable to them. He also tends to do both, often in
conjunction, by considering mappings on the systems studied,
especially structure-preserving mappings (homomorphisms etc.). This
implies that what is crucial about a mathematical phenomenon may not
lie on the surface (concrete features of examples, particular
symbolisms, etc.) but go deeper. And while the deeper features are
often captured set-theoretically (Dedekind cuts, ideals, quotient
structures, etc.), this points beyond set theory in the end, towards
category theory (Corry 2004, McLarty 2006, as well as Ferreirós
2016a).

These three parts of Dedekind's approach may not seem extraordinary to
a contemporary mathematician. But that is just testimony to how much
modern mathematics has been shaped by his work. His approach was
certainly seen as novel, even revolutionary, at the time. Some
negative reactions to it, by finitist and constructivist thinkers,
have already been mentioned. The extent to which Dedekind's approach
diverged from what had been common stands out further if we remember
two traditional, widely shared assumptions: that mathematics is the
science of number and magnitude; and that it has essentially to do
with calculating and other algorithmic procedures. Relative to such
assumptions, Dedekind's approach to mathematics involves a radical
transformation and liberation (Stein 1988, Tait 1996).

Another way to bring out the radical character of Dedekind's work is
by returning to his treatment of the infinite. It starts with taking
what was long seen as a paradoxical property (to be equinumerous with
a proper subset) to be a defining characteristic of infinite sets.
Dedekind then adds a systematic analysis of the finite in terms of the
infinite, again a rather bold idea. For conceptual and methodological
innovations like these to become accepted, they not only had to open
up novel realms for mathematics, but lead to progress in more
traditional ones as well (as they did: the clarification of continuity
and of mathematical induction and recursion, results in algebraic
number theory, in the theory of algebraic functions, etc.).

While Dedekind was a great innovator, he was, of course, not alone in
moving large parts of mathematics in a set-theoretic, infinitary, and
methodologically structuralist direction. There was a whole group of
mathematicians who promoted a more “conceptual” approach
to it at the time, including several of his teachers in
Göttingen. Within that group, Dirichlet has sometimes been picked
out as the leader, or the “poet's poet”, among others by
being a big influence on Dedekind (Stein 1988). As Hermann Minkowski,
a major figure in this tradition himself, put it later (on the
occasion of Dirichlet's 100th birthday): he impressed on other
mathematicians “to conquer the problems with a minimum amount of
blind calculation, a maximum of clear-seeing thought” (quoted in
Stein 1988).

Riemann was another influential figure in this context. And he too had
a strong influence on Dedekind, in two ways: by emphasizing (in his
development of complex function theory) the importance of using
simple, characteristic, and “intrinsic” concepts, in
contrast to “extrinsic” properties tied to, say,
particular symbolisms (Mehrtens 1979b, Laugwitz 1999, Tappenden 2005a,
2006); and by exploring new “conceptual possibilities”,
including the systematic study of Riemannian geometries (Stein 1988).
A further example of such conceptual exploration, again very familiar
to Dedekind, was the study of transfinite ordinal and cardinal numbers
by his correspondent Cantor (Ferreirós 1999, chs. 2 and 6).

Can the significance of Dedekind's methodology be brought out even
further? Or can it be articulated more in different terms? One way to
do the latter, already touched on above, is by highlighting the
methodological values embodied in it: systematicity, generality,
purity, etc. (Avigad 2006, Haffner 2014). Another is by focusing on
the kind of reasoning involved: “conceptual” 
or “structural” reasoning (Stein 1988, Ferreirós
1999), or in terminology often associated with Hilbert,
“axiomatic” reasoning (Sieg & Schlimm 2005, 2014). We
might even want to talk about a novel 
“reasoning style” in
this connection, where “style” 
is to be understood in an epistemological sense, not in an aesthetic, psychological, or 
sociological sense. Such a style brings with it, not just new theorems and proofs, but a
distinctive kind of “understanding” of mathematical facts
(Reck 2009, see also Tappenden 2005b).

These attempts to reveal the full significance of Dedekind's approach
are initial forays, clearly in need of further elaboration. However,
one aspect seems clear enough: The methodological and epistemological
structuralism that shapes Dedekind's mathematical works is not
independent of the logical and metaphysical views emerging in his more
foundational writings. This is no accident—if one adopts his
methodological stance, it is hardly possible to hold on to narrowly
formalist, empiricist, or intuitionist views about mathematics. More
specifically, a structuralist epistemology, along Dedekindian lines,
calls for a structuralist metaphysics, as two sides of the same coin.
Dedekind seems to have been keenly aware of this fact, even if he
never made it explicit in his writings.
6. Concluding Remarks

We started out by considering Dedekind's contributions to the
foundations of mathematics in his overtly foundational writings: the
two booklets, Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen and Was
sind und was sollen die Zahlen? We then added a sketch and
preliminary analysis of the methodological innovations in his more
mainstream mathematical writings, from his work in algebraic number
theory to other areas. We also noted that the logical and metaphysical
position in his foundational work is closely tied to his more general
methodological and epistemological perspective. In this sense, any
attempt to distinguish sharply between his “foundational”
and his other “mathematical” writings is misguided;
Dedekind made foundationally relevant contributions throughout his
work. In fact, his case provides a good argument and illustration for
a more general lesson. Namely, any strict distinction between
“foundational” or “philosophical” questions
about mathematics, on the one hand, and
“inner-mathematical” questions, on the other hand, is
counterproductive in the end, especially if one does not want to
impoverish both sides.

If we look at Dedekind's contributions from such a perspective, the
sum total looks impressive. He was not only one of the greatest
mathematicians of the nineteenth century, but also one of its subtlest
philosophers of mathematics. With his structuralist views about the
nature of mathematical entities and about how to investigate them, he
was far ahead of his time. He was even ahead of much contemporary
philosophy of mathematics, especially with his sensitivity to both
sides. This is not to say that his position is without problems.
Dedekind himself was troubled by the set-theoretic antinomies,
especially initially. And the twentieth century produced additional
surprises, such as Gödel's Incompleteness Theorems, that are
difficult to accommodate more generally. Moreover, the methodology of
mathematics has developed further since his time, including attempts
to reconcile and integrate “conceptual” and
“computational” thinking. Then again, is there a
philosophical position available today that answers all important
questions about mathematics in a satisfactory way? If not, updating a
Dedekindian position may be a worthwhile project.