Normative democratic theory deals with the moral foundations of
democracy and democratic institutions. It is distinct from descriptive
and explanatory democratic theory. It does not offer in the first
instance a scientific study of those societies that are called
democratic. It aims to provide an account of when and why democracy is
morally desirable as well as moral principles for guiding the design of
democratic institutions. Of course, normative democratic theory is
inherently interdisciplinary and must call on the results of political
science, sociology and economics in order to give this kind of concrete
guidance.


This brief outline of normative democratic theory focuses attention
on four distinct issues in recent work. First, it outlines some
different approaches to the question of why democracy is morally
desirable at all. Second, it explores the question of what it is
reasonable to expect from citizens in large democratic societies. 
This issue is central to the evaluation of normative democratic
theories as we will see. A large body of opinion has it that most
classical normative democratic theory is incompatible with what we can
reasonably expect from citizens. It also discusses blueprints of
democratic institutions for dealing with issues that arise from a
conception of citizenship. Third, it surveys different accounts of the
proper characterization of equality in the processes of representation.
These last two parts display the interdisciplinary nature of normative
democratic theory. Fourth, it discusses the issue of whether and when
democratic institutions have authority and it discusses different
conceptions of the limits of democratic authority.
 
1. Democracy Defined


To fix ideas, the term “democracy,” as I will use it in
this article, refers very generally to a method of group decision
making characterized by a kind of equality among the participants at
an essential stage of the collective decision making.   Four
aspects of this definition should be noted. First, democracy concerns
collective decision making, by which I mean decisions that are made
for groups and that are binding on all the members of the
group. Second, this definition means to cover a lot of different kinds
of groups that may be called democratic. So there can be democracy in
families, voluntary organizations, economic firms, as well as states
and transnational and global organizations. Third, the definition is
not intended to carry any normative weight to it. It is quite
compatible with this definition of democracy that it is not desirable
to have democracy in some particular context. So the definition of
democracy does not settle any normative questions. Fourth, the
equality required by the definition of democracy may be more or less
deep. It may be the mere formal equality of one-person one-vote in an
election for representatives to an assembly where there is competition
among candidates for the position. Or it may be more robust, including
equality in the processes of deliberation and coalition building.
“Democracy” may refer to any of these political
arrangements. It may involve direct participation of the members of a
society in deciding on the laws and policies of the society or it may
involve the participation of those members in selecting
representatives to make the decisions.


The function of normative democratic theory is not to settle questions
of definition but to determine which, if any, of the forms democracy
may take are morally desirable and when and how.   For
instance, Joseph Schumpeter argues (1956, chap. XXI), with some force,
that only a highly formal kind of democracy in which citizens vote in
an electoral process for the purpose of selecting competing elites is
highly desirable while a conception of democracy that draws on a more
ambitious conception of equality is dangerous. On the other hand,
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1762, Book II, chap. 1) is apt to argue that
the formal variety of democracy is akin to slavery while only robustly
egalitarian democracies have political legitimacy. Others have argued
that democracy is not desirable at all. To evaluate their arguments we
must decide on the merits of the different principles and conceptions
of humanity and society from which they proceed.
2. The Justification of Democracy


We can evaluate democracy along at least two different dimensions:
consequentially, by reference to the outcomes of using it compared with
other methods of political decision making; or intrinsically, by
reference to qualities that are inherent in the method, for example,
whether there is something inherently fair about making democratic
decisions on matters on which people disagree.
2.1 Instrumentalism
2.1.1 Instrumental Arguments in Favor of Democracy


Two kinds of in instrumental benefits are commonly attributed to
democracy: relatively good laws and policies and improvements in the
characters of the participants. John Stuart Mill argued that a
democratic method of making legislation is better than non-democratic
methods in three ways: strategically, epistemically and via the
improvement of the characters of democratic citizens (Mill, 1861,
Chapter 3). Strategically, democracy has an advantage because it forces
decision-makers to take into account the interests, rights and
opinions of most people in society. Since democracy gives some
political power to each, more people are taken into account than under
aristocracy or monarchy. The most forceful contemporary statement of
this instrumental argument is provided by Amartya Sen, who argues, for
example, that “no substantial famine has ever occurred in any
independent country with a democratic form of government and a
relatively free press” (Sen 1999, 152). The basis of this
argument is that politicians in a multiparty democracy with free
elections and a free press have incentives to respond to the
expressions of needs of the poor.


Epistemologically, democracy is thought to be the best decision-making
method on the grounds that it is generally more reliable in helping
participants discover the right decisions. Since democracy brings a
lot of people into the process of decision making, it can take
advantage of many sources of information and critical assessment of
laws and policies. Democratic decision-making tends to be more
informed than other forms about the interests of citizens and the
causal mechanisms necessary to advance those interests. Furthermore,
the broad based discussion typical of democracy enhances the critical
assessment of the different moral ideas that guide
decision-makers.

 Many have endorsed democracy on the basis of the proposition that
democracy has beneficial effects on character. Many have noted with
Mill and Rousseau that democracy tends to make people stand up for
themselves more than other forms of rule do because it makes
collective decisions depend on them more than monarchy or aristocracy
do. Hence, in democratic societies individuals are encouraged to be
more autonomous. In addition, democracy tends to get people to think
carefully and rationally more than other forms of rule because it
makes a difference whether they do or not. Finally, some have argued
that democracy tends to enhance the moral qualities of citizens. When
they participate in making decisions, they have to listen to others,
they are called upon to justify themselves to others and they are
forced to think in part in terms of the interests of others. Some have
argued that when people find themselves in this kind of circumstance,
they come genuinely to think in terms of the common good and justice.
Hence, some have argued that democratic processes tend to enhance the
autonomy, rationality and morality of participants. Since these
beneficial effects are thought to be worthwhile in themselves, they
count in favor of democracy and against other forms of rule (Mill
1861, p. 74, Elster 2002, p. 152).


Some argue in addition that the above effects on character tend to
enhance the quality of legislation as well. A society of autonomous,
rational, and moral decision-makers is more likely to produce good
legislation than a society ruled by a self-centered person or small
group of persons who rule over slavish and unreflective subjects.

 More detailed knowledge of the effects of political institutions can
be used to discriminate in favor of particular kinds of democratic
institutions or modifications of them. For instance in the United
States, James Madison argued in favor of a fairly strong federal
government on the grounds that local governments are more likely to be
oppressive to minorities (Madison, Hamilton and Jay 1788, n. 10). Of
course the soundness of any of the above arguments depends on the
truth or validity of the associated substantive views about justice
and the common good as well as the causal theories of the consequences
of different institutions.
2.1.2 Instrumental Arguments against Democracy


Not all instrumental arguments favor democracy. Plato
(Republic, Book VI) argues that democracy is inferior to
various forms of monarchy, aristocracy and even oligarchy on the
grounds that democracy tends to undermine the expertise necessary to
properly governed societies. In a democracy, he argues, those who are
expert at winning elections and nothing else will eventually dominate
democratic politics. Democracy tends to emphasize this expertise at
the expense of the expertise that is necessary to properly governed
societies. The reason for this is that most people do not have the
kinds of talents that enable them to think well about the difficult
issues that politics involves. But in order to win office or get a
piece of legislation passed, politicians must appeal to these people's
sense of what is right or not right. Hence, the state will be guided
by very poorly worked out ideas that experts in manipulation and mass
appeal use to help themselves win office.


Hobbes (1651, chap. XIX) argues that democracy is inferior to monarchy
because democracy fosters destabilizing dissension among subjects. But
his skepticism is not based in a conception that most people are not
intellectually fit for politics. On his view, individual citizens and
even politicians are apt not to have a sense of responsibility for the
quality of legislation because no one makes a significant difference
to the outcomes of decision making. As a consequence, citizens’
concerns are not focused on politics and politicians succeed only by
making loud and manipulative appeals to citizens in order to gain more
power, but all lack incentives to consider views that are genuinely
for the common good. Hence the sense of lack of responsibility for
outcomes undermines politicians’ concern for the common good and
inclines them to make sectarian and divisive appeals to citizens. For
Hobbes, then, democracy has deleterious effects on subjects and
politicians and consequently on the quality of the outcomes of
collective decision making.


Many public choice theorists in contemporary economic thought expand
on these Hobbesian criticisms. They argue that citizens are not
informed about politics and that they are often apathetic, which makes
room for special interests to control the behavior of politicians and
use the state for their own limited purposes all the while spreading
the costs to everyone else. Some of them argue for giving over near
complete control over society to the market, on the grounds that more
extensive democracy tends to produce serious economic inefficiencies.
More modest versions of these arguments have been used to justify
modification of democratic institutions.
2.1.3 Grounds for Instrumentalism


Instrumentalists argue that these instrumental arguments for and
against the democratic process are the only bases on which to evaluate
democracy or compare it with other forms of political decision making.
There are a number of different kinds of argument for instrumentalism.
One kind of argument proceeds from a certain kind of moral
theory.   For example classical utilitarianism simply has no
room in its fundamental value theory for the ideas of intrinsic
fairness, liberty or the intrinsic importance of an egalitarian
distribution of political power. Its sole concern with maximizing
utility understood as pleasure or desire satisfaction guarantees that
it can provide only instrumental arguments for and against
democracy.   And there are many moral theories of this
sort.

 But one need not be a thoroughgoing consequentialist to argue for
instrumentalism in democratic theory. There are arguments in favor of
instrumentalism that pertain directly to the question of democracy and
collective decision making generally. One argument states that
political power involves the exercise of power of some over
others. And it argues that the exercise of power of one person over
another can only be justified by reference to the protection of the
interests or rights of the person over whom power is exercised. Thus
no distribution of political power could ever be justified except by
reference to the quality of outcomes of the decision making process
(Arneson 2002, pp. 96-97).

 Other arguments question the coherence of the idea of intrinsically
fair collective decision making processes. For instance, social choice
theory questions the idea that there can be a fair decision making
function that transforms a set of individual preferences into a
rational collective preference. No general rule satisfying reasonable
constraints can be devised that can transform any set of individual
preferences into a rational social preference. And this is taken to
show that democratic procedures cannot be intrinsically fair (Riker
1980, p. 116). Dworkin argues that the idea of equality, which is for
him at the root of social justice, cannot be given a coherent and
plausible interpretation when it comes to the distribution of
political power among members of the society. The relation of
politicians to citizens inevitably gives rise to inequality, so it
cannot be intrinsically fair or just (Dworkin 2000, ch. 4 [originally
published in 1987]). In later work, Dworkin has pulled back from this
originally thoroughgoing instrumentalism (Dworkin 2000, ch. 10
[originally published in 1999]).
2.2 Non-instrumental Values


Few theorists deny that political institutions must be at least in
part evaluated in terms of the outcomes of having those institutions.
Some argue in addition, that some forms of decision making are morally
desirable independent of the consequences of having them. A variety of
different approaches have been used to show that democracy has this
kind of intrinsic value. The most common of these come broadly under
the rubrics of liberty and equality.
2.2.1 Liberty


Some argue that the basic principles of democracy are founded in the
idea that each individual has a right to liberty. Democracy, it is
said, extends the idea that each ought to be master of his or her life
to the domain of collective decision making. First, each person's life
is deeply affected by the larger social, legal and cultural
environment in which he or she lives. Second, only when each person
has an equal voice and vote in the process of collective
decision-making will each have control over this larger environment.
Thinkers such as Carol Gould (1988, pp.45-85) conclude that only when
some kind of democracy is implemented, will individuals have a chance
at self-government. Since individuals have a right of self-government,
they have a right to democratic participation. This right is
established at least partly independently of the worth of the outcomes
of democratic decision making. The idea is that the right of
self-government gives one a right, within limits, to do wrong. Just as
an individual has a right to make some bad decisions for himself or
herself, so a group of individuals have a right to make bad or unjust
decisions for themselves regarding those activities they share.


Here we can see the makings of an argument against instrumentalism.
To the extent that an instrumentalist wishes to diminish a
person's power to contribute to the democratic process for the
sake of enhancing the quality of decisions, he is committed to thinking
that there is no moral loss in the fact that our power has been
diminished. But if the liberty argument is correct our right to control
our lives is violated by this.

 One major difficulty with this line of argument is that it appears to
require that the basic rule of decision making be consensus or
unanimity. If each person must freely choose the outcomes that bind him
or her then those who oppose the decision are not self-governing. They
live in an environment imposed on them by others. So only when all
agree to a decision are they freely adopting the decision.


The trouble is that there is rarely agreement on major issues in
politics. Indeed, it appears that one of the main reasons for having
political decision making procedures is that they can settle matters
despite disagreement. And so it is hard to see how any political
decision making method can respect everyone's liberty.
2.2.2 Democracy as Public Justification


One distant relative of the self-government approach is the account of
democracy as a process of public justification defended by, among
others, Joshua Cohen (2002, p. 21). The idea behind this approach is
that laws and policies are legitimate to the extent that they are
publicly justified to the citizens of the community. Public
justification is justification to each citizen as a result of free and
reasoned debate among equals.  Citizens justify laws and policies to
each other on the basis of mutually acceptable reasons. Democracy,
properly understood, is the context in which individuals freely engage
in a process of reasoned discussion and deliberation on an equal
footing. The ideas of freedom and equality provide guidelines for
structuring democratic institutions.

 The aim of democracy as public justification is reasoned consensus
among citizens. But a serious problem arises when we ask about what
happens when disagreement remains. Two possible replies have been
suggested to this kind of worry. It has been urged that forms of
consensus weaker than full consensus are sufficient for public
justification and that the weaker varieties are achievable in many
societies. For instance, there may be consensus on the list of reasons
that are acceptable publicly but disagreement on the weight of the
different reasons. Or there may be agreement on general reasons
abstractly understood but disagreement about particular
interpretations of those reasons. What would have to be shown here is
that such weak consensus is achievable in many societies and that the
disagreements that remain are not incompatible with the ideal of
public justification.

 Another set of worries concerning this approach arises when we ask what
reason there is for trying to ensure that political decisions are
grounded in principles that everyone can reasonably accept. What is the
basis of this need for consensus? To be sure, the consensus that is
aimed at is reasonable consensus among reasonable persons. Reasonable
consensus does not imply actual consensus. The unreasonable persons in
society need not agree with the terms of association arrived at by
reasonable persons in order for those terms to be legitimate.


The basic principle seems to be the principle of reasonableness
according to which reasonable persons will only offer principles for
the regulation of their society that other reasonable persons can
reasonably accept. The notion of the reasonable is meant to be fairly
weak on this account. One can reasonably reject a doctrine to the
extent that it is incompatible with one's own doctrine as long as
one's doctrine does not imply imposition on others and it is a
doctrine that has survived sustained critical reflection. So this
principle is a kind of principle of reciprocity. One only offers
principles that others, who restrain themselves in the same way, can
accept. Such a principle implies a kind of principle of restraint
which requires that reasonable persons not propose laws and policies
on the basis of controversial principles for the regulation of
society. When individuals offer proposals for the regulation of their
society, they ought not to appeal to the whole truth as they see it
but only to that part of the whole truth that others can reasonably
accept. To put the matter in the way Rawls puts it: political society
must be regulated by principles on which there is an overlapping
consensus (Rawls, 1996, Lecture IV). This is meant to obviate the need
for a complete consensus on the principles that regulate society.


What moral reasons can there be for restraining oneself from
offering what one takes to be the best justified proposals for the
terms of the society one lives in? One might consider a number of
arguments for this principle of reasonableness. One argument is an
epistemological one. It is that there is no justification independent
of what people or at least reasonable people believe. Hence, if one
cannot provide a justification for principles that others can accept
given their reasonable beliefs then those principles are not justified
for those persons. Another argument is a moral argument. One fails to
respect the reason of the other members of society if one imposes terms
of association on them that they cannot accept given their reasonable
views. This failure of respect for the reason of the other members of
society defeats the value of the principles one is proposing for the
society. A third argument is a specifically democratic argument. One
does not genuinely treat others as equals if one insists on imposing
principles on them that they cannot reasonably accept, even if this
imposition takes place against the background of egalitarian decision
making processes.


Each of these three arguments can be questioned. On the democratic
argument, it simply isn’t clear why it is necessary to
democratic equality to justify ones views on terms that others can
accept. If each person has robust rights to participate in debate and
decision making and each person's views are given a reasonable
hearing, it is not clear why equality requires more. My rejection of
another person's beliefs does not in any way imply that I think that
person is inferior to me in capacity or in moral worth or in the
rights to have a say in society. The epistemological argument seems to
presuppose a far too restrictive conception of justification to be
plausible. Many beliefs are justified for me even if they are not
compatible with the political beliefs I currently hold as long as
those beliefs can be vindicated by the use of procedures and methods
of thinking that I use to evaluate beliefs. The conception of respect
for reason in the moral argument seems not obviously to favor the
principle of reasonableness. It may require that I do as much as I can
to make sure that the society I live in conform to what I take to be
rationally defensible norms. Of course, I may also believe that such a
society must be democratically organized in which case I will attempt
to advance these principles through the democratic process.


Moreover, it is hard to see how this approach avoids the need for a
complete consensus, which is highly unlikely to occur in any even
moderately diverse society. The reason for this is that it is not clear
why it is any less of an imposition on me when I propose legislation or
policies for the society that I must restrain myself to considerations
that other reasonable people accept than it is an imposition on others
when I attempt to pass legislation on the basis of reasons they
reasonably reject. For if I do restrain myself in this way, then the
society I live in will not live up to the standards that I believe are
essential to evaluating the society. I must then live in and support a
society that does not accord with my conception of how it ought to be
organized. It is not clear why this is any less of a loss of control
over society than for those who must live in a society that is partly
regulated by principles they do not accept.
2.2.3 Equality


Many democratic theorists have argued that democracy is a way of
treating persons as equals when there is good reason to impose some
kind of organization on their shared lives but they disagree about how
best to do it. On one version, defended by Peter Singer (1973,
pp. 30-41), when people insist on different ways of arranging matters
properly, each person in a sense claims a right to be dictator over
their shared lives. But these claims to dictatorship cannot all hold
up, the argument goes.  Democracy embodies a kind of peaceful and fair
compromise among these conflicting claims to rule. Each compromises
equally on what he claims as long as the others do, resulting in each
having an equal say over decision making. In effect, democratic
decision making respects each person's point of view on matters of
common concern by giving each an equal say about what to do in cases
of disagreement (Singer 1973, Waldron 1999, chap. 5).


One difficulty is that this view relies on agreement much as the
liberty views described above. What if people disagree on the
democratic method or on the particular form democracy is to take? Are
we to decide these latter questions by means of a higher order
procedure? And if there is disagreement on the higher order procedure,
must we also democratically decide that question? The view seems to
lead to an infinite regress.

 Another egalitarian defense of democracy asserts that it publicly
embodies the equal advancement of the interests of the citizens of a
society when there is disagreement about how best to organize their
shared life. The idea is that a society ought to be structured to
advance equally the interests of the members of the society. And the
equality of members ought to be advanced in a way that each can see
that they are being treated as equals. So it requires equal advancement
of interests in accordance with a public measure of those
interests. Hence, justice requires the publicly equal advancement
of the interests of the members of society or public equality.

 The idea of public equality requires some explanation. If we
start with the principle of equal advancement of interests, we will
want to know what it implies. Does it imply equality of well
being or equality of opportunity for well being or equality of
resources?  There are other possibilities but the problem with
these accounts is that they cannot be realized in a way that every
conscientious and informed person can know them to be in place. 
So even if one of these principles is implemented many will think that
they are not being treated equally. There are likely to be too many
disagreements about what each person's well being consists in and
how to compare it to the well being of others. The question for a
political society is, is there a kind of equality that genuinely
advances equally the interests of the members of the society but that
does so in a way that all conscientious and informed people can agree
treats them as equals?  And the answer to this question must be
informed by background facts of diversity, cognitive bias, fallibility
and disagreement. Public equality is the realization of equality
of advancement of interests that all can see to be such a
realization. And the basic argument for democracy is that it
realizes equality of advancement of interests when we take the
background facts above into account. 

 Now the idea is that public equality is a great value. The
importance of publicity itself is grounded in equality. Given the
facts of diversity, cognitive bias, fallibility and disagreement, each
will have reason to think that if they are ruled in accordance with
some specific notion of equality advanced by some particular group that
their interests are likely to be set back in some way. Only a
conception of equality that can be shared by the members of society can
give good reason to think that this will not happen. Within the
context set by public equality, people can argue for more specific
implementations of equality among citizens in law and policy all the
while knowing that there will be substantial and conscientious
disagreement on them. As long as the framework within which they
make and vote for opposing views is set by public equality, they can
know that at base, the society treats them as equals in a way that they
can recognize.


The publicly equal advancement of interests requires that
individuals’ judgments be taken into account equally when there
is disagreement. Here is the argument for the transition from equal
concern for interests to equal concern for judgment. Respect for each
citizen's judgment is grounded in the principle of public equality
combined with a number of basic facts and fundamental interests that
attend social life in typical societies. The basic facts are that
individuals are very diverse in terms of their interests.  People's
interests are diverse because of their different natural talents,
because they are raised in different sectors of society and because
they are raised in societies where there is a diversity of cultural
backgrounds. Partly as a consequence of the fact that people are
raised in different sectors of society and in distinct cultural
milieus they are likely to have deep cognitive biases when they
attempt to understand other people's interests and how they are
compared to their own interests. Those biases will tend to assimilate
other people's interests to their own in some circumstances or
downplay them when there is a wide divergence of interests. Hence
people have deep cognitive biases towards their own interests. The
facts of diversity and of cognitive bias ensure that individuals are
highly fallible in their understanding of their own and others’
interests and that there will be considerable disagreement among them.
And they are likely to be highly fallible in their efforts to compare
the importance of other people's interests to their own. So they are
highly fallible in their efforts to realize equal advancement of
interests in society. And of course there will be a lot of substantial
disagreement about how best to advance each person's interests
equally.


Against the background of these facts each person has interests that
stand out as especially important in a pluralistic society. They have
interests in correcting for the cognitive biases of others when it
comes to the creation or revision of common economic, legal and
political institutions. And each person has interests in living in a
world that makes some sense to them, that accords, within limits, to
their sense of how that social world out to be structured. The facts
described above, and the principle of equality, suggest that each
person ought to have an equal say in determining the common legal,
economic and political institutions they live under. In the light of
these interests each citizen would have good reason to think that his
or her interests were not being given the same weight as others if he
or she had less decision making power than the others. And so each
person who is deprived of a right to an equal say would have reason to
believe that she is being treated publicly as an
inferior. Furthermore, since each person has an interest in being
recognized as an equal member of the community, and having less than
an equal say suggests that they are being treated as inferiors, only
equality in decision making power is compatible with the public equal
advancement of interests. The principle of equal advancement of
interests also implies limits to what can be up for democratic control
and so the infinite regress noted above is avoided.


So against the background facts of diversity, cognitive bias,
fallibility and disagreement each person has fundamental interests in
having an equal say in the processes of collective decision making. And
so in order for people to be treated publicly as equals they must have
an equal say in collective decision making (Christiano, 2004).


A number of worries attend this kind of view. First, it is generally
thought that majority rule is required for treating persons as equals
in collective decision making. This is because only majority rule is
neutral towards alternatives in decision making. Unanimity tends to
favor the status quo as do various forms of supermajority rule. But if
this is so, the above view raises the twin dangers of majority tyranny
and of persistent minorities i.e. groups of persons who find
themselves always losing in majority decisions. Surely these latter
phenomena must be incompatible with equality and even with public
equality. Second, the kind of view defended above is susceptible to
the criticisms leveled against the ideal of equality in decision
making processes. Is it a coherent ideal, in particular in the modern
state?  This last worry will be discussed in more detail in the next
sections on democratic citizenship and legislative representation. The
first worry will be discussed more in the discussion on the limits to
democratic authority.
3. The Problem of Democratic Citizenship


A vexing problem of democratic theory has been to determine whether
ordinary citizens are up to the task of governing a large society.
There are three distinct problems here. First, Plato
(Republic, Book VI) argued that some people are more
intelligent and more moral than others and that those persons ought to
rule. Second, others have argued that a society must have a division
of labor. If everyone were engaged in the complex and difficult task
of politics, little time or energy would be left for the other
essential tasks of a society. Conversely, if we expect most people to
engage in other difficult and complex tasks, how can we expect them to
have the time and resources sufficient to devote themselves
intelligently to politics?

 Third, since individuals have so little impact on the outcomes of
political decision making in large societies, they have little sense
of responsibility for the outcomes. Some have argued that it is not
rational to vote since the chances that a vote will affect the outcome
of an election are nearly indistinguishable from zero. Worse still,
Anthony Downs has argued (1957, chap. 13) that almost all of those who
do vote have little reason to become informed about how best to
vote. On the assumption that citizens reason and behave roughly
according to the Downsian model, either the society must in fact be
run by a relatively small group of people with minimal input from the
rest or it will be very poorly run. As we can see these criticisms are
echoes of the sorts of criticisms Plato and Hobbes made.


These observations pose challenges for any robustly egalitarian or
deliberative conception of democracy. Without the ability to
participate intelligently in politics one cannot use one's votes to
advance one's aims nor can one be said to participate in a process of
reasoned deliberation among equals. So, either equality of political
power implies a kind of self-defeating equal participation of citizens
in politics or a reasonable division of labor seems to undermine
equality of power. And either substantial participation of citizens in
public deliberation entails the relative neglect of other tasks or the
proper functioning of the other sectors of the society requires that
most people do not participate intelligently in public
deliberation.
3.1 Some Solutions Offered for the Problem of Democratic Citizenship
3.1.1 Elite Theory of Democracy


Some modern theorists of democracy, called elite theorists, have
argued against any robustly egalitarian or deliberative forms of
democracy on these grounds. They argue that high levels of citizen
participation tend to produce bad legislation designed by demagogues
to appeal to poorly informed and overly emotional citizens. They look
upon the alleged uninformedness of citizens evidenced in many
empirical studies in the 1950s and 1960s as perfectly reasonable and
predictable. Indeed they regard the alleged apathy of citizens in
modern states as highly desirable social phenomena. The alternative,
they believe, is a highly motivated population of persons who know
nothing and who are more likely than not to pursue irrational and
emotionally appealing aims.


Joseph Schumpeter's assertion that the “democratic method is
that institutional arrangement for arriving at political decisions in
which individuals acquire the power to decide by means of a
competitive struggle for the people's vote” (1956, p. 269),
still stands as a concise statement of the elitist view. In this view,
the emphasis is placed on responsible political leadership.  Political
leaders are to avoid divisive and emotionally charged issues and make
policy and law with little regard for the fickle and diffuse demands
made by ordinary citizens. Citizens participate in the process of
competition by voting but since they know very little they are not
effectively the ruling part of the society. The process of election is
usually just a fairly peaceful way of maintaining or changing those
who rule.


On Schumpeter's view, however, citizens do have a role to play in
avoiding serious disasters. When politicians act in ways that nearly
anyone can see is problematic, the citizens can throw the bums out. So
democracy, even on this stripped down version, plays some role in
protecting society from the worst politicians.


So the elite theory of democracy does seem compatible with some of the
instrumentalist arguments given above but it is strongly opposed to
the intrinsic arguments from liberty, public justification and
equality. Against the liberty and equality arguments, the elite theory
simply rejects the possibility that citizens can participate as
equals.  The society must be ruled by elites and the role of citizens
is merely to ensure smooth and peaceful circulation of elites. Against
the public justification view, ordinary citizens cannot be expected to
participate in public deliberation and the views of elites ought not
to be fundamentally transformed by general public deliberation. To be
sure, it is conceivable for all that has been said that there can be
an elite deliberative democracy wherein elites deliberate, perhaps
even out of sight of the population at large, on how to run the
society. Indeed, some deliberative democrats do emphasize deliberation
in legislative assemblies though in general deliberative democrats
favor a more broadly egalitarian approach to deliberation, which is
vulnerable to the kinds of worries raised by Schumpeter and Downs.
3.1.2 Interest Group Pluralism


One approach that is in part motivated by the problem of democratic
citizenship but which attempts to preserve some elements of equality
against the elitist criticism is the interest group pluralist account
of politics. Robert Dahl's early statement of the view is very
powerful. “In a rough sense, the essence of all competitive
politics is bribery of the electorate by politicians… The
farmer… supports a candidate committed to high price supports,
the businessman…supports an advocate of low corporation
taxes… the consumer…votes for candidates opposed to a
sale tax” (Dahl 1959, p. 69). In this conception of the
democratic process, each citizen is a member of an interest group with
narrowly defined interests that are closely connected to their
everyday lives.  On these subjects citizens are supposed to be quite
well informed and interested in having an influence. Or at least,
elites from each of the interest groups that are relatively close in
perspective to the ordinary members are the principal agents in the
process. On this account, democracy is not rule by the majority but
rather rule by coalitions of minorities. Policy and law in a
democratic society are decided by means of bargaining among the
different groups.

 This approach is conceivably compatible with the more egalitarian
approach to democracy. This is because it attempts to reconcile
equality with collective decision making by limiting the tasks of
citizens to ones which they are able to perform reasonably well. And it
attempts to do this in a way that gives citizens a key role in decision
making. The account ensures that individuals can participate roughly as
equals to the extent that it narrowly confines the issues each
individual is concerned with. It is not particularly compatible with
the deliberative public justification approach because it eschews
deliberation about the common good or about justice. And it takes the
democratic process to be concerned essentially with bargaining among
the different interest groups where the preferences to be advanced by
each group is not subject to further debate in the society as a whole.
To be sure, there might be some deliberation within interest groups but
it will not be society wide.
3.1.3 Neo-Liberalism


A third approach inspired by the problem of citizenship may be called
the neo-liberal approach to politics favored by public choice
theorists such as James Buchanan & Gordon Tullock (1965). Against
elite theories, they contend that elites and their allies will tend to
expand the powers of government and bureaucracy for their own
interests and that this expansion will occur at the expense of a
largely inattentive public. For this reason, they argue for severe
restrictions on the powers of elites. They argue against the interest
group pluralist theorists that the problem of participation occurs
within interest groups more or less as much as among the citizenry at
large.  As a consequence, interest groups will not form very
easily. Only those interest groups that are guided by powerful
economic interests are likely to succeed in organizing to influence
the government. Hence, only some interest groups will succeed in
influencing government and they will do so largely for the benefit of
the powerful economic elites that fund and guide them. Furthermore,
they argue that such interest groups will tend to produce highly
inefficient government because they will attempt to advance their
interests in politics while spreading the costs to others. The
consequence of this is that policies will be created that tend to be
more costly (because imposed on everyone in society) than they are
beneficial (because they benefit only the elites in the interest
group.)

 Neo-liberals argue that any way of organizing a large and powerful
democratic state is likely to produce serious inefficiencies. They
infer that one ought to transfer many of the current functions of the
state to the market and limit the state to the enforcement of basic
property rights and liberties. These can be more easily understood and
brought under the control of ordinary citizens.

 But the neo-liberal account of democracy must answer to two large
worries. First, citizens in modern societies have more ambitious
conceptions of social justice and the common good than are realizable
by the minimal state. The neo-liberal account thus implies a very
serious curtailment of democracy of its own. More evidence is needed to
support the contention that these aspirations cannot be achieved by the
modern state. Second, the neo-liberal approach ignores the problem of
large private concentrations of wealth and power that are capable of
pushing small states around for their own benefit and imposing their
wills on populations without their consent. The assumptions that lead
neo-liberals to be skeptical about the large modern state imply equally
disturbing problems for the large private concentrations of wealth in a
neo-liberal society.
3.2 The Self-Interest Assumption


A considerable amount of the literature in political science and the
economic theory of the state are grounded in the assumption that
individuals act primarily and perhaps even exclusively in their
self-interest narrowly construed. The problem of participation and the
accounts of the democratic process described above are in large part
dependent on this assumption. While these ideas have generated
interesting results and have become ever more sophisticated, there has
been a growing chorus of opponents. Against the self-interest axiom,
defenders of deliberative democracy and others claim that citizens are
capable of being motivated by a concern for the common good and
justice. And they claim, with Mill and Rousseau, that such concerns
are not merely given prior to politics but that they can evolve and
improve through the process of discussion and debate in politics. They
assert that much debate and discussion in politics would not be
intelligible were it not for the fact that citizens are willing to
engage in open minded discussion with those who have distinct morally
informed points of view. Empirical evidence suggests that individuals
are motivated by moral considerations in politics in addition to their
interests.  Accordingly, many propose that democratic institutions be
designed to support the inclination to engage in moral and open-minded
discussion with others (see the essays in Mansbridge 1990).
3.3 The Role of Citizenship as Choosers of Aims


Once we approach the idea of citizenship from a moral point of view
and we recognize the importance of a division of labor, the question
arises, what is the appropriate role for a citizen in a democracy? If
we think that citizens are too often uninformed we should ask two
questions. What ought citizens have knowledge about in order to
fulfill their role? What standards ought citizens’ beliefs live
up to in order to be adequately supported? Some, such as Dahl in the
above quote, have proposed that citizens know about their particular
sectors of society and not others. We have seen that this view has a
number of difficulties. Christiano proposes, along with others, that
citizens must think about what ends the society ought to aim at and
leave the question of how to achieve those aims to experts
(Christiano 1996, chap. 5). This kind of view needs to answer to the
problem of how to ensure that politicians, administrators and experts
actually do attempt to realize the aims set by citizens. And it must
show how institutions can be designed so as to establish the division
of labor while preserving equality among citizens. But if citizens
genuinely do choose the aims and others faithfully pursue the means to
achieving those aims, then citizens are in the driver's seat in
society.

 It is hard to see how citizens can satisfy any even moderate standards
for beliefs about out how best to achieve their political aims.
Knowledge of means requires an immense amount of social science and
knowledge of particular facts. For citizens to have this kind of
knowledge generally would require that we abandon the division of labor
in society. On the other hand, citizens do have first hand and daily
experience with thinking about the values and aims they pursue. This
gives them a chance to satisfy standards of belief regarding what the
best aims are.


Still the view is not defensible without a compelling institutional
answer to the question of how to ensure that others are genuinely
pursuing the means to achieve the aims specified by citizens. On the
proposed view, legislative representatives and bureaucrats as well as
judges must subordinate their activities to the task of figuring out
how to pursue the aims of citizens. There is a huge principal/agent
problem here.


Furthermore, we must ask, how must institutions be designed in order
to reconcile the demand for equality among citizens with the need for a
division of labor? We will discuss one dimension of this issue in the
question of legislative representation.
4. Legislative Representation


A number of debates have centered on the question of what kinds of
legislative institution are best for a democratic society. What choice
we make here will depend heavily on our underlying ethical
justification of democracy, our conception of citizenship as well as on
our empirical understanding of political institutions and how they
function. The most basic types of formal political representation
available are single member district representation, proportional
representation and group representation. In addition, many societies
have opted for multicameral legislative institutions. In some cases,
combinations of the above forms have been tried.

 Single member district representation returns single representatives of
geographically defined areas containing roughly equal populations to
the legislature and is present most prominently in the United States
and the United Kingdom. The most common form of proportional
representation is party list proportional representation. In a simple
form of such a scheme, a number of parties compete for election to a
legislature that is not divided into geographical districts. Parties
acquire seats in the legislature as a proportion of the total number of
votes they receive in the voting population as a whole. Group
representation occurs when the society is divided into
non-geographically defined groups such as ethnic or linguistic groups
or even functional groups such as workers, farmers and capitalists and
returns representatives to a legislature from each of them.


Many have argued in favor of single member district legislation on
the grounds that it has appeared to them to lead to more stable
government than other forms of representation. The thought is that
proportional representation tends to fragment the citizenry into
opposing homogeneous camps that rigidly adhere to their party lines and
that are continually vying for control over the government. Since there
are many parties and they are unwilling to compromise with each other,
governments formed from coalitions of parties tend to fall apart rather
quickly. The post war experience of governments in Italy appears to
confirm this hypothesis. Single member district representation, in
contrast, is said to enhance the stability of governments by virtue of
its favoring a two party system of government. Each election cycle then
determines which party is to stay in power for some length of time.

 Charles Beitz argues (1989, chap. 7) that single member district
representation encourages moderation in party programs offered for
citizens to consider. This results from the tendency of this kind of
representation towards two party systems. In a two party system with
majority rule, it is argued, each party must appeal to the median
voter in the political spectrum. Hence, they must moderate their
programs to appeal to the median voter. Furthermore, they encourage
compromise among groups since they must try to appeal to a lot of
other groups in order to become part of one of the two leading
parties. These tendencies encourage moderation and compromise in
citizens to the extent that political parties, and interest groups,
hold these qualities up as necessary to functioning well in a
democracy.

 In criticism, advocates of proportional and group representation have
argued that single member district representation tends to muffle the
voices and ignore the interests of minority groups in the society.
Minority interests and views tend to be articulated in background
negotiations and in ways that muffle their distinctiveness.
Furthermore, representatives of minority interests and views often have
a difficult time getting elected at all in single member district
systems so it has been charged that minority views and interests are
often systematically underrepresented. Sometimes these problems are
dealt with by redrawing the boundaries of districts in a way that
ensures greater minority representation. The efforts are invariably
quite controversial since there is considerable disagreement about the
criteria for apportionment. In proportional representation, by
contrast, representatives of different groups are seated in the
legislature in proportion to citizens’ choices. Minorities need
not make their demands conform to the basic dichotomy of views and
interests that characterize single member district systems so their
views are more articulated and distinctive as well as better
represented.

 Another criticism of single member district representation is that it
encourages parties to pursue dubious electoral campaign strategies. The
need to appeal to a large, diverse and somewhat amorphous sector of the
population can very often be best met by using ambiguous, vague and
often quite irrelevant appeals to the citizens. Thus instead of
encouraging reasonable compromise the scheme tends to support
tendencies towards ignorance, superficiality and fatuousness in
political campaigns and in the citizenry. It encourages political
leaders to take care of the real issues of politics in back rooms while
they appeal to citizens by means of smoke and mirrors. Of course, those
who agree in the main with the elitist type theories will see nothing
wrong in this, indeed they may well champion this effect. Proportional
representation requires that parties be relatively clear and up front
about their proposals, so those who believe that democracy is ethically
grounded in the appeal to equality tend to favor proportional
representation (see Christiano 1996, chap. 6).

 Advocates of group representation, like Iris Marion Young (1990,
chap. 6), have argued that some historically disenfranchised groups
may still not do very well under proportional representation. They may
not be able to organize and articulate their views as easily as other
groups. Also, minority groups can still be systematically defeated in
the legislature and their interests may be consistently set back even
if they do have some representation. For these groups, some have
argued that the only way to protect their interests is legally to
ensure that they have adequate and even disproportionate
representation.

 One worry about group representation is that it tends to freeze some
aspects of the agenda that might be better left to the choice of
citizens. For instance, consider a population that is divided into
linguistic groups for a long time. And suppose that only some citizens
continue to think of linguistic conflict as important. In the
circumstances a group representation scheme may tend to be biased in an
arbitrary way that favors the views or interests of those who do think
of linguistic conflict as important.
5. The Authority of Democracy


Since democracy is a collective decision process, the question
naturally arises about whether there is any obligation of citizens to
obey the democratic decision. In particular, the question arises as to
whether a citizen has an obligation to obey the democratic decision
when he or she disagrees with it.

 There are three main concepts of the legitimate authority of the state.
First, a state has legitimate authority to the extent that it is
morally justified in imposing its rule on the members. Legitimate
authority on this account has no direct implications concerning the
obligations or duties that citizens may hold toward that state. It
simply says that if the state is morally justified in doing what it
does, then it has legitimate authority. Second, a state has legitimate
authority to the extent that its directives generate duties in citizens
to obey. The duties of the citizens need not be owed to the state but
they are real duties to obey. The third is that the state has a right
to rule that is correlated with the citizens’ duty to it to obey
it. This is the strongest notion of authority and it seems to be the
core idea behind the legitimacy of the state. The idea is that when
citizens disagree about law and policy it is important to be able to
answer the question, who has the right to choose?


With respect to democracy we can imagine three main approaches to the
question as to whether democratic decisions have authority. First, we
can appeal to perfectly general conceptions of legitimate
authority. Some have thought that the question of authority is
independent entirely of whether a state is democratic. Consent
theories of political authority and instrumentalist conceptions of
political authority state general criteria of political authority that
can be met by non democratic as well as democratic states. Second,
some have thought that there is a conceptual link between democracy
and authority such that if a decision is made democratically then it
must therefore have authority. Third, some have thought that there are
general principles of political authority that are uniquely realized
by a democratic state under certain well defined conditions.


Readers who are interested in more general conceptions of political
authority may consult the entry for political authority for a
discussion of the issues. And the second kind of view has been largely
abandoned by democratic theorists. I do wish to discuss the third kind
of conception of the political authority of democracy.
5.1 Instrumentalist Conceptions of Democratic Authority


In general, instrumentalist conceptions of authority make no special
mention of democracy. The instrumental arguments for democracy give
some reason for why one ought to respect the democracy when one
disagrees with its decisions. But there may be many other instrumental
considerations that play a role in deciding on the question of whether
one ought to obey. And these instrumental considerations are pretty
much the same whether one is considering obedience to democracy or some
other form of rule.

 There is one instrumentalist approach which is quite unique to
democracy and that seems to ground a strong conception of democratic
authority. That is the approach inspired by the Condorcet Jury Theorem
(Goodin, 2003, chap. 5; Estlund, 2002, 77-80).  According to this
theorem, on issues where there are two alternatives and there is a
correct answer as to which one is correct, if voters have on average a
better than even chance of getting the right answer, the majority is
more likely to have the right answer than anyone in the minority. And
the likelihood that the majority is right increases as the size of the
voting population increases. In very large populations, the chance
that the majority is right approaches certainty. The theorem is an
instance of the law of large numbers. If each voter has an
independently better than 0.5 chance of getting the right answer then
the probability that more than 0.5 of the voters get the right answer
approaches 1 as the number of voters becomes very large.

 Such a result makes sense of Rousseau's famous passage: “Each
citizen, in giving his suffrage, states his mind on that question
[concerning what the general will is]; and the general will is found
by counting the votes. When, therefore, the motion which I opposed
carries, it only proves to me that I was mistaken and that what I
believed to be the general will was not so” (Rousseau 1762,
95-96).  On this account, we have a conception of the authority of
democracy.  The members of the minority have a powerful reason for
shifting their allegiance to the majority position, since each has
very good reason to think that the majority is right.

 There are a number of difficulties with the application of the
Condorcet Jury Theorem to the case of voting in elections and
referenda. First, many have remarked that voters’ opinions are
not independent of each other. Indeed, the democratic process seems to
emphasize persuasion and coalition building. And the theorem only works
on independent trials. Second, the theorem does not seem to apply to
cases in which the information that voters have access to, and on the
basis of which they make their judgments, is segmented in various ways
so that some sectors of the society do not have the relevant
information while others do have it. And modern societies and politics
seem to instantiate this kind of segmentation in terms of class, race,
ethnic groupings, religion, occupational position, geographical place
and so on. One can always have good reason to think that the majority
is not properly placed to make a reasonable decision on a certain issue
when one is in the minority. Finally, all voters approach issues they
have to make decisions on with strong ideological biases thus
undermining the sense that each voter is bringing a kind of independent
observation on the nature of the common good to the vote.

 One further worry about the Condorcet Theorem's application seems to
be that it would prove too much anyway for it undermines the common
practice of the loyal opposition in democracies. Indeed, even in
scientific communities the fact that a majority of scientists favor a
particular view does not make the minority scientists think that they
are wrong, though it does perhaps give them pause (Goodin 2003,
chap. 7).
5.2 Democratic Consent Theories of Authority


Some consent theorists have thought that there is a special relation
between democracy and legitimate authority at least under certain
conditions. John Locke argues (1690, sec. 96) that when a person
consents to the creation of a political society, he necessarily
consents to the use of majority rule in deciding how the political
society is to be organized.  Locke thinks that majority rule is the
natural decision rule when there are no other ones. He argues that
once a society is formed it must move in the direction of the greater
force. One way to understand this argument is as follows. If we think
of each member of society as an equal and if we think that there is
likely to be disagreement beyond the question of whether to join
society or not, then we must accept majority rule as the appropriate
decision rule. This interpretation of the greater force argument
assumes that the expression “greater force” is to be
understood in terms of the equal worth of each person's interests and
rights, so the society must go in the direction in which the greater
number of persons wants it to go.


To be sure, Locke thinks that a people, which is formed by individuals
in consenting to be members, could choose a monarchy by means of
majority rule and so this argument by itself does not give us an
argument for democracy. But Locke refers back to this argument when he
defends the requirement of representative institutions for deciding
when property may be regulated and when taxes may be levied. He argues
that a person must consent to the regulation or taxation of his
property by the state. But he says that this requirement of consent is
satisfied when a majority of the representatives of property holders
consent to the regulation and taxation of property (Locke, 1690,
sec. 140). This does seem to be moving towards a genuinely democratic
conception of legitimate authority. How democratic this conception is
depends on how we understand property in Locke's discussion. If it
includes the rights of citizens generally, then we have an argument
for democratic decision making. But if the idea of property only
includes holders of private property then we have an argument for, at
best, a highly attenuated form of democratic decision making.


Another consent-based argument for the claim that democracy is
necessary for legitimate authority asserts that when people
participate in the democratic process, by their act of participation
they consent to the outcome, even if it goes against them. Their
participation thereby lends legitimacy to the outcome and perhaps even
to the democratic assembly that is elected by citizens. On this
account, the acts of voting, for example, are also acts of consent to
the outcome of the voting. So participants are thereby obligated to
comply with the decision made by the majority.


The problem with all these variations on consent theory is that they
face a worrisome dilemma. On the one hand, they seem to involve highly
suspect interpretations of behaviors that may or may not imply the
kinds of consent that these theorists have in mind. Hume's worries
about consent theorists’ interpreting residence in a territory
as consent to its government have close analogs in this kind of
context (Hume, 1748, p. 263). Why suppose that a person's vote is
understood by that person to be consent to the outcome of the
vote. Why not suppose that the person is merely trying to have an
impact on the outcome? Or why suppose that a person's membership in
society—the “consent” signaled by remaining in the
society—really commits him to agreeing that decisions must be
made by majority rule?


On the other hand, if we eschew the interpretative route the only way
to think of the person's vote as constituting consent is if we think
that the person ought to consent to the outcome or ought to know that
he is consenting to the outcome. The fact that they ought to consent
to the outcome because they have participated is sufficient, on some
views, to produce an obligation. And the thesis that they ought to
know that they consent is usually grounded in the idea that it they
ought to be consenting when they vote. But this kind of view seems to
get far away from the basic idea of consent theorists, which is that
whether persons consent or not should be up to them and should not be
determined by the correct moral view. Consent theory is grounded in
the need a way to think of government has legitimacy when people
disagree about whether it is just or right.
5.2.1 Liberty and Authority


The liberty approaches to the justification of democracy provide
alternative approaches to the idea of the authority of democracy. The
idea here is that democracy has authority to the extent that people
freely bring about the democratic decision. The reason for this is that
democracy merely extends their activity of self-determination to the
political realm. To the extent that self-determination is an preeminent
value and democracy extends it to the political realm, allegiance to
democratic decisions is necessary to self-determination and therefore
is required by virtue of the pre eminent importance of
self-determination.

 But here is a worry about this kind of approach. It seems either to
presuppose that decisions will have unanimous support or it requires a
number of substantive conditions on self-determination, which
conditions do a lot of the work of generating obligations to
democracy.  For instance, if a decision must be made by majority rule,
one strategy for reconciling this with self-determination is to say
that a self-determining person must accept the legitimacy of majority
rule when there is disagreement. This may be because the
self-determining person must accept the fundamental importance of
equality and majority rule is essential to equality under
circumstances of disagreement. So if one argues that one cannot be
self-determining unless one accepts equality then one might be able to
argue that the self-determining person must accept the results of
majority rule. But this argument seems to make the authority of
democracy depend primarily on the importance of equality. And one must
wonder about the importance of the idea of self-determination to the
account.
5.2.2 Equality and Authority


Another approach to the question of the authority of democracy asserts
that failing to obey the decisions of a democratic assembly amounts to
treating one's fellow citizens as inferiors (Christiano 2004,
284-287). And this approach establishes the authority of democracy by
claiming that the inequality involved in failing to obey the
democratic assembly is the most important form of inequality. It is
more important to treat persons as equals in political decision making
on this account than it is to treat them as equals in the economic
sphere. The idea is that citizens will disagree on how to treat each
other as equals in the areas of substantive law and policy. It is the
purpose of democracy to make decisions when these disagreements
arise. Democracy realizes a kind of equality among persons that all
can share allegiance to even when they disagree about many matters
relating to substantive law and policy. Since democracy realizes
equality in a highly public manner and publicity is a great and
egalitarian value, the equality realized by democracy trumps other
kinds of equality.


The conception of democracy as grounded in public equality provides
some reason to think that democratic equality must have some
pre-eminence over other kinds of equality. The idea is that public
equality is the most important form of equality and that democracy, as
well as some other principles such as liberal rights, are unique
realizations of public equality. The other forms of equality in play in
substantive disputes about law and policy are ones about which people
can have reasonable disagreements (within limits specified by the
principle of public equality). So the principle of public equality
requires that one treat others publicly as equals and democracy is
necessary to doing this. Since public equality has precedence over
other forms of equality, citizens have obligations to abide by the
democratic process even if their favored conceptions of equality are
passed by in the decision making process.


Of course, there will be limits on what citizens must accept from a
democratic assembly. And these limits, on the egalitarian account, must
be understood as deriving from the fundamental value of equality. So,
one might think that public equality also requires protection of
liberal rights and perhaps even the provision of an economic
minimum.
5.3 Limits to the Authority of Democracy


If democracy does have authority, what are the limits to that
authority? A limit to democratic authority is a principle violation of
which defeats democratic authority. When the principle is violated by
the democratic assembly, the assembly loses its authority in that
instance or the moral weight of the authority is overridden. A number
of different views have been offered on this issue. First, it is
worthwhile to distinguish between different kinds of moral limit to
authority. We might distinguish between internal and external limits
to democratic authority. An internal limit to democratic authority is
a limit that arises from the requirements of democratic process or a
limit that arises from the principles that underpin democracy. An
external limit on the authority of democracy is a limit that arises
from principles that are independent of the values or requirements of
democracy.  Furthermore, some limits to democratic authority are
rebutting limits, which are principles that weigh in the balance
against the principles that support democratic decision making. Some
considerations may simply outweigh in importance the considerations
that support democratic authority. So in a particular case, an
individual may see that there are reasons to obey the assembly and
some reasons against obeying the assembly and in the case at hand the
reasons against obedience outweigh the reasons in favor of
obedience.


On the other hand some limits to democratic authority are undercutting
limits. These limits function not by weighing against the
considerations in favor of authority, they undercut the considerations
in favor of authority altogether; they simply short circuit the
authority. When an undercutting limit is in play, it is not as if the
principles which ground the limit outweigh the reasons for obeying the
democratic assembly, it is rather that the reasons for obeying the
democratic assembly are undermined altogether; they cease to exist or
at least they are severely weakened.
5.3.1 Internal Limits to Democratic Authority


Some have argued that the democratic process ought to be limited to
decisions that are not incompatible with the proper functioning of the
democratic process. So they argue that the democratic process may not
legitimately take away the political rights of its citizens in good
standing. It may not take away rights that are necessary to the
democratic process such as freedom of association or freedom of speech.
But these limits do not extend beyond the requirements for proper
democratic functioning. They do not protect non political artistic
speech or freedom of association in the case of non political
activities (Ely 1980, chap. 4).

 Another kind of internal limit is a limit that arises from the
principles that underpin democracy. And the presence of this limit
would seem to be necessary to making sense of the first limit because
in order for the first limit to be morally important we need to know
why a democracy ought to protect the democratic process.

 Locke (1690, chap. XI) gives an account of the internal limits of
democracy in his idea that there are certain things to which a citizen
may not consent. She may not consent to arbitrary rule or the
violation of fundamental rights including democratic and liberal
rights. To the extent that consent is the basis of democratic
authority for Locke, this suggests that there are limits to what a
democratic assembly may do that derive from the very principles that
ground the authority. And these limits simply undermine the right of
the assembly to rule in these cases since they are not things to which
citizens can consent. This account provides an explanation of the idea
behind the first internal limit, that democracy may not be suspended
by democratic means but it goes beyond that limit to suggest that
rights that are not essentially connected with the exercise of the
franchise may also not be violated because one may not consent to
their violation.

 The conception of democratic authority that grounds it in public
equality also provides an account of the limits of that authority.
Since democracy is founded in public equality, it may not violate
public equality in any of its decisions. The basic idea is that overt
violation of public equality by a democratic assembly undermines the
claim that the democratic assembly embodies public equality.
Democracy's embodiment of public equality is conditional on its
protecting public equality. To the extent that liberal rights are
grounded in public equality and the provision of an economic minimum is
also so grounded, this suggests that democratic rights and liberal
rights and rights to an economic minimum create a limit to democratic
authority. This account also provides a deep grounding for the kinds of
limits to democratic authority defended in the first internal limit and
it goes beyond these to the extent that protection of rights that are
not connected with the exercise of the franchise is also necessary to
public equality.
5.3.2 Persistent Minorities


This account of the authority of democracy also provides some help
with a vexing problem of democratic theory. This problem is the
difficulty of persistent minorities. There is a persistent minority in
a democratic society when that minority always loses in the voting.
This is always a possibility in democracies because of the use of
majority rule. If the society is divided into two or more highly
unified voting blocks in which the members of each group votes
in the same ways as all the other members of that group, then the group
in the minority will find itself always on the losing end of the votes.
This problem has plagued some societies, particularly those with
indigenous peoples who live within developed societies. Though this
problem is often connected with majority tyranny it is distinct from
the problem of majority tyranny because it may be the case that the
majority attempts to treat the minority well, in accordance with its
conception of good treatment. It is just that the minority never agrees
with the majority on what constitutes proper treatment. Being a
persistent minority can be highly oppressive even if the majority does
not try to act oppressively. This can be understood with the help of
the very ideas that underpin democracy. Persons have interests in being
able to correct for the cognitive biases of others and to be able to
make the world in such a way that it makes sense to them. These
interests are set back for a persistent minority since they never get
their way.

 The conception of democracy as grounded in public equality can shed
light on this problem. It can say that the existence of a persistent
minority violates public equality. In effect, a society in which there
is a persistent minority is one in which that minority is being
treated publicly as an inferior because it is clear that its
fundamental interests are being set back. Hence to the extent that
violations of public equality undercut the authority of a democratic
assembly, the existence of a persistent minority undermines the
authority of the democracy at least with respect to the minority. This
suggests that certain institutions ought to be constructed so that the
minority is not persistent.
5.3.3 External Limits to Democratic Authority


One natural kind of limit to democratic authority is the external
rebutting kind of limit. Here the idea is that there are certain
considerations that favor democratic decision making and there are
certain values that are independent of democracy that may be at issue
in democratic decisions. Some views may assert that there are only
external limits to democratic authority. But it is possible to think
that there are both internal and external limits. Such an issue may
arise in decisions to go to war, for example. In such decisions, one
may have a duty to obey the decision of the democratic assembly on the
grounds that this is how one treats one's fellow citizens as
equals but one may also have a duty to oppose the war on the grounds
that the war is an unjust aggression against other people. To the
extent that this consideration is sufficiently serious it may outweigh
the considerations of equality that underpin democratic authority. Thus
one may have an overall duty not to obey in this context. Issues of
foreign policy in general seem to give rise to possible external
rebutting limits to democracy.