Claims about desert are familiar and frequent in ordinary
non-philosophical conversation. We say that a hard-working and
productive student deserves a high grade; that a vicious criminal
deserves a harsh penalty; that someone who has suffered a series of
misfortunes deserves some good luck for a change.  


Philosophers have made use of the concept of desert in several
contexts.  In discussions of the nature of justice, several
philosophers have advocated versions of the idea that justice obtains
when goods and evils are distributed according to desert. In
discussions of the concept of intrinsic value, some philosophers have
suggested that happiness may be the greatest good but it has
outstanding value only when enjoyed by someone who deserves it.  In
theories about moral obligation, some consequentialists have defended
the idea that right acts lead to outcomes in which higher welfare is
preferentially distributed to people who deserve it.  In social and
political philosophy (or philosophy of law) a number of philosophers
have appealed to the concept of desert when discussing the
justification of penalties for violations of law. 


So appeals to desert appear frequently in many contexts, in philosophy
as well as in ordinary non-philosophical talk.  Yet many questions
remain about desert: how can it be distinguished from mere
entitlement?  What is its conceptual structure?  What kinds of things
can be deserving?  What kinds of things can be deserved?  What kinds
of properties can serve as bases on which a deserver deserves a
desert?  How can claims about desert be justified?

 
1. Desert and Entitlement


It is important here at the outset that we draw attention to a
distinction between desert and another concept with which it
might be confused.  We will speak of this latter concept as the
concept of entitlement, though different philosophers use
different terminology to mark this distinction. 


A typical desert claim is a claim to the effect that someone deserves
something from someone on some basis.  For example, consider the claim
that a certain student deserves a high grade from her teacher in
virtue of the fact that she did excellent work in the course.  A
typical entitlement claim is a claim to the effect that someone is
entitled to something from someone on some basis.  For example,
consider the claim that a customer is entitled to a refund from a
merchant in virtue of the fact that the merchandise he purchased from
that merchant had been sold with a guarantee and turned out to be
defective. 


There are obvious structural similarities between desert claims and
claims about entitlement.  In typical examples of each sort, someone
is said to deserve (or be entitled to) something from someone on some
basis. However, there is an important difference between the concepts
of desert and entitlement.  As the terminology is used here, desert is
a more purely normative concept, while entitlement is a sociological
or empirical concept.  If some social or legal institution is in place in
your social group, and that institution has a rule that specifies some
treatment for those who have some feature, and you have the feature,
then you are entitled to that treatment.  Thus, for example, suppose
that when the customer purchased a certain item, he received a legally
binding written guarantee from the seller.  The guarantee specified
that if the item should turn out to be defective, the seller would
either replace the item or refund the money that the buyer had spent
for the defective item.  In such a case, if the buyer satisfies the
conditions stated in the guarantee, and the purchased item is indeed
defective, the buyer is entitled to the refund or replacement. 


Typical desert claims have a similar structure, but do not always
depend in this way on the existence of laws or contracts or other
similar social institutions.  A person may deserve some sort of
treatment even though there are no rules in place in his society that
codify the conditions under which someone deserves that sort of
treatment.  In such a case, a person may deserve something even though
he is not entitled to it.  Similarly, a person may be entitled to
something by some rules that are in place in his society even though
he does not deserve it.  Some examples may help to make this
distinction clearer.  


Consider an example involving a wealthy grandfather and two
grandchildren.  One grandchild is vicious and rich; the other is
virtuous and poor.  The vicious grandchild never treated his
grandfather with respect.  The virtuous grandchild was always
respectful and caring.  Suppose the grandfather leaves his entire
fortune to the vicious grandchild.  As the terminology is used here,
we may want to describe the situation by saying that the vicious
grandchild is entitled to the fortune (the rules of the legal
system are unambiguous on this point), but at the same time we may
want to say that he does not deserve it (he already has too
much money; he is a rotten person who never treated his grandfather
respectfully).  The virtuous grandchild may deserve at least
some of the inheritance, but he is not entitled to any of
it. 

 
Another example illustrates the same point.  Suppose that an athlete
has her heart set on doing well in a competition.  Suppose she has a
lot of natural talent and trains diligently for a long time until she
has developed championship-level abilities in her sport. Suppose that
the training involves quite a bit of sacrifice on her part.  Suppose
that at the last minute the competition is cancelled, and the athlete
has no opportunity to compete.  Then we might say that this was a
great misfortune for her; she deserved to have a chance to
participate.  Unfortunately, there is no rule in the rulebook of the
athlete’s sport that says that those who have trained diligently are
to get a chance to participate.  Let us assume that there is no
institution in place in the athlete’s society that specifies that
those who train hard shall be given a chance to compete.  In this
case, it would be wrong to say (using the terminology in the way that
has been specified) that the athlete is entitled to a chance
to participate, yet we may still feel that she deserved the
chance.  This seems to be an example of a case in which someone has
completely “non-institutional” desert of something. 
 Some philosophers use the expression ‘pre-institutional
desert’ where we use ‘desert’, and
‘institutional desert’ where we use
‘entitlement’.  To avoid confusion, we will use
‘desert’ to refer to the relation that does not
essentially involve the existence of social or legal institutions, and
‘entitlement’ to refer to the relation that does
essentially involve the existence of such institutions.  Our focus in
this article is on desert; we mention entitlement only as it bears on
desert. 
2. On the Adicity of Desert


In the introduction to her anthology Desert and Justice,
Serena Olsaretti says that one of the ‘few basic points of substantive
agreement among desert theorists’ is that ‘desert is a three-place
relation between a person, the grounds on which she is said to be
deserving (the desert basis), and the treatment or good which she is
said to deserve (the deserved good)’ (2003, 4).  Similarly, in his
introductory essay ‘Contemporary Interpretations of Desert’ Owen
McLeod says ‘The contemporary literature is agreed that desert...is a
three-place relation: it binds three sorts of thing: (a) a subject,
(b) a thing deserved by the subject, and (c) a basis in virtue of
which the subject deserves it’ (1999a, 61-2). Olsaretti and McLeod are
right: desert is widely thought to be a three-term relation.  But no
matter how widely accepted it may be, we do not think that there are
strong arguments for it. We also do not think that the debate over the
desert-relation’s number of argument-places – or
“adicity” – is particularly important.


To figure out how many argument places the desert relation has we must
look at the number of terms in (grammatically well-formed) sentences
containing the verb ‘deserves.’ But we need to be careful how we
interpret the data. A very naive reading of the data suggests that
there are many different desert relations displaying different levels
of adicity.  Consider these statements: 

D1
You [1] deserve a raise [2].
D2
In virtue of your hard work [1], you [2]
deserve to get a raise [3].
D3
In virtue of your hard work [1], you [2]
deserve to get a raise [3] on September 1 [4].
D4
In virtue of your hard work [1], you
[2] now [3] deserve to get a raise [4] from your
boss [5], on September 1 [6]. 



Each of these sentences is well-formed. And each of them suggests
something different about the adicity of “the” desert
relation. D1 suggests that the desert-relation is a two-place relation
relating a deserver to a desert.  D3 suggests that it is a four-place
relation relating a deserver, a desert, a desert base, and the time at
which the deserver deserves to receive the desert.  D4 suggests that
it is a six-place relation relating a deserver, a desert, two times, a
desert base, and a distributor. What should we conclude? The most
simple-minded conclusion is that there is no one desert relation;
instead there are several, closely-related, relations. But this
conclusion is not inevitable, nor is it particularly plausible. A
second possibility is that the desert-relation is “variably
polyadic”: it does not have a fixed number of argument places. A
third possibility is that it is D4 that perspicuously represents the
number of argument places of the desert-relation (namely, six). Only
D4, the idea goes, is a “fully explicit, fully
articulated” desert claim. The thought continues: the other
statements, D1, D2, and D3, also make statements involving this
six-place relation, but the way in which some of its argument-places
are filled is not made explicit. Maybe, for example, D1 involves
existential quantification: it is short for ‘In virtue of something,
you, at some time, deserve to get a raise from someone at some time’
(where the first time is the time at which the desert claim is true,
and the second time is the time at which you deserve to get the
raise).  A fourth possibility is that D1 is “already” a
fully explicit, fully articulated desert claim, and that the terms in
the other sentences do not stand for things that fill argument-places
in the desert relation, just as (we ordinarily think) the
well-formedness of ‘John loves Jane because she is from New Jersey’
does not show that loving is a three-place relation, relating two
people and a proposition.


Settling which of these views is correct requires some substantive
work in the philosophy of language (and maybe also in
metaphysics). Certainly we cannot conclude from a cursory glance at D2
that the desert-relation has three argument-places. 


We are not going to try to settle this debate, for we think that the
question of how many argument-places the desert relation has has
little bearing on the questions about desert that arise in moral,
social, and political philosophy. The kinds of questions about desert
that are typically of interest when we consider desert claims in
ethics or in social and political philosophy contexts can be asked
without making any assumptions about the desert-relation’s number of
argument-places.  In such contexts, we may want to know (a) who is the
deserver; (b) what the deserver is said to deserve; (c) upon what
basis the deserver is said to be deserving of that desert; (d) from
whom the deserver is said to be deserving.  We may also want to know
(e) the time at which the deserver is deserving of this desert; and
(f) the time at which the deserver deserves to receive this desert.
We can profitably discuss these questions without committing ourselves
to any view about the metaphysical complexity of the concept of
desert. (Perhaps Olsaretti, McLeod, and others who argue that desert
is a three-place relation merely mean to argue that we can always ask
questions (a), (b), and (c).)
3. Deservers, Desert, and Desert Bases


In his seminal work on desert and justice (Feinberg 1970) Joel
Feinberg presented a catalog of types of seemingly uncontroversial
desert claims: a student might deserve a high grade in virtue of
having written a good paper; an athlete might deserve a prize in
virtue of having excelled in a competition; a successful researcher
might deserve an expression of gratitude in virtue of having perfected
a disease-preventing serum; a criminal might deserve the contempt of
his community in virtue of having committed crimes; the victim of an
industrial accident may deserve compensation from his negligent
employer; a hard-working public official may deserve to be promoted to
a higher office in virtue of her diligence.  Leibniz, Kant, and others
focused on examples in which a person is said to deserve happiness in
virtue of having been morally excellent. 


In all these familiar cases, the deserver is a person.  But as
Feinberg himself mentioned, there does not seem to be any conceptual
barrier to saying that non-persons may also be deservers.  Thus, for
example, it seems acceptable to say that a beautiful ancient city
deserves to be preserved; that a unique and formerly vibrant ecosystem
deserves to be restored; that the scene of a horrible massacre
deserves to be torn down.  In moral and political discussions, cases
under scrutiny tend to be ones in which deservers are either
individual people or groups of people.  This should not blind us to
the fact that non-persons can also be deservers. 


Desert claims also typically involve a desert.  This is the
thing that the deserver is said to deserve.  As Feinberg indicated,
familiar deserts include such things as grades, wages, prizes,
respect, honors and awards, rights, love, benefits and other such
things.  Leibniz and Kant would surely insist that we include
happiness among the possible deserts; and others would insist that we
should mention welfare. 


Those deserts may seem at first to be “positive.” However,
there are “negative” counterparts.  Indeed, some of the
items on that list are already negative.  Thus, some grades are bad
grades, as for example, the F a student might deserve for a very weak
paper.  Other deserts are uniformly negative: burdens, fines, booby
prizes, contempt, dishonors, onerous obligations, penalties,
condemnation, hate, etc. 


Some contributors to the literature on desert suggest that every
desert is either a plus or a minus.  Some speak, in this context of
“benefits and burdens,” or advantages and disadvantages.
However, there are cases in which someone deserves something that is
neither good nor bad, neither a benefit nor a burden.  Suppose someone
who has done outstanding academic work deserves to get an A, while
someone who has done completely unsatisfactory work deserves to get an
F.  It is reasonable to suppose that the A is a good grade –
something the recipient will be pleased to get – and the F is a bad
grade – something that the recipient will be disappointed to get.
But suppose a student did mediocre work and deserves a mediocre
grade – a C.  This is neither good nor bad, neither a benefit nor a
burden.  Nevertheless, someone might deserve it.  This would be a case
in which someone deserves something that is neither
“positive” nor “negative.” 


The same could be true of welfare.  Someone might deserve happiness
and (we may assume) that would be a good thing to get; someone else
might deserve unhappiness and (we may assume) that would be a bad
thing to get.  But another person might deserve to be at an
intermediate welfare level, neither happy nor unhappy.  While it might
be good in some way for the person to be at that neutral welfare
level, the thing he deserves would be neither good nor bad.  So while
it is convenient to say that deserts are benefits or burdens –
things that will be good or bad for the deserver to receive – in fact
some deserts are neither benefits nor burdens. 


Feinberg suggested that we can distinguish between “basic” and
“derived” deserts.  Basic deserts are always responsive attitudes such
as approval and disapproval.  On this view, derived deserts are forms
of treatment that would be fitting expressions of the more fundamental
basic deserts.  Thus, giving a student an A might be the fitting
expression for approval of her work; giving a student an F might be
the fitting expression for very serious disapproval of her work.  This
distinction between basic and derived deserts has been noted by
others, but seems no longer to play a significant role in the
literature on desert. 


Perhaps the most important and controversial bit of information we
typically seek in connection with a claim about desert concerns
the desert base.  This is generally taken to be the feature
in virtue of which the deserver deserves the desert.  On this view, a
desert base is always a property.  If we adopt this view, we will say
(for example) that the student deserves a high grade in virtue of her
possession of the property of having produced course work of high
quality.  On another view, a desert base is always a fact.  If we
adopt this view we will prefer to say that the student deserves her
high grade in virtue of the fact that her work was of such high
quality.  


We are inclined to think that it makes no difference whether we take
desert bases to be properties or to be facts.  The views seem to be
intertranslatable.  In this article, simply as a matter of
convenience, we generally speak of desert bases as properties. 


In some cases there is little debate about whether a certain property
serves as a desert base for a certain sort of treatment.  This may be
illustrated by the example of the student who produced outstanding
work in a course and deserves a high grade.  Few would debate the
claim that the student deserves the grade in virtue of the high
quality of her work.  The desert base in that case would be having
produced academic work of high quality.  Similarly consider the
case of the cold-blooded criminal who has inflicted great harm on many
innocent victims.  It is reasonable to suppose that he deserves a
harsh penalty in virtue of his evil behavior.  In this case, the
desert base is something like having inflicted great harm on many
innocent victims. 


In other cases, however, there would be more controversy about desert
bases.  A good example involves the desert of wages.  Suppose an
employee works hard, is productive, is loyal to his employer, and in
virtue of some health problems in his family, needs more money.  We
may agree in such a case that the employee deserves a raise – but we
may disagree about the basis on which he deserves that raise. 


There is general agreement that properties of certain types cannot
serve as desert bases.  Consider a case in which punishing an innocent
person would have good consequences.  The person has this
property: being such that punishing him would have good
consequences.  But it would be seriously counterintuitive to say
that the person deserves punishment in virtue of his possession of
this property. 


Certain general principles about desert bases have been introduced in
an effort to explain why certain properties seem ineligible to serve
as desert bases.  Perhaps the least controversial principle is the
so-called “Aboutness Principle,” mentioned by Feinberg.  In its
propositional form, this principle says that a person can deserve
something in virtue of a certain fact only if that fact is a fact
“about the person.” In its property form, the principle would say that
a person can deserve something in virtue of a certain property only if
the person actually has the property.  The Aboutness Principle does
not offer any assistance with respect to the punishment case just
mentioned.  After all, the innocent person actually does have the
property of being such that punishing him would have good
consequences.  The fact that punishing him would have good
consequences is a fact about him.  


Some have said that if someone deserves something, D, in virtue of
having some desert base, DB, then the deserving one must be
responsible for having DB (see, for example, Rawls 1971; Rachels 1978;
Sadurski 1985). This “Responsibility Principle” seems to be satisfied
by many of the examples already discussed.  The good student, we may
suppose, is responsible for having produced good academic work.  The
cold-blooded criminal, similarly, may seem responsible for his vicious
behavior.  The hard working employee bears some responsibility for
having worked so hard.  We may generalize from these cases and
conclude that all cases of desert are like this: if someone deserves
something, D, on some basis, DB, then he or she is responsible for
having DB.  Appeal to the Responsibility Principle would explain why
the innocent person does not deserve punishment. He is not responsible
for having the property of being such that punishing him would
have good consequences. 


A variety of cases have been offered as counterexamples to the
Responsibility Principle.  Feldman (1995a) described a case in which
patrons at a restaurant were served spoiled food.  He claimed that the
patrons deserved compensation.  The desert base here seems to
be having been harmed by the negligent food preparation by the
restaurant – yet the patrons were not responsible for having
that desert base.  They were innocent victims.  A similar thing
happens in the case of someone who has been egregiously insulted.  She
may deserve an apology in virtue of having been insulted, but she is
not responsible for the insult.  Another case mentioned by McLeod
involves a child who, through no fault of his own, comes down with a
painful illness.  He deserves the care and sympathy of his parents,
yet he is not responsible for having become ill.  


Others have suggested what may be called “the Temporality Principle”:
if someone deserves something, D, in virtue of having a certain desert
base, DB, then he or she must already have DB at the time he or she
begins to deserve D (See, for example, Rachels 1978; Kleinig 1971;
Sadurski 1985).  You cannot deserve something on the basis of a
property you will begin to have only later.  The Temporality Principle
has been invoked in an effort to explain why it is wrong to engage in
“pre-punishment.”  It is said that even if a certain person is going
to commit a crime, he does not begin to deserve punishment for that
crime until he actually commits it.  This line of thought has been
debated.  One problem is that even before he commits the crime, the
future criminal already has this property: being such that he will
later commit a crime.  It might be said that he deserves
punishment in virtue of already having this property even before he
commits the crime. 


In many cases, when we make a desert claim we mention
a distributor.  This is the person or institution from whom
the deserver deserves to receive the desert.  In some cases, the
identity of the distributor will be clear.  In other cases, it is not
so clear.  Consider, for example, the familiar motto of the McDonald’s
restaurants: ‘You deserve a break today.’  No distributor is
explicitly mentioned in the motto.  It just says that you deserve a
break.  Perhaps when McDonald’s makes this statement, they do not have
any particular distributor in mind.  Maybe they just think that you
deserve it from someone.  The same would be true of the Gates
Foundation motto according to which ‘Every person deserves the chance
to live a healthy and productive life.’  The motto does not mention
anyone who has the job of ensuring that everyone gets a chance to live
a healthy and productive life.  Given that no one has the capacity to
ensure that everyone lives a healthy and productive life, we may
conclude that in this case no distributor is mentioned precisely
because no one is qualified to be a distributor. 


In other cases, there is a distributor and its identity is clear.
Consider, for example, the claim that a certain elderly professor
deserves some respect from his unruly students.  Here the distributor
is explicitly mentioned: it is the unruly students.  Those who endorse
the notion that virtuous people deserve happiness in heaven will
presumably say that the distributor in that case is God.  In social
and political contexts we often find philosophers assuming that
citizens deserve certain rights from the government of their
country. 


It may seem that we could relocate this reference to the distributor.
We could build reference to the distributor into the description of
the desert.  Thus, instead of saying that the desert in the example
involving the elderly professor is respect, we could say that
the desert is respect from his students. 


In some cases a desert statement may also indicate something about the
strength of the deserver’s desert of the thing deserved.  The strength
of someone’s desert of something might be indicated loosely, as when
we say that someone’s desert of something is “very strong,” or “only
slight.”  In some cases we can use some numbers to represent strengths
of desert, though the choice of a numbering system will be to some
extent arbitrary.  But there are some important facts here: sometimes
you deserve both A and B, but you deserve A more than you do B;
sometimes two different deservers deserve the same thing and it is not
possible for both of them to get it; maybe one of them deserves it
more than the other.  Sometimes you deserve something, but only to a
very slight degree and this desert could easily be overridden by some
other consideration. 


In many cases a desert statement (if fully spelled out) would also
indicate some times.  One of these is the time of the
deserving; the other is the time when the receipt of the desert is
supposed to take place.  Thus, for example, suppose a lot of money has
been withheld from a certain person’s paycheck each week for a whole
year.  Suppose in fact the government has withheld more than the
person owes in taxes.  Then he deserves a refund.  Suppose refunds are
all given out on April 1.  We might want to say this: at every moment
in March, the taxpayer deserves to get a refund on April 1.  In this
example, the time of the deserving is every moment in
March. The time at which the deserver deserves to receive the
desert is April 1. 
4. The Justification of Desert Claims


A number of related questions have been discussed under the general
title of ‘the justification of desert claims.’  Some apparently take
the question about justification to be a question
about epistemic justification (see, for example, McLeod 1995,
89). If we understand the question in this way, we may want to know
how – if at all – a person can be epistemically justified in
believing that (for example) hard work is a desert base for reward.
Others take the question about justification in a different way.  They
take it to be a question about explanation.  Consider again
the question about the justification of the claim that hard work makes
us deserve reward.  On this second interpretation, the question is:
what explains the fact that hard work is a desert base for reward?
Others speak in this context of “normative force.”  (See, for example,
Sher 1987, xi.)  They seem to be concerned with a question about what
explains the fact that when someone deserves something, it is
obligatory for others to provide it, or good that it be provided.
Still others may phrase the question by appeal to concepts
of grounding or foundation.  They may ask what
grounds the fact that those who work hard deserve rewards.  Still
others write a bit more vaguely about the analysis of desert
claims (see, for example, Feinberg 1970). 


There is a further distinction to be noted.  Some who write about the
justification of desert claims seem to think that it is specific
desert claims about particular individuals that call for
justification.  Thus, they might ask for a justification of the claim
that Jones deserves a $100 bonus for having worked extra hard over
the holiday weekend.  Others apparently think that what calls for
justification is a more general claim about desert bases and deserts.
They might ask for a justification of the claim that hard
work is a desert base for financial reward. 


We will formulate the discussion in the admittedly vague idiom
of justification of claims about desert bases and deserts.
But as we understand the question, it can be explicated in this way:
suppose someone claims that in general the possession of some desert
base, DB, makes people deserve a certain desert, D.  If challenged,
how could the maker of such a claim support his claim?  How could he
argue for his assertion?  What facts about DB and D could he cite in
order to show that he was right – the possession of DB does make
someone deserve D?  


Some who write on this topic are “monists” about justification; they
apparently assume that there is a single feature that will serve in
all cases to justify desert claims.  Others are “pluralists.”  They
defend the idea that desert claims fall into different categories, and
that each category has its own distinctive sort of justification (see,
for example, Feinberg 1970, Sher 1987, and Lamont 1994).  We first
consider some monist views. 


Some popular views about the justification of desert claims are based
on the idea that such claims can be justified by appeal to
considerations about the values of consequences.  Sidgwick seems to be
thinking of something like this in The Methods of Ethics
where he mentions ‘the utilitarian interpretation of Desert.’  He
describes this by saying: ‘when a man is said to deserve reward for
any services to society, the meaning is that it is expedient to reward
him, in order that he and others may be induced to render similar
services by the expectation of similar rewards’ (1907, 284, note
1). (It is not clear that Sidgwick means to defend this view about
desert; he seems to be offering it as an account of what a determinist
would have to say.) 


Sidgwick’s statement has direct implications only for cases in which
what is deserved is some sort of reward and the desert base of this
desert is some sort of ‘service to society.’ As a result, it is not
clear that this idea about justification, taken simply by itself, has
any relevance to cases in which someone deserves punishment, or
compensation, or a prize for outstanding performance, or a grade for
academic work. 


According to a natural extension of the view that Sidgwick mentioned,
a claim to the effect that someone deserves something, D, in virtue of
his possession of some feature, DB, is justified by pointing out that
giving the person D in virtue of his possession of DB would have high
utility. 

 
While there surely are some cases in which giving someone what he
deserves would have high utility, this link between desert and utility
is just as frequently absent.  To see this, consider a case in which a
very popular person has engaged in some bad behavior for which he
deserves punishment – but suppose in addition that no one believes
he is guilty.  If he were punished for having done the nasty deed,
there would be an outpouring of anger from all of the popular person’s
fans and friends who think he has been framed.  If our interest were
in producing an outcome with high utility, we would have to refrain
from punishing him.  But in spite of that, since in fact he did do the
nasty deed, he does deserve the punishment. 


In other cases, giving a person some benefit might have good results
even though the person does not deserve to receive those benefits.  To
see this, imagine that a crazed maniac threatens to murder a dozen
hostages unless he is given a half-hour of prime time TV to air his
grievances.  Giving him this airtime might have high utility – it
might be the best thing for those in charge to do in the
circumstances – surely the maniac does not deserve it.  

 
Another serious problem with the consequentialist approach is brought
out by consideration of the famous telishment case, also known as ‘The
Small Southern Town.’ The example was presented by Carritt in
his Ethical and Political Thinking, but gained great
notoriety as a result of being quoted at length in Rawls’s ‘Two
Concepts of Rules’ (Rawls 1955).  Here is the passage from Carritt:


…if some kind of very cruel crime becomes common, and none of the
criminals can be caught, it might be highly expedient, as an example,
to hang an innocent man, if a charge against him could be so framed
that he were universally thought guilty… (Carritt 1947,
65)


In this example, punishing an innocent person has high utility because
it would have great deterrent effect.  But the victim of the
punishment does not deserve punishment – after all, he is innocent.
This highlights an important fact about desert and utility: sometimes
it can be expedient to give someone a reward or a punishment that he
or she does not deserve. 


It appears then that the consequentialist approach confronts
overwhelming objections. Sometimes deserved treatment is expedient;
sometimes it is not.  Sometimes undeserved treatment is expedient;
sometimes it is not.  As a result, appeals to the utility of giving
someone some benefit or burden cannot justify the claim that the
person deserves that sort of treatment. 


A second approach to the justification of desert claims is based on
some ideas concerning institutions. There are several different ways
in which this “institutional justification” can be developed. (Our
discussion in this section has benefitted enormously from McLeod
1999b.) 


First, some background: an institution may be identified by a
system of rules that define positions, moves, penalties, rewards, etc.
In some cases the rules of an institution are carefully written down
and perhaps made a matter of legislation.  The system of taxation in
some country might be a good example.  In other cases the rules of an
institution are not explicitly formalized.  An example would be the
system of racial segregation that formerly existed in the United
States – the so-called “Jim Crow” system.  It is not easy to say
what makes an institution “exist” in a society.  That is a puzzle best
left to the sociologists.  


We may also need to assume that when people set up institutions, they
do so with some intention.  They are trying to achieve something; or
more likely, they are trying to achieve several different things.
Maybe different people have different aims.  We can say – somewhat
vaguely – that the point of an institution is the main goal
or aim that people have in establishing or maintaining that
institution. 


A person may be governed by some institution even if he does
not like it, or does not endorse it.  Thus, for example, suppose a
criminal justice system exists in a certain society.  Suppose some
miscreant lives in that society and has been charged with some crime.
Suppose he is found guilty in a duly established court of law and is
sentenced to ten years in prison.  He is governed by the rules of the
judicial system whether he likes it or not.  To be governed by an
institution one must live (or perhaps be a visitor) in the society
where the institution exists, and one must somehow “fall under” the
rules.  Those rules must “apply to” the individual.  Again, this is a
tricky sociological notion, not easily spelled out. 


Some philosophers have said things that suggest that it is possible to
justify a desert claim by identifying an institution according to
which the deserver is entitled to the desert.  We can state this idea
a bit more clearly: 

 
AID: The claim that a person, S, deserves something, D, on the basis 
of the fact that he has a feature, DB, is justifiable if and only if 
there is some social institution, I; I exists in S’s society; S is 
governed by I; according to the rules of I, those who have DB are to 
receive D; S has DB.


This “actual institutional” account of desert is almost universally
rejected.[1] There
are several independent sources of difficulty.  Most of these emerge
from the requirement that a desert claim is justifiable always and
only when there is an appropriate actual social institution.
This produces a number of devastating objections.  Suppose a
thoroughly decent person has suffered a number of serious misfortunes.
He deserves a change of luck; he deserves some good luck for a change.
Suppose he lives in a country where there is no social institution
that supplies compensatory benefits to those who have had bad luck.
If AID were true, it would be impossible to justify the claim that he
deserves it. 


An equally serious objection arises from the fact that some of the
institutions that actually exist are morally indefensible.  Let us
imagine a thoroughly horrible social institution – slavery.  Suppose
some unfortunate individual is governed by that institution.  Suppose
the institution contains rules that say that slaves who are strong and
healthy shall be required to work without pay in the cotton fields.
Suppose this individual is strong and healthy.  Consider the claim
that he deserves to be required to work in the fields without pay in
virtue of the fact that he is strong and healthy.  AID implies that
this desert claim is justified.  That is as preposterous as it is
offensive.  


The general point: we must not lose sight of the fundamental
difference between entitlement and desert.  AID
seems to confuse these.  It seems to say that you deserve something if
and only if you are entitled to it by the rules of an actual
institution.  Since there are bad institutions, and cases in which
desert arises in the absence of institutions, this is clearly a
mistake. 


We can deal with all of these objections by altering the institutional
account of justification.  Instead of making the justification of a
desert claim depend upon the existence of an actual social
institution, we can make it depend upon the rules that would be
contained in some ideal social institution.  The main change is that
we no longer require that the social institution exists.  We require
instead that it be an ideal institution – an institution that would
be in some way preferable to the actual one.  Then we can attempt to
justify desert claims by saying that the deservers would be entitled
to those deserts by the rules of an ideal social institution.  


We can state the thesis this way:


IID: The claim that a person, S, deserves something, D, on the basis 
of the fact that he has a feature, DB, is justifiable if and only if 
there is some possible social institution, I; I would be ideal for S’s 
society; S would be governed by I; according to the rules of I, those 
who have DB are to receive D; S has DB.


Before we can evaluate this proposal, we have to explain in greater
detail what makes a possible institution “ideal” for a society.  We
might try to define ideality by saying that an ideal institution is
one that would distribute benefits and burdens to people precisely in
accord with their deserts.  With this account of ideality in place,
IID generates quite a few correct results.  Unfortunately, it would be
unhelpful in the present context.  After all, the aim here is to
explain how desert claims can be justified.  This account would
explain desert by appeal to ideal institutions, and then explain ideal
institutions by appeal to desert.  


Following the rule utilitarians, we could attempt to define ideality
by saying that a possible institution is ideal for a society if and
only if having it as the society’s institutional way of achieving its
point would produce more utility than would the having of any
alternative institution.  This yields a form of the institutional
approach that seems importantly similar to the consequentialist
approach already discussed. 


Unfortunately, with this conception of ideality in place, the proposal
seems to inherit some of the defects of the simpler consequentialist
approach.  It implies, for example, that if it is possible for there
to be a seriously unfair but nevertheless utility maximizing
institution, then people would deserve the burdens allocated to them
by the rules of that institution, even if it were not in place. 


A further difficulty arises in connection with actual but not
optimific institutions.  Suppose, for example, the utility maximizing
ice-skating institution would have rules specifying that in order to
win the gold medal, a competitor must perform a 7 minute free program;
a 6 minute program of required figures; and that all contestants must
wear regulation team uniforms consisting of full length trousers and
matching long-sleeved team shirts.  Suppose in fact that this
institution is not in place in Nancy’s society.  Suppose instead that
the de facto institution contains some slightly different but still
fairly reasonable rules for ice-skating competitions.  Suppose Nancy
abides by all the relevant extant rules and is declared the winner in
a competition.  She is entitled to the gold medal by the actual rules.
It may seem, in such a case, that her claim to deserve the medal would
be justified.  But since she would not be entitled to it by the rules
of the ideal institution, IID implies that it is impossible to justify
her claim that she deserves the medal by virtue of her performance
here tonight.  


It appears, then, that difficulties confront the attempt to justify
desert claims by appeal to claims about the entitlements created by
institutions, actual or ideal.  


Some philosophers have drawn attention to alleged connections between
desert claims and facts about “appraising attitudes” or “responsive
attitudes” (see, for example, Feinberg 1970). Commentators have
understood these philosophers to have been defending the idea that
desert claims can be justified by appeal to facts about appraising
attitudes.  Some have said, for example, that David Miller defended a
view of this sort in his Social Justice (1976). While there
may be debate about whether Miller actually intended to be defending
such a view, it is worthwhile to consider it. (In the discussion that
follows we are indebted to McLeod 1995 and McLeod 2013.) 


We need first to understand what is meant by ‘appraising
attitude.’  


Admiration, approval, and gratitude are typically cited as examples of
“positive” appraising attitudes.  In each case, if a person has such
an attitude toward someone, he has that attitude in virtue of some
feature that he takes the person to have.  Suppose, for example, that
you admire someone; then you must admire her for something she is
or something she did.  Maybe she worked hard; or wrote a good
paper; or can run very fast; or is able to play the violin
beautifully.  Similarly for the other positive appraising
attitudes. 


Disapproval, resentment, contempt, “thinking ill of,” and condemnation
may be cited as examples of “negative” appraising attitudes.  They are
similar to the positive attitudes in this respect, if you disapprove
of someone, then you must disapprove of him for something he is or
something he did.  Maybe he plagiarized a paper; maybe he is
totally out of shape; maybe he is utterly talentless.  


Miller says that if we did not have these attitudes, ‘we would not and
could not use the concept of desert’ (1976, 89). He also says that the
range of possible desert bases coincides with the range of bases for
appraising attitudes.  You cannot deserve something on the basis of
your possession of a property, DB, unless we could have an appraising
attitude toward you on the basis of your possession of DB.  But what
is most important for our present purposes is that, according to
Miller, ‘the existence of these appraising attitudes makes
intelligible the connection between a desert judgment and its basis’
(89). Some have understood Miller to be claiming that something about
these appraising attitudes provides the answer to our question about
the justification of desert claims. 


A certain appraising attitude may seem appropriate to a desert claim.
For example, suppose a person feels strong approval (a positive
appraising attitude) of a subject in virtue of his heroic action.  The
attitude would be appropriate to the claim that the hero deserves a
reward for his heroism.  On the other hand, if someone feels contempt
(a negative appraising attitude) for a person in virtue of his
cowardice, then this attitude would be appropriate to the claim that
the coward deserves some sort of penalty.  On one possible view,
whether a desert judgment is justifiable depends upon whether the
person who makes that judgment has an appraising attitude that is
appropriate to the desert claim. 


This view (presumably not Miller’s) is clearly confused.  Suppose the
leader of a terrorist gang claims that a member of his gang deserves
respect for having set off a suicide bomb in an elementary school.
Suppose the leader has great admiration for this the gang member
precisely because he set off the bomb.  On the current proposal, since
the leader in fact has a positive appraising attitude toward the
member, his desert claim is justified.  That cannot be right.  


The difficulty cannot be resolved by appealing to the reactions of the
community.  It is easy enough to imagine a case in which the
overwhelming majority of the bomber’s community admire him for
destroying the elementary school.  Surely, however, no matter how many
of his compatriots admire him for doing this deed, the claim that he
deserves admiration for having done it is still not justified. 


Instead of appealing to facts about the appraising attitudes that
others in fact have, we might consider a different question: what sort
of appraising attitude would be fitting for others to have in virtue
of the fact that he has committed this deed?  If it would be fitting
for others to admire him for bombing the school, then he deserves
admiration.  If it would be fitting for others to hold him in contempt
for bombing the school, then he deserves contempt. 


In general, then, we might say that the claim that S deserves a
certain benefit (burden) in virtue of having done X is justified if
and only if it would be fitting for observers to have a positive
(negative) appraising attitude toward S in virtue of his having done
X. 


This proposal seems misguided for several reasons.  First, it seems to
be circular.  It purports to explain the justification of desert
claims by appeal to claims about what appraising attitude would be
“fitting.”  But to say that it would be fitting for someone to receive
a certain benefit is dangerously close to saying that he deserves to
receive it.  In this form the proposal seems circular. 


Furthermore, it appears that there are cases in which a person
deserves something but in which no appraising attitude seems to be
fitting.  Suppose, for example, that an abandoned child is in need of
medical care and nurturance.  The fact that the child is sick does not
make it appropriate for onlookers to admire her or to condemn her.  It
does not call for any “positive” or “negative” appraising attitude.
Nevertheless, the claim that the child deserves medical care and
nurturance in virtue of her need might be justified. 


In his (1970) Feinberg hints at a different way in which appraising
attitudes might figure in the justification of desert claims.
Feinberg starts by noting that ‘reasonable men naturally entertain
certain responsive attitudes toward various actions, qualities, and
achievements.’  Those who engage in the actions or manifest the
qualities thereby deserve to be the subjects of the responsive
attitudes.  Going further, we can say that various forms of
treatment – punishments, rewards, prizes, etc. – are the customary
way of expressing the natural responsive attitudes.  When such forms
of treatment are in this way the customary and natural ways of
expressing the attitudes, then those who engage in the action or
manifest the quality deserve, in a derived way, to receive the
treatment.  The suggestion, then, is that in such cases the claim that
someone deserves D on the basis of his possession of DB can be
justified by pointing out that giving D is the conventional way of
expressing the responsive attitude that reasonable men entertain
toward those with DB. 


If understood in the suggested way, this account would rely on some
problematic assumptions about the responsive attitudes that
‘reasonable men naturally entertain.’  We might well doubt whether all
such men invariably entertain those attitudes in cases where the
recipients deserve to be their subject.  In any case where
only some reasonable men entertain the attitudes, it would be
impossible to justify the associated desert claims.  On the other
hand, if we required merely that some reasonable men entertain the
attitudes in question, then it would become far too easy to justify
dubious desert claims.  Furthermore, it would make it possible for
there to be cases in which someone both deserves a certain treatment
and also deserves not to get that treatment. 

 
The details of the appraising attitudes approach remain unclear.  It
is also not clear that anyone ever seriously defended this view as an
answer to the question about how desert claims can be justified. 


A few philosophers – including George Sher (1987) and Julian Lamont
(1994) – said things that suggest a pluralistic approach to the
question about the justification of desert claims.  On this view,
there are several different “external values”; different values would
be relevant in different cases; different desert claims would be
justifiable by appeal to different external values.  Thus, for
example, consider the claim that you deserve a reward for having saved
a life.  The external value in this case might be some combination of
the value of courage and the alleged value of human life.  Consider a
different case in which someone claims that you deserve a high grade for
having done outstanding work in a course.  In this case, the external
value might be the value of academic achievement.  In every case, a
desert claim – if it can be justified at all – can be justified by
pointing out that giving the deserver the desert would properly
respect the associated external value.  A full exposition of this
approach would require a detailed account of what makes a certain
external value be relevant to a desert claim; it would also require a
detailed account of what is meant by saying that some action would
“properly respect” some external value.  
5. Desert and Intrinsic Value


Here is a natural and appealing idea: it is a good thing when people
get what they deserve. If I am distributing raises, and only Jones
deserves a raise, then it would be better for me to give the raise to
Jones than to anyone else.


As simple and straightforward as this idea is, given certain
background assumptions it raises difficult questions about the
connection between desert and “goodness,” or intrinsic value. 


Some consequentialist moral theories make use of (and so presuppose
the intelligibility of) the notion of the “intrinsic value of a state
of affairs,” or the “intrinsic value of a possible world.” This notion
of intrinsic value is a quantitative one: consequentialists usually
assume that we can choose a unit for measuring intrinsic value, and in
terms of that unit we can say that the intrinsic value of one possible
world is 100 units, while the intrinsic value of another is, say,
merely 10 units. 


Common forms of consequentialism go on to say that whether an action A
is permissible or impermissible is determined by how the intrinsic
value of the world that would be actual if A is performed compares to
the intrinsic values of the worlds that would be actual if the
alternatives to A are performed instead. (The alternatives to A are
the actions other than A that are “open” to the agent at
the time he performs A.) One standard form of consequentialism says
that an act A is permissible if and only if none of the worlds that
would be actual were the agent to perform one of the alternatives to A
has a greater intrinsic value than the world that would be actual were
he to perform A. Thus, in a consequentialist framework, if one holds
that facts about desert make a difference to intrinsic value, one may
also hold that facts about desert make a difference to whether an act
is permissible or impermissible. If, in virtue of the fact that only
Jones deserves a raise, it is better to give a raise only to Jones,
then the right thing to do is to give the raise only to Jones. 


This section started with the generalization that, other things being
equal, it is a good thing when people get what they deserve. We have
just seen that in a consequentialist framework this generalization
about value leads naturally to another one, about moral obligation:
other things being equal, one ought to ensure that people get what
they deserve. But one might endorse the second generalization without
the first. Some opponents of consequentialism hold that talk of “the
intrinsic value of a possible world” makes no sense (for example,
Thomson 2008). They could still accept that, other things being equal,
one ought to ensure that people get what they deserve. One could hold,
for example, that the obligation to ensure that people get what they
deserve is a prima facie duty, in the sense that W. D. Ross
(2002) attaches to this phrase. 


Some consequentialists have hoped that basing their theory of
obligation on a “desert-sensitive” theory of intrinsic value will make
their theory immune to certain common objections. To get a sense of
what these philosophers hope to accomplish we will need a more
detailed statement of a theory of intrinsic value. We will make use of
the notion of individual welfare, or well-being. Talk of someone’s
well-being is talk of how good their life is for them. We may speak of
how good someone’s life is at a particular moment, or how good their
life is as a whole; our focus here is on welfare-values of entire
lives. Let us assume, as is common in discussions of desert, that
welfare is a quantitative notion. We can choose a unit for measuring
welfare; then for each person there is, relative to that choice of
unit, a number that represents how good that person’s life is for
them. One simple (non-desert-sensitive) theory of intrinsic value for
possible worlds says that the (number representing) the intrinsic
value of a world is equal to the sum of the numbers representing the
“welfare values” of the lives of the people in that world. 


According to standard consequentialism, combined with this theory of
intrinsic value, “distribution does not matter.” All that matters, for
determining whether an act is right, is the sum total of the welfare
in the world that would be actual if that act is performed, and how
that sum total differs from the totals in the worlds that would be
actual if some alternative act is performed; it does not matter how
good any particular individual’s life is. John Rawls famously argued
that this is an objectionable feature of the theory (Rawls 1971, 26;
his target is a slightly different theory of intrinsic value). 


A desert-adjusted theory of intrinsic value might yield a version of
standard consequentialism that evades this objection. If worlds in
which people get what they deserve are better than worlds in which
people do not, then it is not true that distribution does not
matter. A desert-adjusted theory of intrinsic value could say that, if
Smith and Jones each deserves 25 units of welfare, then a world in
which they each receive 25 units is better than a world in which Smith
receives 50 and Jones receives 0. 


Feldman (1995a, 567) is explicit that the goal of his desert-sensitive
version of consequentialism is to respond to Rawls’ objection. He
suggests that his theory can handle many of the examples commonly
thought to raise problems for consequentialism, such as the Organ
Transplant. In another paper Feldman suggests that a desert-adjusted
theory of intrinsic value can avoid Parfit’s Repugnant
Conclusion. (See Feldman 1995c; for the Repugnant Conclusion, see
Parfit 1984. For reservations about Feldman’s response to Rawls’
objection, and an alternative, see McLeod 2006.) 


What might a desert-adjusted theory of intrinsic value, one that might
form the basis for a desert-sensitive version of consequentialism,
look like? To evaluate desert-adjusted theories of intrinsic value we
need to see them stated at a greater level of detail than we have seen
so far. Presumably, if it is a good thing when people get what they
deserve, then if the people in world w1 are closer
to getting what they deserve than then people in world
w2, w1 is better (has a greater
intrinsic value) than w2 (other things being
equal). But, again, intrinsic value is a quantitative notion. So it
makes sense to ask: how much better is w1 than
w2? 10 units? 100 units? Even if we say a lot more
about what worlds w1 and w2 are
like, the answers to these questions are not obvious. 


To make a start let us go back to an assumption we quietly made three
paragraphs back: that welfare levels are among the things that people
deserve. This claim does not seem controversial. It follows from the
common idea that the wicked deserve to suffer, and the saintly deserve
to prosper, for to prosper is to have a relatively high welfare
level. But philosophers who attempt to formulate (welfarist)
desert-sensitive theories of intrinsic value often make a stronger
assumption: that when it comes to determining the intrinsic value of a
possible world, all that matters is the extent to which
people get the welfare levels they deserve. Suppose I deserve an
apology from my neighbor in virtue of the fact that he (inadvertently)
tore up some of the plants in my yard. But suppose also that I do not
really care about my yard, or about the quality of my relationship
with my neighbor. Getting the apology would mean nothing to me, nor
would I be upset if my neighbor did not apologize. The apology would
not make my life better or worse. Then on the stronger assumption, the
intrinsic value of the world is not higher if I get the apology than
if I don’t – even though only if I get the apology do I get
something I deserve. 


One possible justification for this assumption goes as follows. Even
though we may deserve all sorts of things, only instances of someone’s
deserving a certain welfare level are instances of “moral
desert.” And only moral desert “matters” for the
intrinsic value of a possible world. A theory that says the world is
no better if I get that apology is not
false-but-legitimately-oversimplified. It is saying the
truth. According to this line of thought, it is not, in fact, always
better when people get what they deserve. It is only better if they
get what they morally deserve. (Shelly Kagan focuses on moral desert,
presumably to the exclusion of other kinds of desert, in chapter 1 of
his 2012.) 


Justified or not, most work on desert-sensitive theories of intrinsic
value does assume that the only instances of desert that matter are
instances of deserved welfare. What should a desert-sensitive theory
of intrinsic value that makes this assumption look like? If the value
of a possible world is a function, not just of the welfare levels of
the people in that world, but also of the welfare levels they deserve,
just which function is it? 


Producing a theory that answers this question and is initially
plausible is not easy. 


One way to approach the problem is to start with another simplifying
assumption. The simple non-desert-sensitive theory of intrinsic value
stated above is “totalist”; the intrinsic value of a possible world is
got by summing up “contributions” made by each individual
“separately.” The amount of intrinsic value contributed by an
individual is equal to (or proportional to) that person’s welfare
level. We could try for a desert-sensitive theory that is also
totalist. The contribution made by an individual will not (or not
always) be equal to their welfare level; the amount they deserve will
also be relevant. Still, the value of the world as a whole will just
be the sum of the individual contributions.


Here is a sketch of a theory like this. It treats someone’s desert
level as a “multiplier.” The value an individual contributes to the
intrinsic value of a possible world is equal to the product of the
welfare level they receive in that world and the welfare level they
deserve. (A more sophisticated treatment of the idea of
“desert-as-multiplier” may be found in Kagan 2012, section 2.4.) 


This theory says plausible things about simple cases. If Smith
deserves 10 units of welfare and Jones deserves 20, and you can either
ensure that Smith receives 10 units, or that Jones receives 10 units,
the theory says that it is better to ensure that Jones receives the 10
units. For if Smith receives the welfare, the total value of the world
will be equal to 100, while if Jones does, the total value will be
equal to 200. These facts are summarized in the table below (the
multiplications in the contribution columns are “welfare level times
desert level”): 


Who gets the welfare?     Smith’s
contribution     Jones’s contribution
   
Total value
Smith10 × 10 = 1000 × 20 =
0100
Jones0 × 10 = 010 × 20 =
200200



The idea behind using deserved welfare levels as multipliers is that
‘the welfare of more deserving people is worth more than that of less
deserving people.’ As far as the quality of the lives of the
individuals involved are concerned, 10 units of welfare is 10 units of
welfare, no matter who it “goes to”: if Smith’s life is made better by
10 units of welfare, his life is made better by the same amount as if
Jones’ life is made better by 10 units. But as far as the
world is concerned, it does make a difference who the 10 units
goes to. When 10 units of welfare goes to someone highly deserving,
someone who deserves a high welfare level, the value of that 10 units
is “augmented,” so that 10 units of welfare corresponds to a much
larger number of units of value-for-the-world. 


While the desert-as-multiplier idea gets some cases right, it gets
other cases very wrong. Think again of Smith and Jones, deserving 10
and 20 units of welfare, respectively. Suppose that, if you do
nothing, Jones will live a life worth 100 units, and Smith will live a
life worth 0 units. Your only two options are to act so that Jones
lives a life worth 110 and Smith “stays where he would have been” (he
lives a life worth 0), or act so that Jones stays where he would have
been, and Smith lives a life worth 10. The table below shows the
values of the worlds that correspond to each of your options, according to this theory:


Option Smith’s contribution
   Jones’ contribution
   Total value
Do nothing0 × 10 = 0100 × 20 =
20002000
Augment Smith    10 × 10 =
100100 × 20 = 20002100
Augment Jones0 × 10 = 0110 × 20
= 22002200



The theory says you should augment Jones. This is implausible. Even if
you do nothing, Jones will be living a life far better than the one he
deserves to be living. What sense is there in making his life better,
when instead you could cause Smith to be living a life he deserves,
rather than one worse than he 
deserves?[2] 


It seems wrong to multiply every bit of welfare Jones receives by 20,
even bits of welfare that put him way above the level of welfare he
deserves, when computing his contribution to the intrinsic value of
the world. This failure of the desert-as-multiplier view suggests an
alternative mathematical role for deserved welfare levels. What is
important is not the welfare level you deserve, but how close
you are to the welfare level you deserve: how good the “fit” is
between what you get and what you deserve. A natural way to measure
fit is to look at the distance between what you get and what you
deserve: the absolute value of the difference between your welfare
level and your deserved welfare level. (So when Jones deserves 20
units and gets 100, his “fit value” is the number 80.) 


Having latched on to the importance of fit values, how should we make
use to them? The simplest way to implement the idea that ‘the closer
one is to getting what one deserves, the better’ defines the
contribution made to intrinsic value by an individual as follows: 


Contribution = welfare level − fit value. 


The minus sign is there because someone’s fit value goes up as their
welfare level gets farther away from their deserved welfare
level. Thus increases in the fit value correspond to worse states of
affairs; so we want fit values to make a negative impact on
contributions. 


This new theory gives a plausible judgment about our second
Smith/Jones case. Here are the values it assigns: 


Option    Smith’s contribution
   Jones’ contribution
   Total value
Do nothing  0 − |10−0| =
−10 100 − |20−100| = 20
   10 
Augment Smith    10 −
|10−10| = 10 100 − |20−100| =
20 30 
Augment Jones  0 − |10−0| =
−10 110 − |20−110| =
20 10 




Philosophers have articulated other principles they think a
desert-sensitive theory of value should entail, and have proposed yet
more complicated “contribution formulas” as parts of theories of that
sort. For example, Eric Carlson holds that if you have a bunch of
people with the same desert level, and you “have a fixed amount of
welfare to distribute between them” (really, in each world that you
can “make actual” the sum of their welfare levels is the same), then
the world in which they all receive the same welfare level should have
the greatest intrinsic value. Equal levels of welfare are best, when
everyone is equally deserving. The theory we just described is
incompatible with this idea. (For Carlson’s theory, which does entail
this principle, see Carlson 1997. Feldman 1995a articulated many ideas
about how intrinsic values should be adjusted to take desert into
account. Persson 1997 distinguished the idea of desert as a multiplier
(he called it the “merit idea”) from the idea that what matters is the
fit between desert and receipt; he sees both ideas at work in
Feldman’s paper. Other constraints people have wanted to place on a
desert-sensitive theory may be found in Carlson 1997, Arrhenius 2006,
and Skow 2012.) 


The theories we have discussed so far aim to be “overall”
theories of intrinsic value, theories of intrinsic value all things
considered, even if they may make some simplifying assumptions about
what is valuable. Another approach to theorizing about desert aims to
do something different. Shelly Kagan, in his book The Geometry of
Desert (2012), aims at a theory of “intrinsic value from
the perspective of desert.” To have a complete theory of
intrinsic value one would have to take Kagan’s theory and find a way
to combine it with theories of value from other perspectives. 


Kagan’s book is by far the most comprehensive discussion of the role
of desert in the theory of value. He discusses both
“noncomparative desert” and “comparative
desert.” Without trying to be too precise about this
distinction, comparative desert concerns how the fit between one
person’s welfare level and desert level compares to that of others;
noncomparative desert ignores these comparisons. His theory of
noncomparative desert comprises several claims, the core of which are
these: 

It is best, from the perspective of noncomparative desert, when
someone gets exactly the welfare level they deserve. (That is, a world
in which he gets exactly what he deserves is better than a world in
which he gets more or less, other things being equal.)
If someone has a positive desert level, then it is better, from
the perspective of noncomparative desert, if they get more than they
deserve, than if they get less (by the same amount); moreover, the
degree to which it is better to get more than one deserves increases
as one’s desert level increases. The opposite is true if someone has a
negative desert level.



The image below illustrates these claims. Each “mountain”
plots an individual’s value, from the perspective of non-comparative
desert, as a function of their welfare level. The “peak”
of a person’s mountain sits directly above the welfare level that
person (non-comparatively) deserves; this illustrates claim 1, that
things are best when someone gets they welfare level they
deserve. Note also that the mountain on the left-hand side of the
y-axis has a steeper eastern slope than western slope. This
illustrates part of claim 2. It indicates that if you could either
overcompensate a person who deserves a negative amount of welfare, or
undercompensate him, by the same amount, it is better to
undercompensate him. The mountain on the right-hand side of the y-axis
illustrates the corresponding claim about someone with “positive
desert”: it is better to overcompensate than to undercompensate
such a person. The image also illustrates a claim that Kagan calls
“Bell Motion” (this claim is also part of 2): the
mountains "swing" in a counter-clockwise direction, as they move from
left to right in the diagram. Mountains farther to the right have
shallower eastern slopes and steeper western slopes. This means, among
other things, that if you have to overcompensate one person by a fixed
amount, it is best to overcompensate the person with the highest
desert level. Overcompensating makes things worse from the perspective
of non-comparative desert; overcompensating the most deserving person
is, however, less bad, brings about a smaller vertical drop in the
graph, than overcompensating anyone else would. 





So far we have been discussing Kagan’s theory of non-comparative
desert. His theory of comparative desert is meant to answer questions
like the following: suppose that there are two people, that one of
them is getting more welfare than he deserves, and that there is
nothing we can do about that. What must the welfare level of the other
person be, if the demands of comparative desert are to be perfectly
satisfied? Kagan advocates what he calls the “Y-gap”
view. The image below illustrates this view. Suppose that the mountain
on the left represents the person whose welfare level we cannot
control, and the mountain on the right represents the person whose
welfare level we can control. Then we should overcompensate the person
on the right by that amount which results in his Y-gap being the same
as that of the person on the left. A person’s Y-gap is the vertical
distance between the peak of his mountain, and his actual location (in
this case) on the eastern slope. The vertical bars in the diagram
depict the two Y-gaps.  In this case, although the person on the left
is over-compensated by amount A, the person on the right must be
over-compensated by a greater amount B, to achieve the same Y-gap, and
so to perfectly satisfy the demands of comparative desert, as Kagan
sees them. 





One question about Kagan’s theory is, what exactly are we measuring
when we measure intrinsic value from the perspective of desert? In his
book Kagan remains agnostic about whether it is better if a more
deserving person gets exactly what he deserves than if a less
deserving person does. Maybe this is better; but maybe, on the other
hand, a situation in which someone who deserves a high welfare level
gets exactly what he deserves is just as good as a situation in which
someone who deserves a low (but still positive) welfare gets exactly
what he deserves (2012, section 4.3). However, on one natural
understanding of the perspective of desert, there is not much room for
debate here. It is natural to think that ‘from the perspective of
desert,...’ just means ‘taking into account only how close people are
to getting what they deserve,...’ If this is right then it is obvious
that a situation in which someone who deserves a welfare level of 50
and gets a welfare level of 50 is just as good, from the perspective
of desert, as a situation in which someone who deserves a welfare
level of 200 gets a welfare level of 200. (One who held this view can,
of course, say that in another sense the second situation is better:
it is better all-things-considered, because the total amount of
welfare in that situation is higher.) The fact that Kagan does not
think it obvious that the two situations are equally good from the
perspective of desert is evidence that he rejects this account of what
the perspective of desert is.  (For more on this question about
Kagan’s theory, see Appendix I of Feldman 2003, and Skow 2014.) 
6. Desertist Theories of Justice


There is a long tradition according to which justice is fundamentally
a matter of receipt in accord with desert.  There are passages in the
writings of Aristotle, Leibniz, Mill, Sidgwick, Ross and others in
which this idea seems to be 
present.[3]
 The abstract desertist idea can be combined
with different views about what people deserve; for each of these
views about what we deserve, there is a different version of the
desertist theory of justice.  One of the broadest of these may be
called “Universal Desertism about Justice.”  It is the idea that
justice obtains when people receive everything they deserve on any
basis.  Although Mill did not accept this conception of justice, he
claimed that something quite like it is very widely accepted by “the
general mind.”  Mill said: 


It is universally considered just that each person should obtain that
(whether good or evil) which he deserves; and unjust that he
should obtain a good, or be made to undergo an evil, which he does not
deserve. This is, perhaps, the clearest and most emphatic form in
which the idea of justice is conceived by the general mind
(Utilitarianism, ch 5, para 
7).[4] 


When combined with natural and popular assumptions about what people
deserve, Universal Desertism gives an account of a form of justice
that probably would not be of much interest to social and political
philosophers.  For given these assumptions about what people deserve,
the view implies that in order for there to be perfect justice in a
society, every student would have to get every grade that he or she
deserves, and every athlete would have to win every competition that
he or she deserves to win, every neighbor would have to receive every
apology and thank-you note that he or she deserves, and everyone would
have to receive the amount of respect, and admiration, and love, and
contempt, and good luck that he or she deserves.  The society would be
a veritable wonderland of requited desert in which no one would have
any grounds for complaint about being short-changed about anything.
Surely, however, when political philosophers are drawn to the idea
that justice is a matter of receipt in accord with desert, they do not
have anything quite so fantastic in mind.  


Leibniz maintained a desertist theory of justice that makes use of
considerably restricted views about the relevant desert and desert
bases.  He described what he called ‘the law of justice’ in these
words: 

 
...everyone is to participate in the perfection of the universe, and
to have personal happiness, in proportion to his own virtue and to the
extent that his will has contributed to the common good. (Leibniz
1697) 


Leibniz evidently was imagining a view according to which there is
only one main currency of justice (’happiness and participation in the
perfection of the universe’), and only one main desert base that would
make a person deserve his share of this currency (’virtue and the
extent to which his will has contributed to the common good’).
Leibniz suggested that it falls to God to ensure that people receive
these deserts in the afterlife. 


We can say that “Divine Moral Desertism” is the view that justice
obtains when everyone receives from God in the afterlife precisely the
level of happiness or unhappiness that he or she deserves on the basis
of his or her level of moral virtue or vice during life.


Clearly it is possible for there to be a situation in which the level
of justice as measured by Universal Desertism is very low, but the
level of justice as measured by Divine Moral Desertism is very high.
This would happen if people rarely received the prizes and awards and
income and other things that they deserve here on earth, but if in
addition they always received their heavenly rewards from God in the
afterlife. 


It is also possible for there to be a situation in which the level of
justice as measured by Universal Desertism is very high, but the level
of justice as measured by Divine Moral Desertism is very low.  This
would happen if people often received the apologies, thank-you notes,
wages, grades, honorific jobs, etc. that they deserve on earth, but if
in addition they never received any heavenly or infernal rewards in an
afterlife for the virtue or vice that they manifested while they
lived. 


While Divine Moral Desertism might be of interest to some theologians
or philosophers of religion, it is doubtful that any social or
political philosopher would have any professional interest in it.
Social and political philosophers are more interested
in earthly justice – the kind of justice that obtains in
virtue of things that governments are called upon to do for their
citizens here on earth.  But Divine Moral Desertism concerns things
that God does; and benefits or burdens to be received in the
afterlife, rather than on earth. 


A historically important form of desertism emerges if we continue to
maintain that the relevant desert bases are all manifestations of
moral virtue and vice, but we introduce different assumptions about
deserts and distributors.  Instead of saying (with Leibniz) that the
relevant deserts are levels of happiness and unhappiness to be
experienced in heaven or hell, we can say that the relevant deserts
are levels of happiness and unhappiness to be experienced here on
earth, during our lives.  Furthermore, instead of saying that the
distributor from whom we deserve to receive these rewards is God, we
can say that we deserve them from our country.  The result is a form
of desertism according to which there is perfect justice in a society
if and only if in every case in which a citizen of that society
deserves to be at a certain level of happiness or unhappiness in
virtue of having lived at a certain level of moral virtue or vice, the
government of his or her country sees to it that the person comes to
be at that level of happiness during his or her lifetime.  We can call
this “Earthly Moral Desertism about Justice.” 


It should be obvious that justice as measured by Earthly Moral
Desertism is not equivalent to justice as measured by Divine Moral
Desertism.  


In several passages in A Theory of Justice John Rawls attacks
what he takes to be the desertist conception of justice.  In these
passages, Rawls seems to have in mind something quite like Earthly
Moral Desertism.  He mentions what he takes to be the motto of
desertism: ‘justice is happiness according to virtue’ (1971,
310). Some of his objections to desertism turn on difficulties that
governments would face if they were to try to ensure a proper fit
between citizens’ levels of virtue and happiness.  This indicates that
Rawls was imagining (and trying to refute) a form of desertism that
would saddle the government with the task of matching happiness levels
to virtue levels. 


Theories of justice as presented in the work of social and political
philosophers typically assess states, or institutional frameworks, or
communities for the way in which economic items such as money, jobs,
taxes, and political items such as political rights and opportunities
and obligations are distributed.  A form of desertism could purport to
give an account of the circumstances under which these things have
been distributed justly even though it is silent on the distribution
of other very important things such as happiness, or victories in
sporting events, or warm loving relationships or apologies.  


Instead of focusing on all the things that anyone could deserve, or
upon just one thing – happiness – such a theory would
focus on what we may call ‘political economic deserts.’
These include such things as political rights and obligations, other
benefits and burdens we get from our countries, security of certain
sorts, access to publicly owned or regulated infrastructure such as
transportation systems, educational systems, judicial systems,
communication systems, etc.  


Instead of focusing on all the desert bases in virtue of which anyone
could deserve anything, or simply upon the single desert base of moral
virtue, a theory of political economic justice would focus on what we
may call ‘political economic desert bases.’  These will include such
things as being a citizen; having been unjustifiably harmed by a
government agency; having earned a lot of money; being keen on getting
into business; being vulnerable to robbers and muggers who might
attack.  The theory would thus focus on desert bases such that it is
the business of a government to take note of the fact that its
citizens manifest these bases, and it is the business of that
government to try to see to it that its citizens receive the things
that they deserve on these bases.  


Furthermore, the imagined theory would focus on what we may call our
‘political economic distributors.’ In the typical case,
the political economic distributor for a certain person is the
government of that person’s country, or suitable representatives
of that government.  The resulting theory, which we may dub ‘Political
Economic Desertism about Justice,’ then would maintain that
there is justice in a country if and only if in every case in which a
citizen of that country deserves a political economic desert in virtue
of having a political economic desert base, he or she receives that
desert from the appropriate political economic distributor.  


It should be clear that there might be perfect justice as measured by
Political Economic Desertism in some country even though some citizens
of that country fail to get some of the things they deserve.  Maybe
the citizens are getting everything they deserve from their country,
but some fail to receive the apologies that they deserve and others
fail to receive the good luck in sports or romance that they deserve.
Indeed, there could be perfect justice as measured by Political
Economic Desertism in every country in some possible world even though
many residents of that world fail to receive lots of things that they
deserve. 


It should also be clear that there is no interesting connection
between justice as measured by Divine Moral Desertism and justice as
measured by this Political Economic Desertism.  We can easily imagine
a situation in which people receive all the political economic deserts
that they deserve from their governments, but never receive any of the
heavenly rewards they deserve in the afterlife.  


Suppose the government in some country steadfastly keeps out of the
business of tracking the levels of virtue in its citizens.  Suppose
this government also steadfastly keeps out of the business of worrying
about how happy its citizens are.  But suppose in addition that the
government scrupulously distributes income tax refunds, in-state
tuition waivers, voting rights, police protection, and other such
things to citizens who deserve to have them.  Then the level of
justice as measured by Earthly Moral Desertism in that country could
be very low, but the level of justice as measured by Political
Economic Desertism would be very high.  So these are clearly distinct
concepts of justice.