The great majority of Greek (and Roman) philosophical writings have
been irretrievably lost. But this loss is made good to some extent not
only by quotations from lost works recorded by later writers, but also
by the varieties of ancient reportage that are extant. The modern name
for these forms of reportage is ‘doxography’, which could
be be translated ‘tenet-writing’. Broadly speaking,
doxography encompasses those writings, or parts of writings, in which
the author presents philosophical views of some or other of the
ancient philosophers or schools, in some or other areas, or on some or
other topics, of philosophy, whether with or without presentation of
the argumentation or analysis through which they offered philosophical
support or reasons in favor of their ‘tenets’, and whether
or not they also include critical evaluations and comments of the
author's own. In other words, these are works (or sections of works)
taking as their subject matter the tenets or doctrines of the
philosophers, rather than independent works of philosophy in which the
author addresses in the first instance issues or topics of philosophy,
with ancillary discussion along the way of the opinions of other
philosophers. The terms for tenets, or views, in ancient Greek
are doxai or
dogmata, in Latin opiniones; those for doctrines are, in
Greek, areskonta, translated into Latin as placita. But
note that these designations were used interchangeably.
 
1. Introduction and overview

 The term ‘doxography’ has come to be applied in a much
larger sense than seems to have been intended by its creator Hermann
Diels. This name for the genre, if we may misleadingly call it that,
derives from the Latin neologism ‘doxographi’ used by
Diels to indicate the authors of a rather strictly specified type of
literature studied and edited in his monumental Doxographi
Graeci (‘Greek Doxographers’) of 1879. His researches
were focused on writings concerned with the physical part of
philosophy (including principles, theology, cosmology, astronomy,
meteorology, biology and part of medicine). But today overviews in the
field of ethics are also called doxographical. And scholars speak of
‘doxographies’ to be found in the dialogues of Plato and
the treatises of Aristotle, although these are works in which issues
of philosophy are addressed, with only ancillary discussion of the
views of others.

 The following authors and main works, listed in chronological order,
are representative of doxography in the broad as well as in
the narrower sense (a complete list of names and titles would
be
 impractical).[1]

Cicero, 1st c. BCE: one of our indispensable sources for (the
debates among the) schools of Hellenistic philosophy, esp. Stoicism,
Epicureanism, and Academic Skepticism: Academics (book two
deals with questions of epistemology from Stoic and Academic Skeptic
angles); On the Chief Ends of Good and Evil; On the
Nature of the Gods (contrasting Epicurean and Stoic views on
nature and the gods and criticizing them from the viewpoint of
moderate Skepticism); On Fate (hellenistic arguments pro and
contra determinism); On Duties (largely based on a treatise
of the Middle Stoic Panaetius). (Broad)
Philodemus, 1st c. BCE: works more or less extant on charred
papyrus scrolls: Arrangement of the Philosophers, esp. two
books dealing with the Academic and Stoic schools from an
institutional angle; also a polemical treatise On the Stoics.
A section from his On Piety briefly dealing with the tenets
of the philosophers about the gods is closely parallel to a section in
book one of Cicero's On the Nature of the Gods; both passages
printed in parallel columns in Diels 1879. (Broad)
Ps-Plutarch, 2nd c. CE: Placita (‘tenets’,
‘doctrines’) dealing with physics in five books ranging
from first principles to diseases. Issues in physical philosophy are
presented in chapters which (as a rule) contrast the tenets of the
philosophers and occasionally of some physicians and astronomers, in a
systematic not a chronological sequence. As a rule each individual
tenet is formulated in an extremely brief way. No information is
provided about individuals later than 1st c. BCE. See below, section
2, on Aëtius' Placita of which this tract is an
epitome. Edited as left column of reconstructed Aëtius in Diels
1879. (Narrow)
Arius Didymus, date uncertain (1st – 3rd c. CE?): smaller
and larger fragments from works cited as On Schools, or as
Abstract(s), in their present form mainly dealing
with Stoic and Peripatetic physics on the one hand (edited Diels
 1879),[2]
 and Stoic and Peripatetic ethics (extant in Stobaeus, see below) on
the other. (Narrow)
Plutarch, after 45 – after 140 CE, esp. polemical treatises
against Epicureans and Stoics: That Epicurus Makes a Pleasant Life
Impossible, Reply to Colotes, Is ‘Live
Unknown’ a Wise Precept?, and On Stoic
Self-Contradictions, Against the Stoics on Common
Conceptions. (Broad)
Clement of Alexandria, late 2nd c. CE, a Christian author:
Stromateis (‘Patchworks’), numerous passages
adducing, and explaining, the views of poets and prose-writers,
philosophers and others, on a great variety of
issues. (Broad)
Diogenes Laërtius, early 3rd c. CE, indispensable for the
history of Greek, esp.  Hellenistic, philosophy: Lives and Maxims
of Those who Have Distinguished themselves in Philosophy and the
Doctrines of Each Sect, in ten books. As the title shows this
work offers a blend of biography and doxography. Lay-out is according
to philosophical schools: e.g., book seven gives the common
dogmata of the Stoic school in the life of its founder.
Ranges from the Seven Sages and the Presocratics (passages about the
latter in Diels 1879) till the 2nd – 1st
c. BCE. (Broad)
Hippolytus, early 3rd c. CE, a Christian author, Refutation of
All Heresies: important esp. as source for Presocratic doctrines
(and fragments!) (Osborne 1987, Mansfeld 1992b). Book one edited Diels
1879. (Narrow, more or less)
Ps-Galen, Philosophical History, date uncertain (3rd-5th
c. CE?): mostly a sorry epitome of Ps-Plutarch Placita.
Edited Diels 1879. (Narrow)
Stobaeus, 5th c. CE: Eclogae (‘Anthology’),
preserving among other invaluable excerpts chunks of Aëtius (see
below, section 2) edited as right column for Aëtius in Diels
1879, and large and smaller abstract from Arius Didymus (see
above). Broad (Arius Didymus) and narrow (Aëtius).
Theodoret, 5th c. CE, Christian bishop: Cure for the Diseases
of the Greeks, contains excerpts from Aëtius (see below,
section 2) quoted at bottom of Aëtian page in Diels
1879. (Narrow)

2. Diels' reconstruction of the narrow doxographical tradition

 The starting-point of Diels' (1879) inquiries was a hypothesis
provided by his Bonn teacher and Doktorvater Hermann Usener
(who had predecessors himself), concerning the identical or closely
similar language used in reports of pre-Socratic and other
philosophical doctrines contained in two late compendia, the
Placita (‘Tenets’) surviving in our manuscripts
of Plutarch, and the Eclogae of the anthologizer Stobaeus;
this hypothesis Diels modified in certain respects, and also made much
more complicated, as he attempted to trace back from ps-Plutarch and
Stobaeus a long line of predecessors, each successively relied upon by
later authors in compiling philosophers' doctrines, all the way down
to ps-Plutarch and Stobaeus themselves. In a truly magisterial way he
gave it the aura of absolute certainty and unassailability which did
much to ensure its dominating position in the study of ancient
philosophy until today. The hypothesis may be briefly set out as
follows.

 The tradition of authors of works in the doxography of physics begins
with Aristotle's pupil and successor Theophrastus. In the catalogue of
his oeuvre preserved in his Life in Diogenes Laertius a
treatise is listed of ‘Physikôn Doxôn,
sixteen books’. For the Greek title in the nominative one has a
choice between Physikôn Doxai (‘Tenets of the
Natural Philosophers’) and Physikai Doxai
(‘Tenets in Natural Philosophy’). Usener and Diels opted
for the first alternative, but in the opinion of many scholars today
the second option is much more plausible. To this treatise they
attributed a number of fragments dealing with the principles
(archai: Thales' water, Heraclitus' fire, etc.)  transmitted
for the most part by Simplicius, a Neoplatonist commentator of
Aristotle of the 6th c. CE. That Simplicius and others explicitly
quote from Theophrastus' Physics, a different treatise, did
not bother them. They further posited that a short monograph of
Theophrastus, the De Sensibus, dealing with theories
concerning the senses and their objects from Parmenides to Democritus
and Plato, is a fragment of this treatise as well. The simple fact
however that Plato, not first and foremost a philosopher of nature, is
treated here on the same level as Democritus and the other natural
philosophers (as is also the case in the fragments dealing with the
principles) should have made them more hesitant, even within the scope
of their own hypothesis, as to the interpretation of the title of the
foundational treatise in sixteen books. 

 According to Diels' revision of the hypothesis a number of extant
writings (as well as sections of writings) concerned with doctrines in
the fields of natural philosophy ultimately derive fom this
Theophrastean treatise, via several intermediary stages. These stages
are: 

The Placita of an otherwise unknown Aëtius, who is
mentioned several times by Theodoret; to be dated to the 1st or
perhaps early 2nd c. CE.  Theodoret as source was for the first time
adduced by Diels. This Aëtian work, he thought, may be
reconstructed (a) from the Placita of ps-Plutarch, (b) from
quotations in the Anthology of Stobaeus, and (c) from echoes in
the Therapy of Greek Diseases of
 Theodoret[3].
 Ps-Plutarch is an epitome of Aëtius. Stobaeus as a rule quotes
verbatim, but has a different systematic lay-out. The
Anthology, moreover, has been much abridged and damaged in
the course of transmission, so in a number of cases Stobaean parallels
for ps-Plutarch are no longer extant. Aëtius would also have been
used by other authors, whereas ps-Plutarch would have been used by
other authors again. Diels indeed proved that the second part of
ps-Galen Philosophical History is an epitome of a version of
ps-Plutarch.
In his turn, Aëtius would for the most part derive from a
postulated treatise to which Diels gave the name Vetusta
Placita (‘Older Tenets’), which would have been used
by Cicero, Varro and others. Its latest possible date, accordingly, is
the early 1st c. BCE.


 The Aëtius hypothesis was new; it has proved to be tenable,
though it is in need of revision. Before Diels, scholars believed in
the existence of a single early source, parts of which would have been
taken over and adapted by Cicero as well as much later by, for
instance, ps-Galen.  The Vetusta Placita hypothesis, on the
other hand, is dubious, and the way back to Theophrastus is much more
complicated and uncertain, if only because hard evidence is so scarce,
than Diels, who just stuck to Usener's point of view about Theophrastus, wished to
consider. 

 Diels next posited that Theophrastus' treatise, the Vetusta
Placita, and Aëtius had the same kind of systematic lay-out
as the extant Placita of ps-Plutarch, viz. according to
subject. The individual books and sections of books of this tract are
indeed concerned with specific themes, such as for instance book two,
which deals with the cosmos and the heavenly bodies. Within the
framework of a section devoted to a particular subject, e.g., the sun,
or the moon, the individual chapters may be concerned with various
specific issues pertaining to the sun, or the moon, and so on. 

 Diels further argued that other reports, in other authors, should
also be connected with Theophrastus' foundational treatise. The
passages dealing with the tenets of Presocratic philosophers in the
history of philosophy by Diogenes Laërtius, which is arranged
according to schools and individuals, not subjects, as well as similar
sections of the first book of Hippolytus' Refutation of All
Heresies and of the Stromateis
(‘Patchworks’) of another ps-Plutarch, in Diels' view also
went back, ultimately, to the Tenets of the Natural
Philosophers. He failed to take sufficiently into account that
the difference between treatment according to subject and that
according to person, or school, is quite fundamental. His
argumentation is also weak in other respects. From the undeniable fact
that there are striking resemblances between Theophrastus' fragments
concerned with the principles on the one hand, and what is found on
that score in Aëtius, Diogenes Laërtius, and Hippolytus on
the other, it does not follow that corresponding passages in these
later authors for which we have no Theophrastean parallels derive from
Theophrastus too. This is source criticism, or
Quellenforschung, at its most vulnerable. Diels moreover
preferred to overlook the equally undeniable fact that Aristotle's
treatment of the principles in the first book of the
Metaphysics exhibits equally striking correspondences with
Theophrastus' fragments (Zeller 1877), and so with the later tradition
as well, which could therefore go back ultimately to Aristotle, and
not to Theophrastus.

 Diels saw the development from Theophrastus to these later and (in
his view) dependent authors as a decline, and a progressive
obfuscation and deterioration. His cladistic reconstruction of the
doxographical tradition is clearly related to the famous so-called
‘Lachmannian’ stemma of a group of manuscripts, from later
copies to the lost common ancestor, or archetype, the text of which
(as scholars believed at the time) may be reconstructed in a virtually
mechanical way. Diels was very much aware of this analogy, which
surely was an important factor in convincing him and others that the
splendid results of his investigations were irrefutable. In the 19th
century the method attributed to Lachmann was assumed to be beyond
criticism.

 By thus (so to speak automatically) tracing back these mutually
corresponding passages in later authors to the, as he assumed,
faithful reporter Theophrastus, Diels believed he gained access to
reliable information about Presocratic philosophy. Thanks to the
stemmatic method-back-to-the-archetype it became possible to bestow
upon a passage (a brief lemma in, for instance, Aëtius) dealing
with a tenet of a Presocratic philosopher, the conditional status of
being an attestation which, though still at second hand, should be
early and therefore the more to be trusted. It is with the importance
meted out to such so-called ‘fragments’ that these lemmas,
removed by Diels' scissors from Aëtian chapters dealing with
subjects, figure in the chronological series of chapters
devoted to persons in two fundamental works he
published. These are the Poetarum Philosophorum
Fragmenta (‘Fragments of the Poet-Philosophers’) of
1901, reprinted 2000, and the famous, several times revised (in later editions by
Diels' collaborator Kranz), and often reprinted Fragmente der
Vorsokratiker (‘Fragments of the Presocratics’,
abbreviated D.-K.), first published in 1903. Scholars indeed still
tend to view these Aëtian lemmas as a sort of Theophrastus
fragments, and Theophrastus is believed to be a bona fide source. This
also holds for those passages in Hippolytus, Diogenes Laërtius
and other authors in D.-K. which had been traced back to Theophrastus
hypothetically.

 However, when one compares Aëtian lemmas concerned with tenets
of extant authors, like Plato or Aristotle, with the doctrines found
in the original texts, it becomes clear to what extent these
doxai have been adapted and distorted, or
‘modernized’, in some sense of the word. This consequently
should also hold for lemmas dealing with lost authors, as Xylander
already pointed out in his 16th century edition of Plutarch, which
included the ps-Plutarch.  (For further reading on this topic,
see Mansfeld & Runia 1997, and Runia 1999a, 2004.)

The role of Theodoret as a source for Aëtius has been questioned and
doubted by Lebedev 19, Frede 1999, Gourinat 2011, and Bottler
(2015). Now no one doubts that there must be a source PS shared by
ps.Plutarch and Stobaeus. One can also prove that there must be such a
source TS shared by Theodoret and Stobaeus. As a final step one can
prove that the PS source and the TS source cannot be distinguished
from each other so are identical. Thus Diels’ original intuition is
vindicated. For details see Mansfeld 2016b.
3. Objections to Diels' theory: the Aristotelian background

 Usener's influence is also the cause of a fatal blind spot in
Diels. He failed to acknowledge that Theophrastus, too, had a sort of
Doktorvater, namely Aristotle. Aristotle, in his treatises,
as a rule lists and discusses the opinions (doxai) of men in
general and of the experts (who often are philosophers) in particular,
concerning an issue in metaphysics, or physics, or psychology, and
sometimes ethics, before embarking on his own investigations.  These
opinions are ordered according to the method of diaeresis, or
division: a classification according to sets, sub-sets and
sub-sub-sets with specific differences. Aristotle checks to what
extent these opinions are in agreement among themselves or contradict
each other, and then tries to establish to what extent one of the
available options may prove acceptable, at least as the starting-point
for further inquiry, or whether some option may be available which
others have failed to consider. We call these exegetical and
evaluative overviews ‘dialectical’, in the Aristotelian
sense of the word, of course. An overview of this nature should
establish which genus, or set, is at issue, that is to say
whether we are faced with a theoretical discipline, such as physics
(and then with what species, or sub-set, e.g.,
zoology), or with a non-theoretical discipline such as poetics. This
approach should also be applied to the sub-sets, or particular objects
of inquiry, embraced by a particular sub-set. According to
Posterior Analytics 2.1 various aspects should (or may) be
treated separately, viz.: (1) does the object of the inquiry possess a
particular property or attribute, or not; (2) the reason why it does
possess this attribute; (3) the existence or non-existence of the
object (for instance: do gods exist?—a question one does not
need to ask when humans, or the sun, are at issue); and (4), the
substance or definition of the object. Here an important part is
played by the Aristotelian so-called categories and other kinds of
predicates, because it is of major importance to establish to what
category (viz.  substance, or quality, or quantity, or place, or doing and being-affected etc.) a
given object of inquiry and/or its attributes belong, or whether and
in what sense for instance motion (or rest) may be predicated of
it. These four different primary questions, or types of questions, may
moreover be formulated in respect of each category (viz., not only of
substance, but also of quality, etc.). Take the objects of
mathematics. According to Aristotle these do not belong to the
category of substance but to that of quantity. But within this latter
category one may formulate questions about properties, or attributes,
which may belong to them; wonder whether they exist, and if so, in
what way; ask whether they move or not; and so on.

 In his treatise on dialectic and its methods, the Topics
(1.14), Aristotle provides instructions on how to select and classify
propositions (protaseis) and problems
(problêmata):

We should also make selections from the literature and
include these in separate lists for each set, with separate headings,
for instance ‘On the Good’, or ‘On the Living
Being’—that is to say the Good as a whole, starting with
(the question) ‘what is it?’ One should cite the
doxai [opinions, tenets] of individual thinkers, e.g., that
Empedocles said that the elements of bodies are four in number
[…].

 Of propositions and problems there are—to comprehend the
matter in outline—three sets: some are ethical, others
physical, others again logical. Ethical: for instance (the problem)
whether one should obey one's parents or the law, when these disagree
with each other. Logical: for instance (the problem) whether the
knowledge of opposites is the same, or not.  Physical: for instance
(the problem) whether the cosmos is eternal or not.


 Consequently, propositions and problems can be, and therefore in some
cases should be, elucidated by means of tenets, or opinions:
doxai. As there are three sets of propositions, so there are
three sets of doxai: physical, ethical, and
‘logical’ (i.e., general). An example of such a diaeresis,
or division, of a sub-set which is of fundamental importance for
Aristotle is found at the beginning of his Physics. This
division pertains to two categories and one predicate of a different
sort: the number (category of quantity), nature (category of
substance) and motion vs. rest (category of doing and being-affected) of the
principles (archai) and elements (stoicheia) posited
by Aristotle's predecessors in the field of natural philosophy. In
line with the rule formulated in the Topics names of
philosophers are added to some of the doxai. Numerous other
examples of this ingredient of the dialectical method are to be found
in Aristotle's writings.

 The above-cited passage from the Topics, and Aristotle's
general practice, help to determine and explain the title of the
Theophrastean treatise Diels believed to be foundational: it should be
Physikai Doxai, i.e., ‘Tenets in [the various fields
of] Natural Philosophy’. And one among the extant fragments of
this treatise not only proves (because of the formulation in Greek of
the title as quoted) that this title really is ‘Physical
Tenets’, but also demonstrates that such tenets were criticized
according to the rules of dialectic. Theophrastus, we are informed,
cited a tenet of Plato's and then formulated ‘the
objections’ against it. The Greek word for
‘objections’ found in this fragment, enstaseis,
is a technical term in Aristotle's Topics. Physical tenets
are tenets, or theses, in the fields of natural philosophy in the
largest sense, ranging from the principles, via cosmology, astronomy
and meteorology etc., to human psychology (including philosophy of
mind), biology, and even nosology or the theory of diseases.  Physical
tenets are not only formulated by physikoi, natural
philosophers, but also by physicians and astronomers. Aëtius
indeed contains a number of
 medical[4]
 and astronomical doxai, the oldest of which may derive from
sources that can perhaps be attributed to some of Aristotle's
collaborators. (For further reading on this topic, see Mansfeld 1990,
1992, 1998, 2016a, Mansfeld & Runia 1997, Runia 1999a, Runia 2004, with
criticism in Zhmud 2001 and rejoinder in Mansfeld 2002.) 
4. Theophrastus and the Placita

 Theophrastus applies the diaeretic method in his treatise De
Sensibus. The chief division—already found in
corresponding passages in Aristotle—is between those who posit
that knowledge is to be ascribed to similarity (‘like knows
like’) and those who posit that it is to be ascribed to contrast
(‘unlike knows unlike’). Another division, not paralleled
in Aristotle, also plays an important part in classifying and
dialectically discussing the tenets, viz.  between those who assume
that there is a difference between thinking and sense-perception, and
those who do not. Finally, within each class the philosophers are
treated in a sequence determined by the number of senses that are
posited (category of quantity). The last philosopher to be discussed
is Democritus, not Plato. This is because Democritus according to
Theophrastus assumes that knowledge comes about through both
similarity and contrast.

 This presentation, viz. a division, or divisions, of contrasting
tenets (names included) dealing with specific issues, followed by an
exceptional (or compromise) view, which fails to fit this division, is
not a standard feature of Aristotle's dialectical overviews. However we do find partial anticipations of this methodology in Aristotle, e.g. in the second chapter of De Anima I he opposes three views concerned with the principles that constitute the soul: some hold that these are corporeal, others that they are incorporeal, while a third group posits a blend of corporeal and incorporeal principles. In Aristotle however we do not find the strings of detailed sortings of individual tenets followed by a compromise or maverick opinion typical of numerous Placita chapters, while Theophrastus' presentation in the De
Sensibus is in this respect close to the Placita routine.
[5] Consequently, we may submit that it is
Aristotle's dialectical methodology, as revised by Theophrastus, which
determines the structure of large sections of the Placita. It
is moreover stated, in the proem of ps-Plutarch's Placita,
that ‘according to Aristotle and Theophrastus and almost all the
Peripatetics a perfect human being should devote himself to
problems in the fields of natural philosophy and
ethics’.

 Theophrastus and Aristotle, then, were used in this way. An
example: The chapters in Aëtius (Placita 3.9-15) and
Cicero (Academics 2.122) dealing with a number of various and
occasionally even bizarre views concerning the position, motion,
shape, etc. of the earth in the last resort patently derive, as to
their main themes and oppositions and even as to some telling details,
from a chapter in Aristotle's On the Heavens (2.13) (Mansfeld
1992). Cicero here mentions Theophrastus by name; he therefore may
well be involved too, as an intermediary source. But we have no
further evidence concerning his contribution in this particular
instance. (For further reading on this topic, see Mansfeld 1996.)
5. Using doxographies

 When we inquire into the way ancient authors have used the
information provided by Aëtius' Placita, by its progeny,
and by its post-Theophrastean predecessors, we often find that the
function of these collections of doxai is not much different
from the functions of similar overviews in the context of Aristotle's
dialectical discussions. The main objective of these authors, who are
in a position to base themselves on evidence that has already been
provided with a definite structure, is to ascertain whether a given
doxa may eventually prove to be useful, and which
doxai should be rejected—depending, naturally, on the
point of view of the user (who may be a physician or a philosopher, a
Stoic or an Epicurean, a Platonist or an Aristotelian, a pagan or a
Christian).  Sometimes all the doxai belonging to a specific
sub-set, or dealing with a specific theme, may turn out to be
unacceptable, or useless, under certain circumstances or to somebody
in particular.

 Furthermore, there is a significant difference between Aristotle's
overviews (which we know much better than those of Theophrastus, so
for the sake of clarity one may restrict oneself to Aristotle) and the
corresponding passages and sections in Aëtius and his family.
Aristotle's purpose was to make a choice and to find a solution, and
many later authors also wanted this. But numerous chapters in the
Placita literature when taken at face-value seem to make a
decision impossible, because the bald diaeretic contrast between the
tenets listed in the lemmas results in a logjam, or diaphonia
(‘discordance’), as the ancient Skeptics called it.  In
this stalemate the only remaining option is to suspend one's
judgment. It was at the time impossible, for instance, to find out
whether there is one cosmic system, or more. It is an attractive idea
that at least part of the material (in the course of time naturally
updated by the inclusion of post-Aristotelian tenets) was adapted by
Academic Skeptics to induce the tranquillity of mind which follows
upon suspension of judgment.

 It is somewhat amazing that the great Diels, who clearly was aware of
the importance of the diaeretic method in Aristotle's writings and in
Theophrastus' De Sensibus, failed to apply this insight to
the analysis of the Placita literature. The diaphonic
streamlining, moreover, of chapters containing tenets that are listed
according to criteria determined by various divisions obviously
determines not only the presentation but also, to some extent, the
contents of the material.
6. Doxography broad and narrow

 Consequently, doxography in the narrower sense (derived from the
nature of the majority of the sources discussed and edited by Diels in
the Doxographi Graeci), is: the normally very brief
presentation according to theme, or subject, of contrasting (or even
bizarre, or compromise) tenets in natural philosophy (or science, if
you wish), which in itself fails to provide a decisive answer to the
issue involved although it may assist you to find a way out. The
application of the term ‘doxography’ to what one finds in
Aristotle (or, on a much more limited scale, in Plato, who
occasionally quotes the views of others to further a discussion) is
therefore not entirely to the point (see Mansfeld 2000).

 Turning now to doxography in the broad sense we observe that Cicero's
leisured and extensive presentations, e.g., in his On the Nature
of the Gods of the Epicurean and Stoic doctrines in the field of
theology-cum-physics—presentations followed by
Academic-Skeptical refutations—may be, and have been, called
by the name of doxography. But there are obvious differences from
doxographies of the Aëtian type. To be sure, one might perhaps,
with some hesitation, maintain that what we have here is a sort of
blow-up of the dialectical scheme one also finds in the
Placita literature, with the skeptical component made
explicit: contrasting doctrines which turn out to be
improvable. Such  a move however  is less valid for Diogenes
Laërtius, in spite of the fact that this author several times
makes a distinction between the life (bios) of a person
(Plato; the Stoic Zeno of Citium) and the areskonta or
dogmata of this person, or of his school. It is therefore
perhaps better to classify these overviews in Cicero and Diogenes
Laërtius as belonging with an ancient genre which we may view as
a sub-species of doxography, namely the (largely lost) literature
Peri Haireseôn (‘On Schools’), which deals
with philosophical, or medical, schools and eventually may include
arguments contra the position of a particular hairesis
(‘school’). Philodemus, and Arius Didymus (on ethics),
belong here as well.

 Scholars, as we have noticed, also speak of ethical doxographies. One
could justify this usage by submitting that this is going beyond
Diels, and back to Aristotle. We have seen that Aristotle advised his
pupils (and himself) also to construct lists of ethical propositions
and problems. In his ethical treatises we actually find dialectical
overviews concerning problems in ethics, though on a much more modest
scale than in the physical treatises. But a doxographical literature
in the field of ethics, which as to scale and taxonomy would be even
remotely comparable to physical doxography never existed. Yet one
occasionally encounters short lists and overviews of ethical tenets,
in some later authors. It is therefore possible that modest
doxographical collections of ethical views did circulate, and we may
have some evidence concerned with the circulation (and adaptation) of
a diaeretical overview of tenets about the End, or Highest Good (Algra
1997).
7. Conclusion

 Finally, it should be pointed out that doxographic works are a sort
of tools. They constitute a type of secondary literature of a fluid
and unstable character, both as to form and as to contents. Shorter
and longer versions may be available alongside each other; in fact,
for all the losses sustained by ancient literature, some still
are. Materials may be added, or lost, or added again in a continuous
process of epitomizing and enlarging and updating—and it
remained possible, of course, to inspect and excerpt original sources
at least in some cases. 

 In order the better to understand the value of the available evidence
pertaining to lost philosophical works from Antiquity one therefore
should attempt to understand the traditions and transmissions that are
involved as a whole. One should take the rationale of the extant
overviews into account, and try to discover the intentions of authors
who made use of doxographies. A naïve use of the available collections
of philosophical fragments, implying the putting on the same level of
reliability of most of the evidence that remains, does not always
produce good results.