Cognition is embodied when it is deeply dependent upon features of
the physical body of an agent, that is, when aspects of the
agent's body beyond the brain play a significant causal or
physically constitutive role in cognitive processing.


In general, dominant views in the philosophy of mind and cognitive
science have considered the body as peripheral to understanding the
nature of mind and cognition. Proponents of embodied cognitive science
view this as a serious mistake. Sometimes the nature of the dependence
of cognition on the body is quite unexpected, and suggests new ways of
conceptualizing and exploring the mechanics of cognitive
processing.


Embodied cognitive science encompasses a loose-knit family of
research programs in the cognitive sciences that often share a
commitment to critiquing and even replacing traditional approaches to
cognition and cognitive processing. Empirical research on embodied
cognition has exploded in the past 10 years. As the bibliography for
this article attests, the various bodies of work that will be discussed
represent a serious alternative to the investigation of cognitive
phenomena.


Relatively recent work on the embodiment of cognition provides much
food for thought for empirically-informed philosophers of mind. This is
in part because of the rich range of phenomena that embodied cognitive
science has studied. But it is also in part because those phenomena are
often thought to challenge dominant views of the mind, such as the
computational and representational theories of mind, at the heart of
traditional cognitive science. And they have sometimes been taken to
undermine standard positions in the philosophy of mind, such as the
idea that the mind is identical to, or even realized in, the brain.
 
1. Embodied vs Traditional Cognitive Science

Consider four evocative examples of phenomena that have motivated
embodied cognitive science. 

We typically gesture when we speak to
one another, and gesturing facilitates not just communication but
language processing itself (McNeill 1992).
Vision is often
action-guiding, and bodily movement and the feedback it generates are
more tightly integrated into at least some visual processing than has
been anticipated by traditional models of vision (O'Regan and
Noë 2001).
There are neurons, mirror neurons, that
fire not only when we undertake an action, but do so when we observe
others undertaking the same actions (Rizzolatti and Craighero 2004).

We are often able to perform cognitive tasks, such as remembering, more
effectively by using our bodies and even parts of our surrounding
environments to off-load storage and simplify the nature of the
cognitive processing (Donald 1991).


Although phenomena such as (1)–(4) motivate embodied
cognitive science, appealing to such phenomena to arrive at more
substantive conclusions that have been drawn—for example, that
traditional cognitive science is deeply flawed, or that dominant
positions in the philosophy of mind, such as functionalism, are
mistaken—requires further philosophical argument. Because the
requisite argumentation typically appeals to other concepts central to
work in empirically-informed philosophy of mind and cognitive science
itself, such as modularity and nativism, debate over embodied cognition
has become a hot topic in cognitive science in recent years (Adams
2010; Aizawa 2007; Chemero 2009; Shapiro 2011).


Traditional cognitive science has certainly conceptualized central
cognitive processing, what we will call cognition in the
narrow sense, in abstraction from bodily mechanisms of sensory
processing and motor control. Research programs within artificial
intelligence exemplify this view of cognition in the narrow sense, and
they have been one of the clearest targets of embodied cognitive
science. More positively, embodied cognitive science aims to understand
the full range of perceptual, cognitive, and motor capacities we
possess, cognition in the broad sense, as capacities that are
dependent upon features of the physical body. In this article, we
consider cognition construed both narrowly and broadly, in these
senses.


Finally by way of introducing embodied cognitive science, we note
its relationship to situated cognition (Smith 1999, Robbins
and Aydede 2009). As a paradigm within situated cognition, embodied
cognitive science can be distinguished from both the study of
embedded cognition and the thesis of extended
cognition.


Embodied cognitive science appeals to the idea that cognition deeply
depends on aspects of the agent's body other than the brain.
Without the involvement of the body in both sensing and acting,
thoughts would be empty, and mental affairs would not exhibit the
characteristics and properties they do. Work on embedded cognition, by
contrast, draws on the view that cognition deeply depends on the
natural and social environment. By focusing on the strategies organisms
use to off-load cognitive processing onto the environment, this work
places particular emphasis on the ways in which cognitive activity is
distributed across the agent and her physical, social, and cultural
environment (Suchman 1987, Hutchins 1995). The thesis of extended
cognition is the claim that cognitive systems themselves extend beyond
the boundary of the individual organism. On this view, features of an
agent's physical, social, and cultural environment can do more than
distribute cognitive processing: they may well partially constitute
that agent's cognitive system. (Clark and Chalmers 1998, R. Wilson
2004; A. Clark 2008, Menary 2010).


We follow recent authors (A. Clark 2008; Rupert 2009b; Shapiro 2010,
2011) in holding that while embodied cognitive science can be neatly
distinguished, in principle, from both of these other forms of situated
cognition, and that there are times when this is useful (even crucial),
the broader philosophical issues in play are also revealingly discussed
sometimes by considering these views together. Thus, although this
article focuses on the specific ways in which cognition depends on the
physical body, it also discusses situated cognition more generally, as
appropriate.
2. Some Historical Anchors for Embodied Cognitive Science

A consideration (Sections 2.1–2.3) of three landmark
publications provides a historical anchor for understanding early work
on embodied cognition in the narrow sense: George Lakoff and Mark
Johnson's Metaphors We Live By (1980), the enactive
perspective on cognition developed by Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson,
and Eleanor Rosch in their The Embodied Mind (1991); and work
on robotics and computationally intelligent action summarized and
analyzed in Andy Clark's Being There: Putting Mind, World,
and Body Back Together (1997). We then turn more briefly to
influential work on embodied cognition in the broad sense (Sections 2.4–2.5) and on the phenomenological tradition within continental
philosophy that has inspired more recent embodied cognitive science
(Section 2.6).
2.1 Metaphor and Cognition

Figurative language
clearly plays a role in cognition, and philosophers, linguists, and
psychologists have all contributed to its understanding in cognitive
science (Black 1962; Ortony 1979). Beginning in their Metaphors We
Live By (1980), George Lakoff and Mark Johnson argued that such
language, and metaphor in particular, was not simply a phenomenon to be
studied in the domain of cognition, but actively structures much of
cognition traditionally thought to be isolated from metaphor. For
example, many central cognitive processes, such as those concerning
space and time, were, claimed Lakoff and Johnson, both expressed and
influenced by metaphor (hence “metaphors we live by”). If
human experience is intricately bound up with large-scale metaphors,
and both experience and metaphor are shaped up by the kinds of bodies
we have that mediate between agent and world, argued Lakoff and
Johnson, then cognition is embodied in a way not anticipated within
traditional cognitive science.

Although Lakoff (1987) and Johnson (1987) developed the basic idea here
in different ways (see also Lakoff and Johnson 1999, Johnson 2007), the
general flavor of the view they share can be conveyed by considering a
well-known example they discuss: that of love as a kind of journey.
Those in a romantic relationship are often said to head off together,
travel the same path, take wrong turns, retrace their steps, check
their bearings, and pack their bags. For Lakoff and Johnson, this
non-literal language is not merely peripheral expression useful for
adding bells and whistles to the bustle of communication, but reflects
something deep about how love is conceptualized. Importantly, the
central organizing metaphor—love is a journey—involves a
mapping from one domain (journeys) to another (love), where the source
domain is informed by our bodily physicality and the embodied
experience that we have as creatures who move through the world to
achieve purposes and goals.


Spatial concepts, such as “front”, “back”,
“up”, and “down”, provide perhaps the clearest
examples in which such embodied experience exists. These concepts are
articulated in terms of our body's position in, and movement
through, space. Creatures like us that stand upright and move forward,
for example, think of things that are “in front of”
themselves as located in the line of vision or in terms of the
direction they are moving. Creatures that were long and flat and moved
backwards, by contrast, might have a very different concept of
“in front of”, or perhaps none at all. Likewise for other
spatial concepts, such as “up”. We might get a first-hand
feel for the embodied nature of such concepts in situations when we
approximate such creatures, such as when we try to use such concepts to
guide our action when we are laying down, moving backwards, or even
looking in a rear-vision mirror. The experience of
“upness”, proponents of embodied cognition claim, depends
on the particular kind of body we have, and how that body interacts
with its surroundings (Lakoff and Johnson 1999).

This example can also be used to illustrate why embodied cognition has
proven to be a contentious view within cognitive science and the
philosophy of mind. One might argue that the dependence between our
spatial concepts and our bodies identified above is mundane and
unremarkable. Consider the best-known of classic mind-body dualists,
René Descartes. In his famous quip in Meditation VI, that he (his mind,
for Descartes) was not merely lodged in his body “like a pilot in
a ship”, Descartes clearly recognizes that there is some sense in
which cognition depends on, and is integrated with, the body.
Proponents of embodied cognition must, minimally, show that
“front” and “up” depend on the body in some
sense that Descartes would deny.


Of more relevance to contemporary debates, proponents of embodied
cognition must show that this dependence cannot be accommodated within
traditional cognitive science and its working commitments (e.g., to the
computational and representational theories of mind). At least this is
true if embodied cognition is to mark a significant departure from, and
pose a substantive challenge to, traditional cognitive science and
associated philosophical views of the mind. And that requires,
minimally, not only identifying some kind of dependence or other
between cognition and the body, but specifying the nature of that
dependence.
2.2 Enactive Cognition

The book The Embodied
Mind (Varela, Thompson and Rosch 1991) was an attempt to re-direct
the cognitive sciences by infusing them with the phenomenological
perspective developed in the work of Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1945).
(More ambitiously, and less successfully, it also aimed to integrate
cognitive science with Buddhist philosophy; the book also included some
passing discussion of psychoanalysis.) Varela, Thompson and Rosch
argued that the standard division between pre-given, external features
of the world and internal symbolic representations should be dropped,
as it is unable to accommodate the feedback from embodied actions to
cognition via the actions of a situated cognitive agent. The
fundamental differences between their perspective and classical views
lies in the answers to the questions of what cognition is, how it
works, and when a system functions adequately.

Traditional accounts basically state that there are no computations
without representations, and view cognition as successfully
functioning when any device can support and manipulate symbols to
solve the problem given to the system. Varela, Thompson, and Rosch
introduced the concept of enaction to present and develop a
framework that places strong emphasis on the idea that the experienced
world is portrayed and determined by mutual interactions between the
physiology of the organism, its sensorimotor circuit and the
environment. Their emphasis on the structural coupling of
brain-body-world constitutes the kernel of their program of embodied
cognition, building on the classical phenomenological idea that
cognitive agents bring forth a world by means of the activity of
their situated living bodies. As the metaphor of
“bringing forth a world” of meaningful experience implies,
on this view knowledge emerges through the primary agent's bodily
engagement with the environment, rather than being simply determined
by and dependent upon either pre-existent situations or personal
construals.

One implication of this view is that only a creature with certain
features—e.g., eyes, hands, legs, and skills—can possess
certain kinds of cognitive capacities. This is because cognition is a
dynamic sensorimotor activity, and the world that is given and
experienced is not only conditioned by the neural activity of the
subject, but is essentially enacted in that it emerges through the
bodily activities of the organism. This general approach encourages a
view of enaction as essentially distinct from computation, as it is
traditionally conceived. Varela, Thompson, and Rosch's most detailed
illustration of their perspective is contained in their discussion of
color experience and categorization, a discussion that received much
attention in other venues (e.g., Thompson, Palacios, and Varela 1992;
Thompson 1995), typically without reference to the more sweeping
claims about embodiment, phenomenology, and Buddhism made in
The Embodied Mind (see also Thompson 2007).

Since its origin, the enactive tradition has grown and enriched in
various ways and each of its strands, though sharing a common
framework with neighbouring accounts in embodied cognitive science,
has developed one’s own theoretical trait and explored a conceptual
territory that differentiates them from one another. One variant,
branded autopoietic enactivism, has developed in particular the
biological phenomenon of autopoiesis and attributed to it a central
role in explaining fundamental properties of our mental life (Maturana
and Varela 1992; Thompson 2005; Di Paolo and Thompson 2014). The
notion of autopoiesis describes living systems as active, adaptive,
self-maintaining and self-individuating, that is, as having the
property of self-reproducing through self-regulating strategies.
Another variant, the so-called sensorimotor enactivism, has taken a
more liberal route and, rather than stressing the role of autopoietic
organization in the living systems, it draws on the implicit grasp of
sensorimotor dependencies (that is, the way in which stimulation
changes contingent upon actions of the organisms) to explain conscious
experience and a broad range of behaviors (Noe 2004; O’Regan 2011,
Degenaar and O’Regan forthcoming), Yet another, has gone as radical as
to say that cognition and experience does not depend on autopoietic
organization and sensorimotor accounts remain committed to mentalism
and representationalist thinking (Hutto and Myin’s 2013). In sum,
although these respective varieties are broadly consonant, they come
to emphasize different features, and internal tensions motivated a
widen fragmentation and various forms of elaboration and
extension. Though we refer to other venues for a thorough discourse on
the demarcation line between varieties of enactive proposals (Degenaar
and O’Regan forthcoming, Menary 2006, Hutto and Myin 2013), here we
will limit ourselves to a high-level overview of some reasons for
their disagreement.  One such reason concerns the role ascribed to the
notion of autopoiesis.  Whereas the programme that issues from Varela,
Thompson and Rosch maintains that autopoiesis (or self-production) is
a necessary precondition for experience, leading to the idea that
there is a deep continuity of life and mind (Thompson 2007) and that
consciousness is a particular form of life, both sensorimotor
enactivism and its radical formulation do not put autopoietic
processes center-stage and do not commit to the view that cognitive
phenomena build upon peculiar aspects of the organization of living
organisms (Degenaar and O’Regan forthcoming, Hutto and Myin 2013).  A
further reason for disagreement concerns the rendering of the claim
that perceptual experience requires mediating know-how. Whereas
sensorimotor enactivism advocates that perceptual experience is made
possible by the possession and skillful exercise of practical
knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies, the other variants consider
the talk of mediating knowledge as a brand of cognitivism (Hutto and
Myin 2013), somewhat consistent with the theory of mind that grounds
traditional cognitive science. In its radical expression, the enactive
thinking maintains that mentality is to be explained in terms of
direct environment-involving embodied engagements.
2.3 Rethinking Robotics
By the early 1990s, work in
computational intelligence had started to explore ways of generating
intelligent action in robots that shortly became known as the embodied
approach to robotics. In a pair of papers Rodney Brooks (1991a, 1991b)
had presented a general and accessible overview of a new kind of
intelligent computational architecture, subsumption architecture, that
was representation-lite and world-driven. In these respects, it
departed from the representation-crunching intensive traditional views
of planning and decision-making that had characterized classic AI and
was characterized by Brooks as providing “intelligence without
representation”. Together with computational work by Agre and
Chapman (1987) and Suchman (1987), Brooks's approach suggested a
view of computational intelligence in which control was governed
bottom-up by behavior and interaction with the world, rather than by
plentiful and often complicated internal algorithms and
representations.

The sweep of work in reactive or behavior-based robotics, and its
identification as marking a part of the embodied cognitive science, was
heralded in Andy Clark's Being There: Putting Mind, World,
and Body Back Together (1997). Clark here provided an integrative
framework for a wide-range of emerging work on embodiment in the
cognitive sciences. The big idea in Being There, one with
lasting impact in embodied cognitive science, is that minds are not for
thinking, traditionally conceived, but for doing, for getting
things done in the world in real time. Rather than developing
“walking encyclopedias”, robotics in the late 1980s and
early 1990s was starting to focus on the dynamic interaction between
body and world. Clark drew out affinities between this shift in the
conception of intelligent action in computational systems and the
emergence of the idea that cognition was scaffolded, embedded, and
extended.


The work we have briefly recounted so far all concerns what we
called cognition in the narrow sense, processes like human memory,
categorization, and language processing (Lakoff and Johnson), human and
nonhuman color categorization (Varela, Thompson, and Rosch), and
decision-making and planning in robots and robotic systems (Clark). But
embodied cognitive science aims to encompass cognition broadly
construed. To convey the flavor of early work here, we briefly consider
the work of James Gibson on perception, and Esther Thelen and Linda
Smith (1994) on infant walking and reaching behaviors (cf. Shapiro
2011).
2.4 Ecological Perception

James Gibson's
(1979) account of vision challenged the idea that the central problem
that the visual system has to solve is how to reconstruct a full-blown,
three-dimensional world from the information specified in the
two-dimensional image on the retina. That idea has been prominent in
traditional, information processing views of vision, including those of
Rock (1983, 1997), Richard Gregory (1966) and Marr (1982). Gibson
thinks that this is not a problem the visual system faces because
vision does not begin with a static retinal array but with an organism
actively moving through a visually rich environment. Gibson's
positive approach to vision was to attempt to specify this richness,
the information in what he called the ambient optic array,
especially invariants in that array, which can be used to distinguish
agent-dependent and objective features of one's environment. By
both emphasizing the role of the movement of a perceiver and the
integration of that perceiver in a larger, visually rich environment,
Gibson has been championed as at least a nascent proponent of embodied
vision (see also Wilson 2004: ch.7; Shapiro 2011: ch.2).
2.5 Dynamicism and Development

 Esther Thelen and
Linda Smith (1994) offered a radical challenge to traditional nativist
views of cognitive development by applying dynamical systems theory to
developmental psychology. One important implication of dynamical
systems theory is that systems can generate novel behaviors (e.g.,
different solutions for reaching objects) through bodily activity,
questioning the need to posit preprogrammed patterns that unfold over
time. Raising fundamental questions about shared assumptions in the
field, they argued that the stepping behavior in infants is not driven
by maturational processes somehow determined by a hard-wired genetic
code, but results instead from the interaction between the
infant's initial spontaneous limb movements and changing
contexts. Thus, they viewed this particular aspect of development as an
emergent and self organizing product of many decentralized and local
interactions taking place in real time, with the promise of
generalizing this approach to cognitive development more generally.
2.6 Phenomenology
 Finally by way of recent historical
anchoring, the idea that an understanding of the body underpins the
very possibility of experience has roots in the
phenomenological works of Edmund Husserl (1913, 1931), Maurice
Merleau-Ponty (1945), and Jean-Paul Sartre (1943), roots we saw
acknowledged by Varela, Thompson, and Rosch in The Embodied
Mind. This earlier continental tradition was explored
constructively early on within artificial intelligence, with special
reference to Heidegger, by Winograd and Flores (1986) and also formed
the backdrop to Dreyfus's (1972) classic critique of traditional
computationalism.


Embodied cognitive science pushes phenomenological accounts in new
directions. It seeks not so much to understand how physicality opens up
the experience of the self, the world and the others, but rather aims
to specify the mechanisms that explain just how cognition is
grounded in, and deeply constrained by, the bodily nature of cognitive
agency. We shall not explore the convergence between the early
phenomenological tradition and embodied cognitive science, although we
recognize that phenomenological insights can be an indispensable
resource for the ongoing investigation of consciousness,
self-consciousness, action and intersubjectivity (see Gallagher 2009;
Gallagher and Zahavi 2008; Thompson 2007; Gallagher 2005; Wheeler
2005).
3. What Embodied Cognition Is


The general characterization of embodied cognition with which we
began provides the basis for what we will call the Embodiment
Thesis:

Embodiment Thesis: Many features of cognition are
embodied in that they are deeply dependent upon characteristics of the
physical body of an agent, such that the agent's beyond-the-brain
body plays a significant causal role, or a physically constitutive
role, in that agent's cognitive processing.



All five of the early examples of work in embodied cognition that we
briefly summarized in Section 2 accept the Embodiment Thesis. The
working hypothesis of embodied cognitive science is that this thesis is
true either because of the significant causal or the significant
physically constitutive role of the body in cognitive processing.
Proponents of embodied cognitive science have advocated both the causal
and the constitutive claim about the role of the body in cognition.
While the ascription of a physically constitutive role to the body in
cognition has been taken to challenge traditional cognitive science in
a more radical way than does that of a merely significant causal role
to it, both versions of the Embodiment Thesis mark a departure from
views of the mind dominant in traditional cognitive science.

Rather than following those who attempt to explain embodied cognition
by appeal to the metaphor of grounding (e.g., Anderson 2003;
Barsalou 1999, 2008; Glenberg and Robertson 2000; Glenberg et al.
2005), we think that the best way to articulate the Embodiment Thesis
further is to specify the nature of the dependence of cognition on the
body: what particular significant causal or physically constitutive
roles does the body play in cognition? (cf. Shapiro 2010, 2011; A.
Clark 2008; Thompson 2007; Wheeler 2005; Anderson 2003; M. Wilson
2002).

At the most general level, there are three such distinct functions or
roles, each with its own implications for embodied cognitive science.
The body can function as a constraint on cognition, as a
distributor for cognitive processing, or as a
regulator of cognitive activity.


We can specify each of these functions or roles more precisely, and
draw attention to the distinctive implications that each has, and the
work already described that appeals to each of these conceptions of the
Embodiment Thesis.

Body as Constraint: an agent's body functions to significantly
constrain the nature and content of the representations processed by
that agent's cognitive system.



Amongst the alleged implications of the Body as Constraint thesis
are two we would like to draw attention to:

Some
forms of cognition will be easier, and will come more naturally,
because of an agent's bodily characteristics; likewise, some
kinds of cognition will be difficult or even impossible because of the
body that a cognitive agent has.

Cognitive variation is sometimes explained by an appeal to bodily
variation.



The work of Lakoff and Johnson on the permeation of cognition by
metaphor, and that of Varela, Thompson, and Rosch on enactive cognition
(especially in the domain of color perception and categorization), both
exemplify the Body as Constraint thesis.

Body as Distributor: an agent's body functions to distribute
computational and representational load between neural and non-neural
structures.


Unlike the role of the body in the Body as Constraint thesis, here
the body is taken as sharing in cognitive processing itself, serving to
distribute cognitive tasks between brain and body. The Body as
Distributor thesis has three putative implications worth making
explicit:


Neural-realized cognitive structures may be more minimal than has been
traditionally assumed, and in principle absent altogether.

Bodily structures themselves can be at least partial realizers of the
physical machinery realizing cognitive processes.

Cognition is not bounded by the skull, so cognitive systems may include
both non-neural parts of the body and even the beyond-the-body
environment.



As these implications should suggest, it is Body as Distributor that
is in play for those who take embodied cognition to challenge
traditional views of mental representation (Gibson 1979 and Thelen and
Smith 1994; see also Glenberg 1997 on memory; Shapiro 1997 and Wilson
2004: ch.7–8 on exploitative representation). The appeal to
morphological computation (MacIver 2009), whereby properties
of anatomical structures (such as the shape of bats ears) play a
computational role in a cognitive process (such as echolocation), also
relies on the Body as Distributor thesis. And in subsuming both an
agent's bodily structures as well as aspects of its environment
as forms of non-neural structures, the Body as Distributor thesis draws
a connection between embodied cognition and versions of the extended
mind thesis that appeal to concepts such as realization and scaffolding
(Wilson and Clark 2009; R. Wilson 2004: ch.5–6; A. Clark 2003).

Closely related to the Body as Distributor thesis is:

Body as Regulator: an agent's body
functions to regulate cognitive activity over space and time, ensuring
that cognition and action are tightly coordinated.

We distinguish this version of the Embodiment Thesis from the Body
as Distributor thesis because of distinctive supposed implications that
ascribing a regulative role to the body in cognition has. These
include:

Bodily structures facilitate the real-time execution of complex
behaviors in response to complex and changing environmental events.

The
body does not merely function to transduce from world-inputs to
cognition, and later deliver worldly-output in the form of behavior
from internal cognitive processing, but is integral to the online
control of cognition itself.



Here the body has a feedback-driven role in cognitive processing,
and the Body as Regulator thesis has been especially prominent in
dynamic approaches to cognition (e.g., Port and van Gelder 1995; Beer
2000; Thelen and Smith 1994; cf. also Chemero 2009).

To summarize this section: we have distinguished three ways to
articulate the Embodied Cognition Thesis, each specifying a particular
way in which cognition depends on the body. Put more positively (and we
think informatively), there are three distinctive functions or roles
for the body that embodied cognitive science might ascribe: as a
constraint on cognition, as a distributor for cognitive processing, and
as a real-time regulator of cognitive activity. Such determinate forms
of the Embodiment Thesis can ascribe the body either a significant
causal role, or a physically constitutive role, in cognition.
4. Embodiment vs Tradition on Three Issues


In this section, we explore the revolutionary promise of embodied
cognitive science with respect to three standard topics in the
philosophy of mind and cognitive science: the modularity of mind, the
nature of mental representation, and nativism. (For alternative views
of situated cognition and modularity, representation, and nativism, see
Bechtel 2009; Rowlands 2009; and Rupert 2009a). We begin with some
general, putative contrasts between traditional and embodied cognitive
science.

Traditional views have tended to assume the existence of discrete,
internal representations realized by underlying, sharply distinct and
highly specified mechanisms in the brain. These mechanisms, in turn,
have been shaped by natural selection and encoded in genetic
structures. Thus, traditional views have been influential in
neuroscience and have been committed to individualism or internalism,
the claim that cognition supervenes on the intrinsic, physical
properties of the cognizer. The research strategy of
“methodological solipsism” (Fodor 1980, 1981) is one
classic version of this individualistic conception of cognition. The
way in which central topics have been addressed deeply reflects the
idea that cognitive phenomena can be accounted for locally, and that
elements beyond the boundaries of the skull are of interest only
insofar as they provide sensory input and allow behavioral output.
Borrowing from Susan Hurley (1998), mainstream views of the mind have
been committed to the “classical sandwich model”, the claim
that cognition (in the narrow sense) is segregated from processing in
low-level systems, therefore acting like meat in a sandwich em-breaded
by perception and
action.

Embodied cognitive science, by contrast, has modeled cognition as the
product of dynamic interplay between neural and non-neural processes,
with no general fracture between cognition, the agent's bodily
experience, and real-life contexts. Here the body is viewed as
constraining, distributing, or regulating cognitive processing.
Specifying how the body performs these functions in particular
environments raises the prospect that cognition itself is neither
bounded by the brain, nor perhaps even by the body itself.

We can express the prima facie contrast between traditional and
embodied cognitive science in terms of opposed views of mental
representation, computation, and realization. Whereas many traditional
accounts tend to see cognition as representationally localistic,
computationally fixed, and as properly characterized independently of
the realizing neuronal system, the features of the physical body and
the surrounding environment., embodied cognitive science tends to view
cognition as, representationally distributed, computationally dynamic,
and as properly characterized only by reference to details of bodily
realization. Embodied cognitive science thus motivates an interrogation
of some of the fundamental assumptions made in cognitive science. (Such
probing is also manifest in views of cognitive modeling that themselves
are not especially embodied, such as connectionism, which we leave
aside here.)

4.1 Modularity

 Modular systems are independent, domain
specific, encapsulated and hardwired, and function in a low-to-high
processing hierarchy. When modularity theory was introduced in
cognitive science (Fodor 1983), central cognition—cognition in
the narrow sense—was characterized as non-modular, and as sharply
distinct from modular peripheral systems, such as those governing
perception and motor control (plus, as Fodor says, language).
Fodor's claims about central cognition have been challenged by a
wide variety of researchers (e.g., Carruthers 2006; Sperber 2001;
Cosmides and Tooby 1997; Hirshfeld and Gelman 1994; see also R. Wilson
2005, 2008). These critics have argued that higher-cognitive processes
also meet modularity criteria. In fact, the view that cognition in the
narrow sense is also modular is sufficiently widespread across
developmental, evolutionary, and cognitive psychology perhaps to count
as the dominant form of modularity theory in contemporary cognitive
science, despite Fodor's contrary view (Fodor 2000).


Both the traditional, Fodorian account of modularity and its
rebellious, dominant offspring make reference to the body and the
environment only indirectly. Modularity theory in either guise has
little positive to say about the actual bearing of the beyond-the
skull-entities on cognitive performance, other than viewing them as a
source of input and repository of behavioral output. This view implies
that all the tough work, cognitively speaking, is performed by
cognition central alone, with peripheral processes simply providing
inputs and executing instructions. The claims that cognitive processing
occurs purely in the brain in a modular fashion, and accomplishes its
business by operating essentially independently from motor planning and
motor execution, however, are called into question by empirical studies
of embodied experience.

One example of embodied experience in relation to language, one that
exemplifies the Body as Constraint thesis is Glenberg's Indexical
Hypothesis (Glenberg et alia 2009; Glenberg and Kaschak 2002; Glenberg
and Robertson 1999, 2000). This view assumes that the understanding of
a sentence is achieved through the activation of relevant action
schemas, recruiting the same neural mechanisms active in overt
behavior, and by affordance combination. Consider the sentences:


(1a) After wading barefoot in the lake, Erik used his shirt to dry
his feet.

(1b)After wading barefoot in the lake, Erik used his glasses to dry
his feet.



Although both (1a) and (1b) are grammatical, the reason why (1b)
does not make the same kind of sense as (1a) does is because the
affordances of glasses do not mesh with the action of drying.
Understanding the meaning of such sentences requires knowing the
possibilities offered by objects referred to in them. These
possibilities are constrained by the interaction between bodily
capabilities and the referents. Another study showed that people are
faster to comprehend sentences where objects provide the affordances
needed to accomplish an action (e.g., chair with four wheels to move
large boxes) than sentences in which objects do not (e.g., a chair with
four missing wheels (Kaschak and Glenberg 2000).

Such findings indicate that the construal of meaning is constrained by
the embodied possibilities a scenario offers, and suggest that
sensorimotor processes contribute to language comprehension. This
conclusion would likely be rejected by modularists because their
commitment to encapsulation and domain specificity implies that
language processing cannot be modulated by motor information and
background knowledge. Borghi, Glenberg and Kaschak (2004) have also
reported that in language comprehension the perspective implied by the
sentence guides the retrieval of information about objects, making
conceptual knowledge available. Responses to questions over whether an
object (e.g., a table) is part of the location described in the
sentence are faster if there is compatibility between the object-noun
and the perspective implied by the sentence (e.g., eating in a
restaurant). Embodied responses are activated also in judging specific
objects' properties, suggesting that vision and action are
tightly integrated in the biological organism, and that they jointly
constrain cognitive processing.

The sharp distinction between vision and action that is part of the
traditional modular account of cognition has also been challenged by
studies of embodied experience. For example, when people are asked to
choose among stairs of different heights the one they can ascend most
easily their responses are consistent with respect to their
stair-climbing abilities (Warren 1984). Similar results have been
reported for judgments of grasping objects (van Leeuwen et alia 1994)
catching balls (Oudejams et alia 1996) and climbing walls (Wagman and
Carello 2001). Studies such as these support the general claim that
perceptual experience incorporates anticipated embodied interaction,
suggesting either that vision and action are integrated, or at least
feedback linked, in ways that are incompatible with the flow-through
model of cognition postulated by modularists (Hurley 1998; R. Wilson
2010).

Even ascribing emotions, intentions or beliefs to someone appears to
presuppose a certain bodily realization. Unlike traditional views,
which posit an innate Theory of Mind module to account for social
cognition (Leslie, 1987; Baron-Cohen 1995), an increasing number of
studies in the field (Rizzolatti and Craighero 2004; Rizzolatti et alia
1996; Gallese et alia 1996), suggests that the understanding of other
minds is primarily based on the motor expertise underlying our capacity
to act. Such embodied understanding is not only different in nature
from the modalities of mindreading as traditionally understood, but
also strongly indicates that the meaning of intentional behavior can be
grasped only if we know bodily, experientially or both what it is like
to be in a mental state.

The processing that underwrites a variety of mental
phenomena—discerning meaningful sentences from those that are
not, extracting the possibilities afforded by objects, and detecting
intentional behaviors—thus requires the orchestrated contribution
of many components, neural and non-neural. If bodily states and
brain's modality-specific systems serve as the grounding of
various aspects of our cognitive life, then traditional, amodal
domain-specific modules are not the meaningful elements of analysis
they have been assumed to be under the Disembodiment Thesis. The claim
that cognition heavily relies on the processes evolved to allow
organisms to interact effectively with the environment suggests that
the mind is not decoupled from embodied experience in the way
presupposed by traditional views in cognitive science. Rather, the body
can act as a constraint on cognition, and as a
distributor for cognitive processing (see Section 3).
4.2 Mental Representation

At the heart of the
traditional scientific understanding of cognition lies a particular
conception of mental representation (Fodor and Pylyshyn 1988; Newell
and Simon 1972). This conception claims that representations are
symbolic structures with quasi-linguistic and combinatorial properties,
act as vehicles of contents, and are what are primarily appealed to in
explaining intelligent behavior. Mental representations are symbolic
and abstract in that the same representation, such as
“table” is used to mean different kinds of table. They are
amodal in that the same representation can be employed when
“table” is written or spoken about. Such representations
are arbitrarily related to their referents because the way in which
they are formed and deployed, along with their characteristics, bears
no relationship to the physical and functional features of the
referents. Thus, on the traditional view, not only are the internal
representations employed in language, concept formation, and memory
essentially distinct from those processed by the sensorimotor system,
but their meaning is divorced from bodily experience. Supporters of
this view have been committed to at least three fundamental
principles:

information conveyed by a mental representation exhibits no
modality-specific feature. In this sense, representations are
autonomous from perceptual systems, bodily action, and their
operational details;

knowledge is organized propositionally, with the meaning of words
emerging from their relations to internal symbols. Determining the
meaning of a symbol is like looking up in the dictionary in order to
find which definition is given by its relation to other symbols;

internal representations are used to instruct motor programs, which are
essentially separate and independent from cognition. Hence, cognitive
processing is not inextricably shaped by bodily actions.


Recently, several alternative explanations for adaptive behavior
have gained attention. While diverse, they all call into question the
commitment to these principles. By advancing the idea that cognitive
activity re-uses the processes and the representations deployed in
perception and action, these explanations pose a serious challenge to
the notion that conceptual and semantic representations are (or must
be) amodal. There remain significant differences between these views
with respect to the radicalness of their anti-representationalist
leanings (see Chemero 2009; Hutto and Myin 2013; Myin and Degenaar 2014).

Amongst the most influential anti-representationalist views is
dynamical systems theory (Beer 1990, 2002, 2003; Brooks 1991a, 1991b,
2002; Thelen and Smith 1994; Van Gelder 1992). Dynamicists tend to
minimize and sometimes even deny the need for a centralized
representational processor. The notion of representation that these
authors challenge is relatively specific: an internal model capable of
reproducing the external environmental structure that is used by the
cognitive agent to guide its behavior in relative independence from the
world. Dynamical systems theory has proven to be popular in robotics
and in work on artificial life, which has tried to explain adaptive
behavior in terms of embodiment and embeddedness. As long as a situated
creature can sense its world so as to allow its body to be directly
influenced, abstract symbolic descriptions can be dispensed with.

Formulating an empirically adequate theory of intelligent behavior
without appealing to representations at all, however, faces insuperable
difficulties, and the idea that it is a relatively trivial matter to
scale up from existing dynamic models to explain all of cognition
remains wishful thinking and subject to just the problems that
motivated the shift from behaviorism to cognitive science in the first
place. For example, organism-environment interaction alone cannot
account for anticipatory behavior, which involves internal factors
beyond the immediate constraints of the environment to achieve or
fulfill future needs, goals or conditions. Domains raising a
representation-hungry problem (A. Clark 1997) are those involving
reasoning about absent, non-existent or counterfactual states of
affairs, planning, imaging and interacting (for a recent, contrasting
view, see Chemero 2009).

Moreover, it is unclear why embodied cognitive science could not also
be symbolic, representational, abstract, etc.. Puzzlement here is
magnified by the fact that many self-styled embodied approaches to
cognition are symbolic, representational, abstract, etc.. What
they offer are specific views of what mental symbols and
representations are, and how they function in our cognitive economy.
Typically, they replace the conception of propositional encoding with
one according to which symbols convey a modality-specific feature.

One view that adapts, rather than dispenses with, the notion of mental
representation is Lawrence Barsalou's perceptual symbols theory
(1999, 2003, 2008, 2009). This theory rests on the assumption that
human cognition does not consist of amodal representations that bear
arbitrary relations to their referents in the world, but rather
representations whose activation patterns include information from
various sensory modalities. For example, the symbolic structure that
represents the color of an object in its absence, say, during imagery
or problem solving tasks, depends upon the same neural system that is
recruited when the color is actually perceived. Thus, not only do
cognitive and perceptual mechanisms share representational states, but
cognitive processing essentially re-activates sensorimotor areas to run
perceptual simulations. A further implication is that perceptual
symbols are not independent of the biological system that embodies them
and the content conveyed would be likely to vary if intelligent systems
varied physically. Since appeal to the body and sensorimotor processes
constrains the nature of symbols available to cognition,
Barsalou's theory exemplifies the Body as Constraint
thesis.

While defenders of modal representations argue that there is little
direct empirical evidence for amodal representations, with the adoption
of the traditional model of representation largely motivated by
theoretical reasons (Barsalou et alia 2003, 85), and that their own
views are empirically plausible (see Pecher et alia 2003; Zwaan and
Yaxley 2003; Glenberg and Kaschak 2002; Martin and Chao 2001; Solomon
and Barsalou 2001; Martin et alia 2000; Spivey et alia 2000), they also
underestimate the difficulty of providing definitive evidence against
amodal accounts. As Machery (2007) points out, subjects'
performance can be accommodated by both modal and amodal explanations
(see also Rupert 2006). Since most amodal advocates (e.g., Simon 1995;
Fodor 1975) do not deny the involvement of perceptual areas during
cognitive tasks, such as visual imagery, showing that visual cortex is
activated when, say, imaging the green of an apple does not provide
evidence for Barsalou's theory over the amodal account. Moreover,
as traditionalists point out, some mental problems are solved without
(reportable) imagery, and subjects sometimes draw upon knowledge stored
in modality-free representational systems. Hence, generalizing results
concerning the use of perceptual simulations in some tasks to all
tasks, which is required for a general modal theory of representation,
is problematic.
4.3 Nativism

 Most researchers today recognize that cognition
develops as a result of the dynamic interplay of innateness and
learning, even if it is not always clear how this interplay proceeds.
On the two-dimensional view of nativism defended by one of us elsewhere
that distinguishes between strong and weak forms of nativism, (R.
Wilson 2004: ch.3), strong nativists are committed to the following two
theses:

the internal structures and processes necessary for the
development of an individual are rich, complex and causally
powerful;
processes external to the individual play a secondary
causal role in the acquisition and development of these structures.



Strong anti-nativists (such as classic empiricists), by contrast,
deny both of these general views.


Paradigms committed to strong nativism has produced remarkable
results in the field of cognitive development of infants, in domains
including arithmetic and physics (Baillargeon 2002, Baillargeon et alia
1985; Spelke et alia 1992, 1995). Those critical of nativism have
labeled nativism as antidevelopmental in nature (Haith 1998), and
claimed that conclusions that the mind consists of hard-wired traits
that unfold through maturation on a fixed pattern conflict with the
very idea of learning and flexibility (Quartz and Sejnowski 1997;
Thelen and Smith 1994; Bates et alia 1995; Karmiloff-Smith 1994). If
nativism were true, then the body and environment (including culture),
while relevant, should be regarded as no more than
“triggers” of ontogenetically determined features that
develop in predictable ways.

Although prima facie it might be thought that embodied cognition has no
distinctive implications for the ongoing debate between
“nativism” and “empiricism”, one contribution
of embodied cognitive science here lies in its specific exploration of
the roles that the body plays in cognitive processing. These roles
often pose challenges to strong nativist and strong empiricist views
alike. As such, embodied cognitive science does not simply assume, with
empiricists, that cognitive processing depends to a great extent on
environmental exposure, and that cognition is a causal reflection of
it. Further, while empiricists typically conceive of the world as
something objectively given to a subject, who thus forms a static
representation of it that then guides action, embodied cognitive
science addresses how the dynamic interplay between embodied agent and
the world generates cognition. It is this focus on dynamic, worldly
interplay that provides one link from embodied to embedded cognition
within situated cognitive science. Here we will explore whether, and in
what ways, embodied cognitive science has been thought to undermine
strong nativist claims.

By and large, embodied cognitive science generally downplays the
internal richness needed to perform complex behavior (Rupert 2009a),
highlighting the fact that cognitive processing and development are
deeply affected by perturbation across changes in the environment and
the body in action (Griffiths and Stotz 2000; Clark and Toribio 1994;
Thelen and Smith 1994; Varela, Thompson and Rosch 1991; Ballard 1991).
The body in action is a powerful constraint on how organisms conceive
their niche, as this constraint allows certain interactions and
experiences to have an effect on concept formation and understanding of
linguistic meaning. For example, by having fingers capable of grasping
objects and legs capable of walking and climbing walls, we sort and
categorize stimuli in ways that are radically different from, say, the
ways in which they are sorted by butterflies. One's own
ordinarily kinesthetic experiences essentially frame the acquisition
and development of cognitive structures. That appears to support the
significant contribution of the beyond-the-skull components in
realizing cognitive phenomena, and in terms of the framework we have
introduced (see section 3) it exemplifies both the Body as Constraint
and Body as Distributor theses.


Examples supporting the Body as Distributor thesis come
from non-nativist research on perception. Many putative modules, such
as those for sensory processing, develop partly via learning. In the
newborn, sensory modalities and cortical pathways are not as
differentiated as are those of mature brains but appear to emerge
through a series of strengthening interactions between the active body
and the environment (Quartz and Sejnowski 1997). This implies that in
infants few, if any, cortical pathways are domain specific and highly
specialized for most tasks, but during development by virtue of active
interactions with the environment get recruited and tuned up for
processing particular stimuli (Elman et alia 1996). Other empirical
results in the study of sensory modalities point in the same direction,
rejecting the idea that the senses are dedicated modules wired up for
perception at birth, with the body's interactions with the
environment playing only a secondary role in constraining or even
determining the nature of perceptual processing.


Conversely, it seems that many relevant capacities are not as
domain-specific as they may initially appear. For example, even though
the visual cortex appears dedicated to process a particular class of
information, it can be recruited by a different sense modality during
the reading of Braille—whether the subject has congenital,
acquired or induced (blindfold) blindness (Sadato et alia 1996, 1998;
see also Pascual-Leone and Hamilton 2001; Pascual-Leone et alia 1998).
If we extend these observations to face recognition, further support
for the hypothesis that specialization begins at later stage of
development, by virtue of experience, arises. Despite the fact that the
fusiform face area (FFA) is highly selective to faces (Kanwisher 2000;
Kanwisher et alia 1997), data suggest that it can also be activated in
response to non-face features, such as birds and cars, provided that
subjects have a substantial expertise in those categories (Gauthier et
alia 2000).
While this evidence does not call into question the idea of brain
specialization, it does indicate the role of bodily activity in
generating the differentiation of cortical pathways and the emergence
of specific functions, such as direction-selective responses in the
visual cortex. Embodied interactions with the world shape and control
the mechanisms responsible for this information processing, offering
support for the Body as Distributor and Body as Regulator
theses. Additionally, consider studies investigating how switching
handedness shapes cortical sensorimotor representations of finger
movements. A left to right switch of handwriting not only triggers a
general re-organization of motor dominance but also has a wider impact
on the functional neuroanatomy of the motor system that controls the
hands, influencing even motor tasks that require little skill
(Kloeppel et al 2007). The re-organization patterns found in converted
left-handers show how flexible the brain is in terms of which regions
can do what in response to educational training and hand use
throughout life, and how bodily features and interaction schemas are
conditions to which the brain is attuned to.  These studies can be
interpreted as suggesting that embodied interactions and the
beyond-the-body environment may themselves be partial realizers of the
corresponding cognitive activity. Including non-neural parts of the
body amongst the physically constitutive building blocks of cognition
suggests a more radical reading of embodied cognition.


Strong nativist claims may also be challenged when considering
cognition beyond the sense modalities. The issue concerning how much
language-specific information, if any, is innate has been one of the
dominant topic in cognitive science and the literature relevant to the
matter provides us with a wide range of possibilities. Some (Pinker
1994; Chomsky 1975, 1980), for instance, conclude that a specific
innate endowment help explain several aspects of children's
linguistic performance. Others (Cowie 1999; Bates 1998; Bates et alia
1995), instead, find this conception unparsimonious and puzzling from
an evolutionary standpoint, and claim that nonlinguistic learning
factors significantly constrain and control the range of possibilities
that characterize spoken language.


Encouragement for this latter view comes from evidence that shows
how language acquisition heavily depends, beyond environmental
exposure, on a number of different factors, including working memory
and general cognitive development (Seung and Chapman, 2000). First
language learning, for instance, builds on what children already know
about objects and events they experienced and this knowledge background
provides them with the basis onto which they can map words (see E.
Clark 2004 for reviews). Their ability to develop a language is also
affected by information they receive from adults and caregivers.
Accordingly, they will be sensitive and prone to pick up the
regularities they hear more often, such as frequent words, sounds,
inflections and grammar constructions (Saffran et alia 1996; De
Villiers 1985). Also social interactions appear to be crucial to the
process of language acquisition. Children more quickly learn to name
things that are physically present during a conversation and to which
the joint focus of attention is directed (E . Clark 2003; Tomasello
2003). Even language development in children affected by Autistic
Spectrum Disorder (ASD), commonly held to have a genetic origin, can be
modulated by parental and social factors, such as gender and high level
of education (Grandgeorge et alia 2009). The same holds for normal
development in which the size and production of a child's
vocabulary appears to be deeply related to parents' lexical
richness, monitoring of language interaction and socioeconomic status
(Hoff 2003; Hoff and Naigles 2002).


Implications of these findings support the Body as Distributor
thesis and place primary emphasis on the view that properties of
language-learning process heavily depend on the environmental and
social conditions within which an individual is raised. They also
indicate that direct engagement with the world and other individuals
regulate language functioning and that this functioning is inseparably
linked to and exploits the affordances of the situation within which
language processes take place.


Further support for the Body as Distributor thesis comes from
evidence that differences in early gesture explain disparities in
children's vocabulary size (Rowe and Goldin-Meadow 2009a).
Parents frequently appealing to gesture to translate their words
provide children with an opportunity to learn particular meanings by
hands and this parent-child gesture use accounts for the correlation
between early gesture of children at 14 months and later vocabulary
skills and size at 54 months. Although gesture is not the only factor
mediating language development, evidence strongly suggests that
exposure to a broader range of embodied interactions determines lexical
richness and vocabulary growth. Other findings (Rowe and Goldin-Meadow
2009b; Rowe et alia 2008;
 Ozçalişkan and
Goldin-Meadow 2005; Iverson and
Goldin-Meadow 2005; Acredolo and Goodwyn 1988) point in the same
direction: parents who gesture very frequently encourage the child to
gesture and gesturing may then influence language development. These
findings collectively suggest that if learning is body-based and
correlated with nonlinguistic aspects of behavior, then appeals to some
forms of innateness seem unlikely to account for such features of
language development.
Additional support for the Body as Distributor thesis comes from
data showing the role of gestures in reasoning. According to the
Gesture as Simulated Action (GSA) Framework (Hostetter and Alibabi
2008), gestures derive from mental simulations of actions and
perceptual states that people utilize when thinking, and they affect
the cognitive mechanisms in service of mental imagery, judgment and
problem solving by raising activation of sensorimotor areas (see
Alibabi et alia 2014 for a recent discussion).


It should be clear that no form of the Embodiment Thesis denies the
biological grounds of language processes and cognitive activity. What
it challenges is the adequacy of current research programs that
continue to build heavily on the idea that language and cognitive
development rely on processes and mechanisms that are domain-specific
and causally powerful. Embodied cognitive science has generated
evidence that suggests that non-neural structures are not merely
secondary resources. Rather, they variously foster, constitute, and
determine the acquisition and development of specific psychological
capacities, including those operant in language and perceptual
processing.
5. Empirical Domains for Embodied Cognition


In this section, we focus on five empirical domains in which an
embodied perspective has motivated novel insights about cognition and
the mind: visual consciousness, concepts, memory, the understanding of
other minds, and moral cognition. We limit discussion to these five
topics for reasons of space and clarity, not because these are the only
five to which these theoretical tools can be fruitfully applied (see
Gibbs 2006 for an extensive presentation and discussion of a wider
range of applications).
5.1 Visual Consciousness
 Visual consciousness is typically
viewed as a process within the brain. Yet the issues about the
relationship between conscious experience and neural structures are
empirically and philosophically controversial. Brain plasticity, for
example, provides some reason to think that there could be different
neural substrates for a given conscious visual experience, both within
the same individual at different times, or different individuals at the
same time. And even if one assumes that brain states alone suffice for
visual conscious experience (‘the minimal substrate thesis’
for short), one might still wonder whether neural correlates of visual
consciousness systematically match the content of perceptual
experience. While a considerable number of neuroscientists seem to
share the commitment to the matching-content doctrine, the literature
on the neural correlates of consciousness, as Noë and Thompson
(2004) point out, says very little, if anything, to prove that neural
states match visual conscious experience in content.

Hence, while seemingly obvious, upon closer examination the
brain-centered view (endorsed by prominent scholars, such as Koch
2004; Chalmers 2000; Metzinger 2000; Crick and Koch 1990, 1998; Crick
1996) appears problematic. Defenders of embodied cognition (most
notably Noë and Thompson 2004; Noë, 2004; O'Regan and
Noë, 2001; Thompson and Varela, 2001; Hurley, 1998;) advance
several arguments to cast doubt on the matching-content doctrine and
the minimal substrate thesis. One argument concerns the
incommensurability of the features of the content of visual
experience. Whereas the content of a visual experience is
experiential—that is, represented from a point of view, active
and attentional—none of these properties seem to be ascribable
to the content of a neural representational system (Noë and
Thompson 2004). Roughly put, while animals and people experience the
world relative to an egocentric standpoint and, phenomenologically
speaking, attend to portions of it that can be revealed and explored
through appropriate movements of the head and body, neurons do not
(Noë 2004; O'Regan and Noë 2001). Just as the sense of our
visual conscious experience depends on our implicit mastery of
sensorimotor contingencies—a set of rules concerning how sensory
stimulation varies as a function of movement—conscious visual
experience is a temporary pattern of skillful activity. It is
something we do (Noë and O'Regan 2002). (A thorough analysis of
the meaning of this claim, which affords at least two main
interpretations, one radical and one moderate, along with a review of
the debate it generated, can be found in Loughlin 2014, O’Regan
2011, Noe 2010, Shapiro 2010, Hickerson 2007). Whether or not these
authors are right, their claim is significant, as it urges
neuroscientists and philosophers to pursue a rather different approach
to understanding the basis of visual consciousness (Gangopadhyay,
Madary, and Spicer, 2010).

Two striking, experimentally-generated phenomena that indicate
surprising dimensions to the limitations of our explicit visual
knowledge have been invoked in support of embodied views of visual
consciousness. The first of these, change-blindness (Levins and Simons
1997), occurs when changes to a visual scene are coordinated with the
short periods during which a subject is saccading; the second,
inattentional blindness (Mack and Rock 1998; Simons and Chambris 1999),
when such changes occur while subjects are engaged in an
attention-intensive task. Under such conditions, subjects can fail to
report noticing even massive and (to other observers) striking changes
to a visual scene, such as the appearance of a dancing gorilla walking
through the middle of the scene.

These phenomena call into question the traditional assumption that the
brain reconstructs detailed and accurate internal models of the visual
field. This assumption, while widespread, has obscured two important
points, each motivating a shift to an embodied perspective on vision:


Vision is not a mere brain process devoted to constructing mental
models, but rather a skill of the whole situated, embodied agent, one
whose movements are crucial to visual agency (cf. Gibson 1979)
Visual processing should be recognized as a temporally extended
activity, where such activity is guided in part by the agent
itself.


That subjects are usually capable of noticing large changes to, and
unexpected elements in, the visual field, show several things. Most
importantly for present purposes, visual conscious experience is a
skillful engagement with the world and heavily depends on what we
do with our eyes, head and body to bring something into visual
consciousness. This implies that we must ‘do’ something in
order to engage in a conscious experience, and only by way of our
bodily movements can attentional processes be directed to the
environment. Thus, body and world not only matter as sources of causal
influence, but act as non-neural substrates of the machinery realizing
the enactment of visual consciousness.

Given the current state of neuroscience, the conclusion that phenomenal
experience cannot be explained by processes in the head seems hard to
accept (Block 2005). Distributed consciousness has inescapable
consequences. One might assume, for example, that if two people with
the same internal states were in different environments, their
conscious experience would be different and that a brain in a vat would
not have any visual conscious experience, because a brain in a vat has
no body and accordingly cannot interact with the environment as we
normally do.

Regardless of how convincing these arguments are, the genuine insight
about the nature of consciousness that embodied cognitive science has
generated is that the character of visual experience results from the
way we are dynamically hooked up to the world. Sensorimotor coupling
with the environment is crucial in providing the organism with the
proprioceptive/kinesthetic feedback necessary for the sense of
ownership of movement. When we touch an object, for example, we do not
exclusively have experience of it, but while touching and being
touched we experience ourselves moving, including the feeling of
controlling our own body in action. The account that agency (the sense
of controlling one's own body) originates in processes that evolved
for interaction with the environment—that is, mechanisms for
sensory processing and motor control (Tsakiris et alia 2007; Berti et
alia 2005; Haggard 2005; Farrer et alia 2003; Leube et alia 2003;
Farrer and Frith 2002; Chaminade and Decety, 2002)—suggests that
embodied experience underpins self awareness.
For a recent contrasting, yet embodied, account of agency and its
related disorders refer to work in phenomenological psychiatry (Fuchs
2011, 2010, 2009, 2005; Sass and Parnas 2001; Stanghellini
2004). Here, Frith’s (1992) attempt to ‘neuralizing’
consciousness, subjectivity and agency by causally tracing them back
to neurophysiological correlates is challenged by a view that places
strong emphasis on the notion of “lived corporality”.

Consistent with the view that consciousness and action may be closely
related, brain imaging studies have shown that delusions of control,
often seen in schizophrenic patients, are associated with a failure in
the mechanism by which the predicted consequences of an action are
linked to the intended sequence of motor commands (Frith et alia 2000).
Deficits of this kind suggest that the ability to control and hold
conscious thoughts may recruit the same mechanisms employed in
interactions with the
environment.
5.2 Concepts
 A common assumption in traditional
accounts is that concepts are context-independent amodal symbols. There
are several problems with this view and research is strong in
suggesting that conceptual capacities incorporate and are structured in
terms of patterns of bodily activity. Talking or thinking about objects
have been suggested to imply the reactivation of previous experiences,
and the recruitment of the same neural circuits involved during
perception and action towards those objects would allow the
re-enactment of multimodal information (color, size, width, etc). In
principle, the view that concepts are represented through abstract
symbols, rather than modality specific features, and cognition requires
stable forms of representation should be either dropped or strongly
revisited.

Evidence reveals that people construct concepts quite differently in
distinct contexts (Solomon and Barsalou 2001; Wisniewski 1998; Medin
and Shoben 1988; Barsalou and Ross 1986), and conceptualization can
vary across individuals and be different for the same individual in
distinct occasions. When subjects are asked to provide definitions for
categories, like bird and chair (see Barsalou 1993) only 44% of the
features in one person's definition exist in another
person's definition and a great deal of flexibility exists also
within individuals providing definitions for the same categories two
weeks later.


Also the pattern of interaction entertained with an object may
influence the way conceptualization is done. People dealing with
certain items and their structural parts more frequently and
extensively than others will tend to develop representations that
reflect the nature of their interactions with them. Not surprisingly,
distinct tree experts (such as a taxonomist, a landscape worker and a
park maintenance personnel) will categorize trees in ways that differ
from one other and from non-specialists (Medin et alia 1997). These
studies draw upon and reinforce the theory of perceptual symbol
systems (Barsalou 1999) and strongly indicate that perceptual and
motor mechanisms are engaged when people perform conceptual processing.
They also suggest that completely modality-free categories are rare,
because concepts, whether concrete or abstract, are distributed over
modality specific domains and involve reactivation of states in
sensorimotor systems (Boronat et alia 2005; Gallese and Lakoff 2005;
Barsalou et alia 2003; Tranel et alia 2003; Beauchamp and Martin 2007;
Martin and Chao 2001; Martin et alia 2000; Pulvermüller 1999;
Martin et alia 1996).


Further support for the theory that modalities play a pivotal role in
concept representation comes from work on property verification
(Solomon and Barsalou 2001; Pecher et alia 2003). Property
verification consists in deciding whether a property in a specific
modality fits an object, for example, the auditory
property loud for BLENDER and the visual
property green for APPLE. Findings demonstrated that subjects
performing the task responded faster and more accurately when the
previous verification was in the same modality (e.g.,
LEAVES—rustling) rather than in a different modality
(e.g., CRANBERRIES—tart) (Pecher et alia 2003). The
effect is explained by assuming that concept representation does not
activate the abstract features of an object but uses the same system
that is recruited for perception in different modalities. So, if the
auditory system is used for hearing the sound of a blender, then to
run a simulation (that is, form a concept) of the sound of a
BLENDER the auditory system will be recruited. Slower responses in
different modalities are associated with cost in switching attention,
and the effort made in switching modalities speaks against the idea
that knowledge is represented in a modality-free manner. Conversely,
there should not be any differences between same-modality and
different-modality conditions.  Extending this logic, various
embodied theorists have developed the hypothesis that even the
representation of emotion concepts is grounded in bodily simulations
and requires re-enacting forms of behaviors associated to an original
experience with a referent. Emotion concepts like
“disgust”, “fear” or “anger”
wouldn’t thus be amodal and abstract cognitive appraisals, but
representations embedded in bodily feelings, including facial
expressions and gestures, that generate meaning (see Niedenthal et
alia 2014 for a recent discussion on the embodiment of emotions and
emotion concepts). A related account is that understanding
others’ emotions builds upon the sensorimotor system that
grounds emotion concept formation in ourselves (Oosterwijk and Barrett
2014).



The fact that sensorimotor circuits get recruited, or rather,
re-used for purposes, like concept formation or language
processing, other than those they have been established for, such as
motor and sensory information processing, strongly favors modal and
embodied approaches to cognition over amodal and abstract ones. It also
offers an alternative perspective on several topics in the sciences of
the mind, including the degree of modularity in cortical organization,
the development of the brain and the localization hypothesis of
cognitive functions (see Anderson 2010 for a recent theory of neural
re-use).


While these findings have provoked revisions to traditional
accounts, the specific conclusion that sensorimotor processes are
physically constitutive of conceptual processing has not been
universally accepted on the grounds that the data are consistent with
different theories (see Mahon and Caramazza 2008; Rupert 2009b:
ch.9–10).
5.3 Memory
Consider the case of remembering how tools
and ingredients are displayed in the kitchen in order to instruct
someone to bake a cake. Traditional accounts would claim that
information storage and retrieval should be featured as essentially
independent from sensorimotor mechanisms. However, it does not seem
from empirical evidence that remembering appeals to the semantic
relatedness of ingredients and tool but rather consists of forming an
image revealing where ingredients and tools are located as a function
of our imagined movement throughout the kitchen. The location itself
serves as external aid to memory and imagined embodied actions within
the location afford the retrieval of information that help figure out
what is needed to bake a cake (Cole et alia 1997). That the time needed
to recall and retrieve information is constrained by the imaged spatial
layout with reference to the observer's body has been shown by a
different set of studies (Bryant and Wright 1999; see also Waller et
alia 2008; Nori et alia 2004; McNamara 2003; Waller et alia 2002).


Embodiment effects on memory have been also found in accomplishing
particular tasks, including reasoning and language understanding, and
several recent works suggest that memory reflects different bodily
capacities (M. Wilson 2001; Glenberg 1997; Carlson 1997). For instance,
hand-arm movements, that often accompany speech, do not play a mere
communicative role but facilitate the maintenance of spatial
representations in working memory (Wesp et alia 2001) and recalling
enacted action-phrases is significantly easier with respect to purely
verbal encoding (see Engelkamp, 1998 for a review). This effect
suggests that motor information may have become part of the memory
trace, thus indicating that action-phrases merely heard do not produce
the same effective encoding of real enacted action-sentences. Empirical
literature also supports the hypothesis that the memory trace includes
the body posture in which the experience was acquired (Barsalou et alia
2003). Drawing on congruent-posture and incongruent-posture conditions,
behavioral data have shown that the body contains the cue to recall
autobiographical events and the retrieval of a memory of a past
experience gets facilitated if the body posture assumed during that
experience is reassumed (Dijkstra et alia 2007). Further evidence of
the body's constraining capacities has been provided by Presson
and Montello (1994). In this experiment subjects were first asked to
memorize the location of objects in a room and then, while blindfolded,
were asked to point to the objects. Pointing was fast and accurate.
While some subjects were then asked to imagine rotating 90° and to
point to the objects again, the others were asked to actually rotate
90° and to point to the objects. In this second half of the
experiment, pointing was slow and inaccurate only for those who
imagined the rotation.
A recent, informative survey of memory-related empirical phenomena,
which also explains in what sense memory can be understood as an
embodied skill, namely, a process incorporating bodily experience, can
be found in Sutton and Williamson (2014).
5.4 Other Minds
Folk psychology is the commonsense
understanding we have of one another in terms of internal mental
states, such as beliefs and desires, that in combination can be used to
predict and explain human behaviour. The traditional perspective on
understanding folk psychology presupposes that our attributional
tendencies here are generated by an internal theory (Premack and
Woodruff 1978), and on some versions of this “theory
theory” view of folk psychology, this internal theory is executed
by a theory of mind module in the brain (Leslie 1987). Opponents of
this view, simulation theorists, minimize the role played by the kind
of abstract theorizing typical of theories, and question whether such a
theory of mind module exists. They argue that discoveries and findings
from neuroscience are consistent with the approach that sees social
cognition as a form of body-based simulation, and conceives of bodily
states as the building blocks of intersubjectivity (Oberman and
Ramachandran 2007; Iacoboni and Dapretto 2006; Rizzolatti and Craighero
2004; Ferrari et alia 2003; Rizzolatti et alia 2001; Umiltà et
alia 2001; Gallese and Goldman 1998; Rizzolatti and Arbib 1998).


The discovery of mirror neurons in macaques and humans–cells
with sensorimotor properties that fire both when performing an action
and when observing the very same action executed by other
individuals—has been seized on by simulation theorists and other
opponents of the theory-theory view in support of their preferred
explanatory frameworks. (For critical evaluations of fMRI and PET
studies aiming to show the presence of a mirror neuron system in humans
see Turella et alia 2009; see also Hickok 2008.)

Indirect evidence in support of a mirror system in humans comes from
studies on the reactivity of cerebral rhythm, the posterior alpha
rhythm and the central mu rhythm, during action observation. While the
mu rhythm is present during motor rest, it disappears when active
movements are performed. Electrophysiological results have shown that
observing the action executed by another individual blocks the mu
rhythm of the observer, thus providing evidence for a resonance
system, which links the observed action to the action of the
subject's own motor repertoire (Oberman et alia 2005; Cochin et
alia 1998; Gastaut and Bert 1954, Cohen-Seat et alia 1954). Another
body of evidence in support of the existence of an
observation/execution matching system in humans comes from transcranial
magnetic stimulation studies (Fadiga et alia 1995). Left motor cortex
of normal participants was stimulated both during the observation of
intransitive and goal-directed arm movements. Motor evoked potentials
were recorded from various hand muscles. The results showed a selective
increase in motor evoked potentials in the regions that participants
normally recruit for producing the observed action. That means that
when we observe a person grasping a cup of coffee the very same neural
population that controls the execution of the grasping movement becomes
active in the observer's motor areas.


On this view, it is the embodied imitation of the observed body in
action that directly enables us to recognize others as persons like
us, not an abstract, inferential and theory-like process. The
hypothesis that action understanding is based on a resonance mechanism
does not exclude the possibility that other processes, based on
movement descriptions, could influence this function. It simply
highlights the primacy of a direct, automatic and prereflexive
matching between the observation and the execution of action. By
accepting this premise the traditional tension between acting and
thinking considerably shrinks, as the capacity to detect the meaning
of the behaviors of others consists in employing the same resources
used to model our motor behavior. In a recent contribution
Craighero (2014) reviews the main findings of the mirror neuron
literature, and discusses the possible functions of a dedicated system
for coding actions, including the possibility it affords for the
acquisition of new motor abilities.

5.5 Moral Cognition
A dominant tradition in moral
theory for the past several centuries has placed reason at the center
of moral thought and moral behavior. Kohlberg's cognitive
developmental work on moral cognition (1969) reflects this spirit.
Kohlberg consistently endorsed, along the lines of classic cognitivism,
a rationalist model in which emotions and body states may be taken into
account by reason but it is pure reasoning that ultimately leads to
moral decisions. His paradigm inspired most leading studies in the
field, all characterized by the common view that cognitive processing
in the moral domain is disengaged from the economy of emotions and
body.

Recent work in embodied moral cognition challenges this paradigm.
Social intuitionist models, for instance, claim that many moral
judgments appear to be the result of affective components (Greene and
Haidt 2002; Haidt et alia 1993). Subjects presented with descriptions
of actions that were harmless but likely to produce a strong affective
response/reaction (e.g., eating one's pet dog after a car killed
it) often judge the action described by the sentence to be wrong. When
pressed to provide a justification, subjects typically focus on
nonexistent harms associated with the actions, indicating that
conscious reasoning is not a good predictor of their judgment of
wrongness. If affective reactions play a pervasive role in moral
judgments, a role that escapes (and is in fact masked by) conscious
reflection, this suggests that moral cognition is shaped and
constrained by “gut feelings”, rather than the product of
abstract reasoning.

Further examples supporting the embodied nature of moral cognition come
from the experimental literature that specifically addresses
disgust/repugnance (Lerner et alia 2004; Wheatley and Haidt, 2005).
Disgust involves strong physical components and explicit bodily
changes, such as nausea, stomach-turning, throat clenching,
food-expulsion, thrusting out of the tongue, and wrinkling of the nose.
Even if disgust evolved as a food-related reaction indicating that a
substance should be either avoided or expelled, it is also an emotion
of social rejection, extending its reach and influence into the domain
of moral cognition (Niedenthal et alia 2005; Prinz 2004).


Recent experiments have shown, for example, that the feeling of
disgust induced by the exposure to a bad smell or dirty looking room
makes moral judgments more severe (Schnall et alia 2008a), and that
subjects who physically cleanse themselves then find certain moral
actions to be less wrong than do participants not exposed to a
cleanliness manipulation (Schnall et alia 2008b). These ‘moral
harshness’ effects may be induced even for moral evaluations of
certain issues or groups. In a recent study (Inbar et alia 2009)
experimenters found that people reported more negative evaluations
towards gays and lesbians when exposed to a noxious odor in the room
than when no odor was present. Even anger has been shown to deeply
shape the representations available to moral judgment. Anger over a
traffic incident before going to work may lead to an increased reliance
on prejudice when interviewing a job candidate afterwards (DeSteno et
alia 2004).
Accumulating evidence that perception, emotion and judgment are
grounded in sensorimotor mechanisms motivated the body-specificity
thesis (Casasanto 2011, 2009; de la Vega et alia 2012; Brunyé
et alia 2012), the claim that people with different kinds of bodies
tend to think differently. Right handers, for example, conceptualize
“good” and “bad” in terms of motor dominance
rather than cultural conventions and tend to prefer or make positive
evaluations of people or objects presented in their right side
(Casasanto 2014, 2009, Casasanto and Henetz 2012). This space-valence
implicit mapping can be manipulated via changes in body- environment
interactions. Subjects who lost the use of their dominant hand or wear
a glove that impairs motor fluency show a reversal of their space
–valence associations (Casasanto and Chrysikou 2011). For a
detailed discussion of how affective judgments incorporate patterns of
bodily interaction with the environment and are constrained by a range
of embodied capabilities see Casasanto 2014.

The empirical literature suggests that the specificity of one's
own bodily cues and affective reactions (e.g., nausea, arousal) guide
and constrain cognitive processing in social and moral domains. In
addition, it suggests that dramatic deficits occur when subjects do not
exhibit and make use of these cues and reactions. Damasio's
somatic marker hypothesis (1994, 1996) claims that bodily states,
normally triggered during emotional experiences, are re-enacted
whenever certain situations occur or are considered, and such
re-enaction avoids deleterious consequences of one's course of
action. When the capacity to integrate these feelings (either positive
or negative) with one's own knowledge of facts is severely
compromised, as is the case in ventro-medial-prefrontal cortex (VMPFC)
patients, making judgments and decisions is severely impaired. As a
‘gambling task’ (Bechara et alia 1994) reveals, in the
absence of embodied states (e.g., anticipatory skin conductance
response) VMPFC patients miss a fundamental source of information about
the possible outcomes associated with different actions (see also
Bechara et alia 2000). If Damasio's hypothesis is correct, then
the affective and bodily feedback implicated in various types of moral
judgment do not simply lead to different understandings and
conceptualizations of the situation at hand, but are part of the
physical machinery realizing cognitive processes.

While we think there is broad empirical support for the idea that
sensorimotor activity and central cognitive processing are more deeply
dependent on one another than previously thought, and for the view that
bodily activity can constrain, distribute, and regulate neural
activity, embodied cognitive science has also been invoked in support
of more radical philosophical ideas about cognition and the mind. For
example, as we noted in Section 3, some have argued that embodied
cognition implies that cognition itself leaks out into the body (and
ultimately the environment (A. Clark 2008). Proponents of the
traditional view that cognition is skull-bound have argued, in reply,
both that this inference is mistaken and the view it leads to is
implausible and metaphysically extravagant (Rupert 2009b; Adams and
Aizawa 2008; Aizawa 2007). We take up such further philosophical issues
in Section 6 below.
6. Sharper Divides Over Embodied Cognition

The difference that embodied cognition makes to the three issues we
discussed in Section 4—the modularity of mind, the nature of
mental representation, and nativism about the mind, remains a live
issue of debate in the philosophy of mind and cognitive science. The
same is true of the interpretation of the particular empirical results
described in Section 5.


We think that some of these disagreements both reflect and
contribute to sharper divides over the significance of embodied
cognitive science. We discuss four such issues in this concluding
section, structuring our discussion around four corresponding
questions:

 What payoffs for
empirical research does embodied cognitive science have?
To what extent can the
findings generated by embodied cognitive science be accommodated by the
tools of traditional cognitive science?
What is the
relationship between embodied cognition and the extended mind
thesis?
What implications for
agency, the self, and subjectivity does accepting the embodied nature
of cognition have?


Our aim here is not to provide extensive answers to these questions,
but to indicate briefly what our review of contemporary work on
embodied cognition indicates about the issues that they raise. We take
each in turn.
6.1 Payoffs for empirical research
Insofar as
embodied cognitive science has its origins in a variety of
dissatisfaction with traditional cognitive science, it has explored
novel questions about cognition and generated results that have, in
some cases, been unexpected. As we have seen in the previous section,
embodied cognitive science continues to produce empirical research that
is interesting, novel, and controversial. In this respect, embodied
cognitive science is not simply (or chiefly) a philosophical mantra
empty of empirical content, but a cluster of perspectives on cognition
whose empirical orientation and rootedness cannot be questioned.


But there is an alternative position that one might take on this
question that is more circumspect about the empirical payoff of
“embodied cognition”. While there is no doubt about the
empirical “oomph” of embodied cognitive science, the extent
to which this work either challenges traditional views or requires one
or another of the determinate forms of the Embodiment Thesis that we
articulated—Body as Constraint, Body as Distributor, and Body as
Regulator—might be questioned. For example, Lawrence Shapiro
(2011) has argued that the views of Lakoff and Johnson on metaphor,
thought, and the body are fully compatible with central tenets of
traditional cognitive science, such as the idea that cognition
centrally involves computation over internal mental representations
(see also Shapiro 2010). Robert Rupert (2009b) has argued more
generally for compatibility between the empirical findings of embodied
cognitive science and the core assumptions of traditional cognitive
science. Likewise, Fred Adams (2010) has argued that one should
distinguish between the empirical premise in arguments for the
embodiment of cognition, and a requisite logical-metaphysical premise,
and that the latter of these is seldom supported. (Adams focuses on
Glenberg's work on meaning affordances (Glenberg and Kaschak
2002; see also Glenberg and Robertson 2000, Glenberg et al. 2005), but
his claims are quite general). From this perspective, one should sift
the empirical wheat of embodied cognitive science from the
revolutionary, philosophical chaff that has characterized that movement
from the outset. This issue, in turn, brings us to our next issue.
6.2 Accommodation by traditional cognitive science
For the most part, questioning whether
embodied cognitive science delivers on the revolutionary front has
proceeded not by drawing on general considerations—say, of the
underdetermination of theory by data—but by a detailed
consideration of particular empirical results (cf. Rupert 2009b: ch.11,
however). By its nature, this kind of argument, which we endorse the
need for, is time- and space-consuming, especially given the diversity
of work that falls under the label “embodied cognition”.
This is more so in the evaluation of this type of challenge to
proponents of embodied cognition. Here we settle for making one general
point about the state of the dialectic here, and state where we believe
the burden of proof lies.


Suppose that we simply grant the historical claim that the focus and
orientation of traditional cognitive science has not taken cognition to
be dependent, in any significant way, on the body. What does this imply
about the explanatory power of traditional cognitive science vis-a-vis
the Embodiment Thesis? Recall that we have analyzed the Embodiment
Thesis in terms of three determinate theses about the nature of the
dependence of cognition on the body, each with its own particular
implications:

Body as Constraint: an agent's body
functions so as to significantly constrain the nature and content of
the representations processed by that agent's cognitive
system.

Body as Distributor: an agent's body
functions so as to distribute computational and representational load
between neural and non-neural structures.

Body as Regulator: an agent's body functions so as to regulate
cognitive activity over space and time, ensuring that cognition and
action are tightly coordinated.



Those seeking to resist the challenge that one or more of these
views poses to traditional cognitive science have two primary options:
to deny the truth of the corresponding thesis, or to reject the
inference(s) from that thesis to claims about what traditional
cognitive science can and cannot explain.


Defenders of traditional cognitive science have considerable
dialectical power available here, and they have made effective use of a
familiar argumentative strategy in resisting the embodied cognition
challenge: to grant that there is a weak or limited sense in which one
or more of these particular embodiment thesis is correct, but argue
that the inferential gap between such theses and the rejection of views
such as computationalism and representationalism is not bridgeable
(Adams 2010, Rupert 2009a, 2009b) a strategy that those critically
sympathetic to embodied cognitive science have also made effective use
of (e.g., Shapiro 2010, 2011). To this extent, the burden of proof
currently lies squarely with proponents of embodied cognitive science
who hold that the revolutionary promise of embodied cognition is real
to show how those gaps can be bridged.
6.3 Embodied cognition and the extended mind thesis
One such putatively radical implication of embodied
cognition is the Extended Mind Thesis, which says that an agent's
mind and associated cognitive processing are neither skull-bound nor
even body-bound, but extend into the agent's world. Unlike the
Embodiment Thesis, this thesis arose via more explicitly
philosophically-driven discussions—of functionalism (Harman
1988), of computationalism and individualism (R. Wilson 1994, 1995:
ch.3–4), and of belief (Clark and Chalmers 1998). It thus bears a
different kind of relationship to empirical work in cognitive science
than does the idea of embodied cognition. Despite the legacies of these
different histories, as we noted in Section 1, embodied cognition and
extended cognition have recently come to be viewed as peas in the same
pod, as variants of situated cognitive science.


The first point to draw attention to is that nothing in any of the
three determinate forms of the Embodiment Thesis entails the extended
mind thesis. Thus, the view that cognition is embodied (in some
specific sense: constrained, distributed, or regulated) is compatible
with the denial of the view that cognition is extended. Expressed in
terms of the Body as Distributor thesis, perhaps cognitive processing
is distributed by the body across neural and non-neural resources, but
all of the relevant non-neural resources are contained within the
boundaries of the body. We believe that this is the position
occupied by the core of the embodied cognitive science community. (For
example, Barsalou's recent [2008] review paper on “grounded
cognition”, which completely omits mention of any the large
philosophical literature on extended cognition, is indicative of this
state of affairs.)


Second, many of the most influential defenses of the extended mind
thesis appeal to considerations only tangentially related to the
body—to computationalism and individualism (R. Wilson 1994), to
distributed and group-level cognition (Hutchins 1995), to parity
principles (Clark and Chalmers 1998), to realization (R. Wilson 2001,
2004: ch.5–6). For this reason, debate over those arguments and the
extended view of the mind they putatively support have only recently
become conjoined by advocates (R. Wilson 2010; A. Clark 2003, 2008) and
critics (Adams and Aizawa 2008; Rupert 2009b) alike. This recent, joint
consideration is of mutual benefit to discussions of both embodied and
extended cognition.


Thus, and third, despite their independence, some have claimed that
the most powerful arguments for one of these views also provide strong
reasons to accept the other. For example, Andy Clark (2008) argues from
the active embodiment of cognition to the extended mind thesis.
Similarly, some of the most trenchant objections to one of these views
would also appear also to serve as the basis for rejecting the other.
For example, critics of the extended mind thesis, such as Adams and
Aizawa (2008) and Rupert (2004, 2009b), have objected that those
arguing for the thesis have confused or elided the distinction between
external causes of cognition and external constituents
of cognition. This charge of committing a
“coupling-constitution fallacy” is also readily made
against particular embodied cognition views, such as Alva
Nöe's (2004) view that perceptual experience is constituted
by sensorimotor abilities (see Prinz 2009; Aizawa 2007; Rupert 2006;
Block 2005). While there may be relevant differences between embodied
and extended cognition that imply that such arguments and objections do
not transfer, there are at least default, parity considerations that
put the burden of proof on those claiming those differences.


Fourth, there may be deeper reasons for thinking that embodied and
extended cognition stand or fall together. Rupert (2009b), for example,
has recently argued against both embodied and extended cognition in
part by making a positive case for what he calls the cognitive
systems view of the boundaries of cognition, and that this view
suggests, together with our best empirical science, that cognition
begins and ends in the brain. If Rupert is correct, then cognition is
neither embodied nor extended because both views are incompatible with
an independently-motivated account of the brain-bound nature of
integrated cognitive architectures.


Conversely, in laying out a general conception of situated cognition
as cognitive extension, Wilson and Clark (2009) claimed that
“many forms of embodied cognition, properly understood, will turn
out to involve just the kinds of cognitive extension that we articulate
here” (p.56), a promissory note that one of us (R. Wilson 2010)
has attempted to cash in offering the following explicit argument tying
together embodied and extended cognition:

The function of some
visual processes is to guide action via visual information.

A primary way to
achieve that function is through the active embodiment of visual
processing (à la Body as Distributor).
Visual processes are
actively embodied in this sense just if in their normal operation in
natural environments, these processes are coupled with bodily
activities so as to form an integrated system with functional gain.

But visual processes
that are actively embodied, in this sense, are also extended. Thus,

Some visual processes,
and the visual systems those processes physically constitute, are
extended.



Clearly, as the premise that explicitly draws a connection between
the Embodiment and Extended Mind theses, (4) is where this argument is
likely to be scrutinized by those skeptical of the conclusion to this
argument. Whether that can be done while accepting (1)–(3),
however, is unclear and the kind of issue that requires further
attention in this debate.
6.4 Agency, the self, and subjectivity
If the mind
is not skull-bound but at least embodied, and perhaps even extended,
then what view should we adopt of the self, subjectivity, and
consciousness? The penultimate paragraph to Clark and Chalmers (1998)
advocated the view that, to put it colloquially, where mind goes, the
self follows: if the mind is extended, for example, so too is the self
(see also A. Clark 2001, 2003). Since much of what matters to the
identity of one's self is cognitive in nature, at least on
traditional views of the self and personal identity, this
“self-follows-mind” view seems a natural default.


If the boundaries of the self shift with those of the mind out from
skull to body, or even from body to world, as the self-follows-mind
view implies, then accepting embodied or extended cognition will have
interesting implications concerning autonomy, sociality, personal
identity, and responsibility. For example, it might be that in some
cases interfering with someone's peripersonal space, the space
close to the body, or even certain of one's belongings, will have
a comparable moral significance as interfering with a person's
body. And as Clark and Chalmers (1998) suggested in their final
paragraph, certain forms of social activity might be reconceived as a
kind of thought activity. The social distribution of human
decision-making would also mitigate individual's responsibility
for a transgression, thereby producing dramatic ramifications for our
practices of attributing legal culpability. In effect, if situational
forces and environmental contingences played a physically constitutive
role in decision-making processes so as to become partial realizers of
one's own behavior, as the so called ‘Frail Control
Hypothesis’ seems to suggest (see Churchland and Suhler 2009 for
critics to this view), then human beings would have little if any
control over their actions and presumably no normative competence.


Against the self-follows-mind view, Wilson (2004: 141-143) has
argued that even if one accepts that the mind is extended, there are
reasons to resist the idea that the self is likewise extended. This
resistance turns on precisely the kinds of implications indicated
above, and their often radical, deeply counter-intuitive, and puzzling
consequences. For example, if subjects of cognition (or agents, or
individuals) are themselves distributed across brain, body, and world,
then why should we punish just one bit of this individual, the bit
inside the body, when it commits a crime? (Consider this a truncated
reductio.) More generally, while agents as the subjects of
cognition are not just a bundle of neural circuits and bodily
experience, re-casting agency and subjectivity within the extended
framework likely requires a far more comprehensive and somewhat uneasy
reconceptualization of notions such as normative competence, freedom
and control, and personal identity. Perhaps this simply tells us that
much further exploration is needed concerning how embodied experiences
in real-world contexts shape cognitive processing. Or perhaps it
suggests that more conservative strategies should be employed to
account for what the subjects of cognitive processing really are.


One such strategy is to appeal to the ready-made distinction between
the subject or agent of cognition, which can be readily
identified as being where the locus of control for a given cognitive
system is, housed in the agent's body, and the cognitive
systems in which cognitive processing is realized, which are often
extended (R. Wilson 2004, ch.5–6). Such a distinction is put to
antecedent use in making sense of extended biological systems,
such as spiders and the webs they spin—these organisms are
bounded, roughly speaking, by their cohesive, organic bodies, but still
act in the world through the extended biological systems they construct
(R. Wilson 2005, ch.1–4). Thus, an appeal to this distinction here is
not ad hoc, and provides a principled basis for a more conservative,
traditional view of agency and the self within an extended cognition
framework.