Emergence is a notorious philosophical term of art. A variety of
theorists have appropriated it for their purposes ever since George
Henry Lewes gave it a philosophical sense in his 1875 Problems of
Life and Mind. We might roughly characterize the shared meaning
thus: emergent entities (properties or substances) ‘arise’
out of more fundamental entities and yet are ‘novel’ or
‘irreducible’ with respect to them. (For example, it is
sometimes said that consciousness is an emergent property of the
brain.) Each of the quoted terms is slippery in its own right, and
their specifications yield the varied notions of emergence that we
discuss below. There has been renewed interest in emergence within
discussions of the behavior of complex systems and debates over the
reconcilability of mental causation, intentionality, or consciousness
with physicalism.
 
1. A Brief History


 British emergentists of the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth
centuries may not have been the first to embrace emergentist ideas
(Caston 1997 provides evidence that Galen was an emergentist), but
they were certainly the first to work out a comprehensive emergentist
picture. Much of the defense of emergentism in this era was centered
on chemistry and biology. The question was whether or not the
constitutive principles and features of these sciences were reducible
to those of the corresponding ‘lower level’ sciences of
physics and chemistry, respectively. Reduction-minded
‘mechanists’, who supposed that the processes of life were
governed wholly by physical-chemical principles, contended with the
extreme anti-reductionist ‘vitalists,’ who posited an
entelechy, a primitive substance or directing principle embodied in
the organism which guided such characteristic vital processes as
embryonic development and the regeneration of lost 
 parts.[1]
 Emergentists sought to develop a middle way, eschewing vital
substances but retaining — in some sense —
irreducibly vital qualities or processes.
1.1 J.S. Mill


Here is the early exponent of emergentism, J.S. Mill:

 
 All organised bodies are composed of parts, similar to those
composing inorganic nature, and which have even themselves existed in
an inorganic state; but the phenomena of life, which result from the
juxtaposition of those parts in a certain manner, bear no analogy to
any of the effects which would be produced by the action of the
component substances considered as mere physical agents. To whatever
degree we might imagine our knowledge of the properties of the several
ingredients of a living body to be extended and perfected, it is
certain that no mere summing up of the separate actions of those
elements will ever amount to the action of the living body
itself. (A System of Logic, Bk.III, Ch.6, §1)




 In analyzing such phenomena, Mill introduces the notion of a
heteropathic effect and the attendant notion of a
heteropathic law, in contrast to homopathic effects and
laws. He does this by way of contrasting two modes of the conjoint
action of causes, the ‘mechanical’ and
‘chemical’ modes. Mill says that the essence of the
mechanical mode is that the total effect of several causes acting in
concert is identical to what would have been the sum of effects of
each of the causes acting alone. The laws of vector addition of
forces, such as the parallelogram law, are for him the paradigm
example of the conjoint action of causes in the mechanical mode. The
total effect of two forces F and G acting in concert on a
particle p just is the effect of F acting on
p followed by G acting on p. In imitation
of the principle of ‘Composition of Forces’ operative in
physics, Mill named the corresponding principle for causes the
‘Composition of Causes.’ In Mill's terminology, effects of
multiple causes produced in the mechanical mode — i.e.  in
accordance with the Composition of Causes — are known as
‘homopathic effects.’ Laws which subsume such causal
relations between causes and their homopathic effects are known as
‘homopathic laws.’


By contrast, the chemical mode of the conjoint action of causes is
characterized by a violation of the Composition of Causes: the joint
action of multiple causes acting in the chemical mode is not the sum
of effects of the causes had they been acting individually. This mode
of conjoint action of causes is named after the chemical reactions
which typically exhibit it, e.g.:


NaOH + HCl → NaCl + H2O



(Sodium hydroxide + hydrochloric acid produces sodium chloride +
water)



 The product of this neutralization reaction, water and a salt, is
in no sense the sum of the effects of the individual reactants, an acid
and a base. These are ‘heteropathic effects,’ and the
causal laws which subsume them are ‘heteropathic laws.’
Heteropathic laws and effects correspond to a class of laws and effects
that the later British Emergentists dubbed ‘emergent.’ Mill
clearly believed in the existence of heteropathic laws within chemistry
and biology, while supposing it conceivable that psychology generally
could be reduced to physiology.


Within each level, however, there are also numerous homopathic laws
characterizing causal interactions which obey the Composition of
Causes. One might wonder how homopathic and heteropathic laws interact.
On Mill's account, higher-level heteropathic laws will supplement
but not supplant lower-level laws (whether homopathic or heteropathic).
Regarding the relations between lower-level and higher-level laws in
the case of vegetable and animal substances, Mill writes:

    Those bodies continue, as before, to obey mechanical and chemical
laws, in so far as the operation of those laws is not counteracted by
the new laws which govern them as organized beings. (1843, p. 431)



The compatibility of higher-level and lower-level laws is due in some
cases to lower-level laws containing ceteris paribus clauses,
and in others to the fact that lower-level dynamical laws will simply
sum over more causes. For example, Newton's second law, F =
ma, does not state that only physical forces
count. If any basic chemical or biological forces exist, they will be
summed with whatever physical forces there are in the dynamical
context, and that will be the value of F in the
 equation.[2]


It is important to note that both homopathic and heteropathic
laws for Mill are causal laws, and homopathic and heteropathic
effects are effects of causal interactions. Thus, Mill's
dynamical account of emergence (heteropathic interactions)
differs importantly from the synchronic, noncausal covariational
account of the relationship of emergent features to the conditions that
give rise to them that C. D. Broad was to espouse in Mind and Its
Place in Nature (1925). Mill's account is thus an important
precursor to the atypical dynamical accounts of emergence in the
literature today. (See the discussion of Humphreys' and
O'Connor's accounts in Part IV below.)
1.2 C. D. Broad


British Emergentism reaches its zenith with C.D. Broad's
monumental The Mind and Its Place in Nature (1925), reworked
from his Tarner lectures delivered at Cambridge in 1923. It is
interesting to note that the aim of the Tarner Benefaction was to found
a course of lectures on “the relation or lack of relation between
the various sciences.” This is none other than the familiar
contemporary question of the autonomy of the special sciences
(Fodor 1974). We suggest below that Samuel Alexander's conception of
emergentism is actually the closest parallel to the modern view known
as nonreductive physicalism.


Broad sees his inquiry as aimed at answering a general question of
which the debate between the Mechanists and Vitalists about living
organisms is a particular instance: “Are the apparently different
kinds of material objects irreducibly different?” (1925, p. 43)
Broad is not merely interested in resolving the Mechanist-Vitalist
controversy, but in answering the broader question of whether the
special sciences are reducible to more general sciences (e.g. biology
to chemistry), and ultimately to physics. He writes:


[One] wonders whether the question ought not to have been raised
long before the level of life … The question: Is chemical
behaviour ultimately different from dynamical behaviour? seems just as
reasonable as the question: Is vital behaviour ultimately different
from non-vital behaviour? And we are much more likely to answer the
latter question rightly if we see it in relation to similar questions
which might be raised about other apparent differences of kind in the
material realm. (1925, p. 44)




He suggests that two types of answers to the reducibility question
can be given, mechanism and emergentism. Broad characterizes the
purest form of the Mechanist position thus:


[There] is one and only one kind of material. Each particle of this
obeys one elementary law of behaviour, and continues to do so no matter
how complex may be the collection of particles of which it is a
constituent. There is one uniform law of composition, connecting the
behaviour of groups of these particles as wholes with the behaviour
which each would show in isolation and with the structure of the group.
All the apparently different kinds of stuff are just differently
arranged groups of different numbers of the one kind of elementary
particle; and all the apparently peculiar laws of behaviour are simply
special cases which could be deduced in theory from the structure of
the whole under consideration, the one elementary law of behaviour for
isolated particles, and the one universal law of composition. On such a
view the external world has the greatest amount of unity which is
conceivable. There is really only one science, and the various
“special sciences” are just particular cases of it. (1925,
p. 76)




As Broad notes, it is easy to see that there are weaker Mechanist
positions which are still consistent with the idea and spirit of
Mechanism, though for economy's sake we shall not explore such
variants here.


The Emergentist position taken by Broad rejects the deep ontological
unity posited by the Mechanist position. If emergence obtains,
theorists would be forced to rest content with a hierarchy of various
sciences ranging from the universal — physics — to the
most specific (1925, p. 77). While Emergentists, too, are physical
substance monists (“there is only fundamentally one kind of
stuff”), they recognize “aggregates [of matter] of various
orders” — a stratification of kinds of substances, with
different kinds belonging to different orders, or levels. Each level
is characterized by certain fundamental, irreducible properties that
emerge from lower-level properties. Correspondingly, there are two
types of laws: (1) ‘intra-ordinal’ laws, which relate
events within an order, i.e., a law connecting an aggregate of that
order instantiating a property of that order at a time with some
aggregate of that order instantiating some other property at a certain
time; and (2) ‘trans-ordinal’ laws, which characterize the
emergence of higher-level properties from lower-level ones. Emergent
properties are identified by the trans-ordinal laws that they figure
in; each emergent property appears in the consequent of at least one
trans-ordinal law, the antecedent of which is some lower-level
property:


 A trans-ordinal law would be one which connects the properties of
aggregates of adjacent orders. A and B would be
adjacent, and in ascending order, if every aggregate of order
B is composed of aggregates of order A, and if it
has certain properties which no aggregate of order A
possesses and which cannot be deduced from the A-properties
and the structure of the B-complex by any law of composition
which has manifested itself at lower levels … A trans-ordinal
law would be a statement of the irreducible fact that an aggregate
composed of aggregates of the next lower order in such and such
proportions and arrangements has such and such characteristic and
non-deducible properties. (1925, pp. 77-78)




Trans-ordinal laws are what we now call ‘emergent laws,’
fundamental, irreducible laws that describe a synchronic, noncausal
covariation of an emergent property and its lower-level emergent base.
Emergent laws are not metaphysically necessitated by any lower-level
laws, boundary conditions and any lower-level compositional
principles.  On the epistemological status of emergent laws, Broad
comments that:


 There is nothing, so far as I can see, mysterious or unscientific
about a trans-ordinal law or about the notion of ultimate
characteristics of a given order. A trans-ordinal law is as good a law
as any other; and, once it has been discovered, it can be used like
any other to suggest experiments, to make predictions, and to give us
practical control over external objects. The only peculiarity of it is
that we must wait till we meet with an actual instance of an object of
the higher order before we can discover such a law; and that we cannot
possibly deduce it beforehand from any combination of laws which we
have discovered by observing aggregates of a lower order. (1925,
p. 79)




Here we see the unpredictability element of Emergentism that is often
discussed. The idea is that even the ideal theorist — Broad's
mathematical archangel — with complete knowledge of the
lower-level aggregates and properties will be helpless at predicting
what might emerge from a specific lower-level structure with certain
properties prior to observing the actual instantiation of the complex,
higher-level event. This unpredictability, however, is not
constitutive of emergence, but rather a consequence of the
metaphysical irreducibility of the emergent properties and the
trans-ordinal laws they bring in their
 train.[3]
1.3 Samuel Alexander


Though Broad was the last of the major British emergentists, we
reserve the final slot for Samuel Alexander, who, inspired by his
contemporary, C. Lloyd Morgan, gives a very different account of
 emergence.[4]
 Alexander's views are embedded within a comprehensive metaphysics,
some crucial aspects of which are, to these readers, obscure. What is
crystal clear in Alexander is that the activity of a living human
being consists in a single kind of process whose fundamental qualities
are physico-chemical:


We are forced, therefore, to go beyond the mere correlation of the
mental with these neural processes and to identify them. There is but
one process which, being of a specific complexity, has the quality of
consciousness…. (vol.II, p. 5)




He is also adamant that, such identity of process notwithstanding, the
mental process is “not merely neural” (p. 6), but
“something new, a fresh creation” (p. 7). It involves a
“distinctive quality” (p. 55) which emerges,
rather than merely being resultant, from the neural process
(p. 14).


What is the upshot of this conception for the relationship of physical
principles to those exclusively concerned with higher levels of
organization? Interpreters usually focus on texts such as these:


Physical and chemical processes of a certain complexity have the
quality of life. The new quality life emerges with this constellation
of such processes, and therefore life is at once a physico-chemical
complex and is not merely physical and chemical, for these terms do
not sufficiently characterize the new complex which in the course and
order of time has been generated out of them. Such is the account to
be given of the meaning of quality as such. The higher quality emerges
from the lower level of existence and has its roots therein, but it
emerges therefrom, and it does not belong to that level, but
constitutes its possessor a new order of existent with its special
laws of behaviour.  The existence of emergent qualities thus described
is something to be noted, as some would say, under the compulsion of
brute empirical fact, or, as I should prefer to say in less harsh
terms, to be accepted with the “natural piety” of the
investigator. It admits no explanation.  (pp.46–7)


 To call [a structure] organism is but to mark the fact that its
behaviour, its response to stimulation, is, owing to the
constellation, of a character different from those which physics and
chemistry are ordinarily concerned with, and in this sense something
new with an appropriate quality, that of life. (p.62)



Such texts can easily be read as claiming that emergent features
generate ‘configurational forces’ which supplement those
of basic physics and chemistry. However, this reading is
mistaken. First, it does not comport easily with the equally repeated
claim that


The [emergent] quality and the constellation to which it belongs are
at once new and expressible without residue in terms of the
processes proper to the level from which they emerge…
(p.45, emphasis added; cf. p.67)




At this point, we should ask ourselves, what exactly are
‘qualities’, according to Alexander? Consider that he
remarks that speaking of ‘the new emergent quality’ of
life really just “sums up” a number of interconnected
features, such as self-regulation, plasticity of behavioral response,
and reproduction (p.63; cf. p.70). This might suggest that talk of
‘a new quality’ is very often shorthand for what
is in fact a complex set of features. Still, given the emphatic nature
of his claims for the newness of emergent qualities, Alexander is
probably best read as holding that corresponding to our summary terms
“life” and “mind” are certain primitive
features or other associated with the organized structures.


Do these primitive features exert a primitive form of causality,
additional to the forms exerted at the level of basic physics? (Do
they involve fundamental ‘configurational
 forces’?)[5]
 Here, the answer is certainly negative. For he allows that a
Laplacian calculator of unlimited computational ability who knew only
the basic principles of physics and the state of the universe at a
pre-biological stage might predict the subsequent distribution of
all matter in physical terms (pp.327–9). Contrast this with
our first quotation from Mill.


Still, the Laplacian calculator could not predict the
emergent qualities and processes of living and minded systems.
Furthermore, these emergent qualities are causally relevant to the
physical — they are not epiphenomenal (pp.8–9). The reader will
be forgiven for doubting whether these disparate claims form a
coherent package. Alexander's attempt to harmonize them is as follows:
Emergent qualities are novel qualities that supervene on a distinctive
kind of physico-chemical process. (They appear always and only in such
complex systems, as a matter of empirical law.) They display their own
characteristic form of activity, yet in a manner fully consonant with
the completeness of fundamental physics. They are
not epiphenomenal because, owing to supervenience, they pass a
counterfactual test for causal efficacy: A given neural
process would not possess its specific neural character if it were not
also mental (pp.8–9). While “strictly speaking,” the
mental qualities cause the coming to be of other mental qualities, and
the associated, underlying neural qualities have neural effects, since
there is but one process having both kinds of qualities, there is also
a sense in which the mental state (identical to the neural state)
causes a subsequent neural state (pp.12–13).


In sum, for those familiar with contemporary views on mental
causation, we have a view very close in detail to a standard form of
non-reductive physicalism (NRP). (The one major aspect of Alexander's
view that is not clearly in agreement with standard forms of NRP is
that his property type-dualism is apparently not matched with an
acceptance of token identity. As we read Alexander, qualities are
immanent to physical things, so distinctness of primitive qualities
entails both type and token non-identity.) NRP emphasizes that while
special sciences do not ‘compete with’ or complete
physics, they do have an explanatory ‘autonomy’ —
they use distinctive concepts and laws that cannot be derived from
physical laws and concepts using only definitions and other necessary
truths. Compare Alexander:


To call [a structure] organism is but to mark the fact that its
behaviour, its response to stimulation, is, owing to the
constellation, of a character different from those which physics and
chemistry are ordinarily concerned with, and in this sense something
new with an appropriate quality, that of life. At the same time, this
new method of behaviour is also physico-chemical and may be exhibited
without remainder in physico-chemical terms, provided only the nature
of the constellation is known…Until that constellation is
known, what is specially vital may elude the piecemeal application of
the methods of physics and chemistry…. If the study of life is
not one with a peculiar subject-matter, though that subject-matter is
resoluble without residue into physico-chemical processes, then we
should be compelled ultimately to declare … psychology to be a
department of physiology, and physiology of physics and
chemistry…. (pp.62–3)



Such is the account to be given of the meaning of quality as such.
The higher quality emerges from the lower level of existence and has
its roots therein, but it emerges therefrom, and it does not belong to
that level, but constitutes its possessor a new order of existent with
its special laws of behaviour. (p.46)



These two passages have a very Fodorian
 flavor.[6]
 They both emphasize the non-competing yet distinctive nature of
special science “patterns of behavior,” and the second
seems to give a natural-kind criterion for qualityhood. This reading
is bolstered by Alexander's discussion of the reducibility of
chemistry to physics, on which he is neutral. He says that the
question hinges on whether “chemical matter is not so
distinctively different in the way of complexity from physical matter
that ‘chemism’ is properly a new quality emerging from
physical existence” (p.61). Allowing in this way that the
‘distinctiveness’ of process that is the criterion of an
emergent quality comes in degrees fits what we should expect on a
Fodor-style, natural-kind picture.
1.4 Summary of British Emergentism


Let us sum up our discussion of the British Emergentists.  Common to
all these theorists is a layered view of nature. The world is
divided into discrete strata, with fundamental physics as the base
level, followed by chemistry, biology, and psychology (and possibly
sociology). To each level corresponds a special science, and the
levels are arranged in terms of increasing organizational complexity
of matter, the bottom level being the limiting case investigated by
the fundamental science of physics. As we move up the levels, the
sciences become increasingly specialized, dealing only with a smaller
set of increasingly complex structures with distinguishing
characteristics which are the science's focus. The task of physics is
to investigate the fundamental properties of the elementary
constituents of nature and the laws that characterize them, whilst the
task of the special sciences is to elucidate the properties had by
complex material substances and the laws governing their
characteristic behavior and interactions.


Crucial to an account of emergence, however, is a view concerning the
relationship of such levels. On this score, we find that
there are, in fact, two rather different pictures of emergence, one
represented by Mill and Broad, and the other represented by Alexander.
For Mill and Broad, emergence involves the appearance of primitive
high-level causal interactions that are additional to those of the
more fundamental levels. Alexander, by contrast, is committed only to
the appearance of novel qualities and associated, high-level causal
patterns which cannot be directly expressed in terms of the more
fundamental entities and principles. But these patterns do not
supplement, much less supersede, the fundamental interactions. Rather,
they are macroscopic patterns running through those very microscopic
interactions. Emergent qualities are something truly new
under the sun, but the world's fundamental dynamics remain unchanged.
2. Epistemological Emergence


When we turn to the contemporary scene, easily the more popular
approach to emergence descends from Alexander, not Mill and Broad.
Though details differ, representatives of this approach characterize
the concept of emergence strictly in terms of limits on human
knowledge of complex systems. Emergence for such theorists is
fundamentally an epistemological, not metaphysical, category. (Hence,
their views of emergence are in fact weaker still than Alexander's
position. Alexander held that emergent qualities were metaphysically
primitive, although they did not alter the fundamental physical
dynamics.) The two most common versions are these:


Predictive: Emergent properties are systemic features of
complex systems which could not be predicted (practically speaking; or
for any finite knower; or for even an ideal knower) from the
standpoint of a pre-emergent stage, despite a thorough knowledge of
the features of, and laws governing, their parts.

Irreducible-Pattern: Emergent properties and laws are
systemic features of complex systems governed by true, lawlike
generalizations within a special science that is irreducible to
fundamental physical theory for conceptual reasons. The macroscopic
patterns in question cannot be captured in terms of the concepts and
dynamics of physics. Although he does not use the language of
emergence, Jerry Fodor (1974) expresses this view nicely in speaking
of the ‘immortal economist’ who vainly tries to derive
economic principles from a knowledge of physics and the distribution
of physical qualities in space-time.



This distinction is probably not a sharp one. Our use of it is
intended to reflect the variable emphases of different emergence
theorists, and such theorists do not often carefully distinguish their
views from those of others. For some theorists, emergence reflects the
unpredictable macroscopic outcomes of the world's dynamical
evolution. Hence, they focus entirely on diachronic relationships
between matter in pre- and post-complexity stages. For others,
emergence concerns the relationship between micro- and macro-level
theories, and so is equally manifested in synchronic patterns at
different levels.


An instance of the temporal view of epistemological emergence may be
Popper (1977). Popper confusingly blurs together a variety of issues
— the status of general causal determinism, the metaphysics of
indeterministic causality, and the synchronic relationship of
properties of microscopic parts and macroscopic wholes. In places he
argues that there are emergent features in the structural/dynamical
sense, and it is likely that he also believes that there are emergent
features in the stronger, ontological sense which we will discuss in
the following section. Nonetheless, it is the case that he often
equates emergence with unpredictability (see, e.g., p.16) and suggests
that the failure of causal determinism is crucial to emergence in
any of these senses:


If this Laplacian determinism is accepted, nothing whatever can be
unpredictable in principle. So evolution cannot be emergent.  (p. 22)

 
 Any change in the higher level (temperature) will thus influence the
lower level (the movement of the individual atoms). The one-sided
dominance [of higher on lower levels of matter] is due … to the
random character of the heat motions of the atoms…. For it
seems that were the universe per impossible a perfect
determinist clockwork, there would be no layers and therefore no such
dominating influence would occur.

 This suggests that the emergence of hierarchical levels or layers,
and of an interaction between them, depends upon a fundamental
indeterminism of the physical universe. Each level is open to causal
influence from lower and from higher levels. (p.35)


 A weaker variety of the prediction-based construal of emergence is
offered by Mark Bedau (1997). He defines the notion of a
weakly emergent state (contrasted with strong
emergence of the sort discussed in our following section) thus: a
macroscopic state which could be derived from a knowledge of
the system's microdynamics and external conditions but only
by simulating it, or modeling all the interactions of the
realizing microstates leading up to it from its initial conditions. He
has in mind in part chaotic phenomena, whereby long-range
outcomes of a process are sensitive to very small differences in its
initial conditions, owing to the nonlinear character of the system's
dynamics. One might strengthen Bedau's condition by noting that when
the existence of such processes is combined with the apparent fact
that fundamental physical properties can be specified only
approximately by empirical methods, the upshot may well be a kind of
unpredictability in principle, at least for any finite, empirical
observers. However, pace Popper, this does not require the
system's dynamics to be indeterministic. (See Kellert 1993 for a
thorough and accessible discussion of the mathematic features of
chaotic dynamics and their philosophical implications; see Wilson 2013 for discussion of whether and when considerations of nonlinearity provide a basis for characterizing emergence of metaphysical varieties.)


There are a variety of recent instances of the second,
structural/dynamic view of epistemological emergence. Much of this
discussion has been influenced by the intertheoretic account of
reduction, and its antithesis, emergence, given by Ernest Nagel
(1961).  (Nagel himself gives such an analysis of the notion of
emergence on pp.366–374.) Paul Teller (1992) suggests a definition he
intends to have broad application: a property is emergent if and only
if it is not explicitly definable in terms of the
non-relational properties of any of the object's proper parts
(pp.140–1). As he notes, on this construal, emergent properties will
include both relational and non-relational properties. He also admits
that this will include fairly uninteresting cases.


As with Bedau, Andy Clark (1997, 2000) has his eye on complex systems
theory (and cognitive science more particularly) in articulating a
notion of emergence, but prefers one that will encompass an even
broader range of phenomena that are striking from a macroscopic point
of view. He suggests that a phenomenon is emergent just in case it is
best understood by attention to the changing values of a
collective variable — one that “tracks a pattern
resulting from the interactions among multiple elements in a
system,” which may include aspects of the environment (1997,
p.112). Emergence will come in degrees as a function of the complexity
of interactions subsumed by the collective variable.


Robert Batterman (2001), by contrast, connects philosophical
discussion of emergence to intertheoretic ‘reduction’
within the physical sciences. He takes his point of departure from the
fact that in actual scientific practice, reductions of theories to
more fundamental ones are rarely, if ever, ‘smooth,’ in
the sense that all of the central concepts of the less fundamental
theory are directly characterizable and explainable in terms of the
resources of the more basic theories, even given all necessary
information concerning initial and boundary conditions. He discusses a
range of striking phenomena arising at singular asymptotic
limits for the relation of the two theories. The properties of systems
at the limit values, he argues, cannot be derived from the
more fundamental theories; instead, they require one to make use of a
special-case theory involving elements of both the original two. These
are the properties Batterman calls ‘emergent.’ Note that
no claim is made concerning their ontological novelty or impact upon
the fundamental physical dynamics.  Rather, it is a point about the
adequacy of the would-be reducing theories: while all the
phenomena may be ‘grounded in,’ or ‘contained
by,’ the reducing theory, the theory itself is unable to capture
or explain the distinctive nature of the phenomena.


A general rule of thumb in perusing the diverse recent literature on
emergence is that emergence encompasses whatever striking macroscopic
phenomena the theorist in question is interested in. Philosophers
desire the concept to have clear application, and their different foci
within the special sciences lead them to slant the notion in somewhat
distinct ways. (For discussion see section 4 of this article.)
3. Ontological Emergence
3.1 The Standard Ontology of Emergence: Supervenience Emergentism


Recall that among the British Emergentists, Mill and Broad had a more
robustly ontological conception of emergence than the notions
discussed immediately above. This is not always transparent in their
writings, as they sometimes use epistemological criteria for
identifying the metaphysical concept they have in mind. Here we offer
a composite picture that captures what is implicit or explicit in a
widespread understanding of ontological emergence from that era right
up to much recent writing. We dub this view “supervenience
emergentism.”


Ontological emergentists see the physical world as entirely
constituted by physical structures, simple or composite. But
composites are not (always) mere aggregates of the simples. There are
layered strata, or levels, of objects, based on increasing
complexity. Each new layer is a consequence of the appearance of an
interacting range of ‘novel qualities.’ Their novelty is
not merely temporal (such as the first instance of a particular
geometric configuration), nor the first instance of a particular
determinate of a familiar determinable (such as the first instance of
mass 157.6819 kg in a contiguous hunk of matter). Instead, it is a
novel, fundamental type of property altogether. We might say that it
is ‘nonstructural,’ in that the occurrence of the property
is not in any sense constituted by the occurrence of more fundamental
properties and relations of the object's parts. Further, newness of
property, in this sense, entails new primitive causal powers,
reflected in laws which connect complex physical structures to the
emergent features. (Broad's trans-ordinal laws are laws of this sort.)


Emergent laws are fundamental; they are irreducible to laws
characterizing properties at lower levels of complexity, even given
ideal information as to boundary conditions. Since emergent features
have not only same-level effects, but also effects in lower levels,
some speak of the view's commitment to “downward causation” (a phrase
originating in Campbell 1974).


Earlier emergentists did not give very clear accounts of the
relationship between the necessary physical conditions and the
emergents, apart from the general, lawful character of
emergence. Given the requisite structural conditions, the new layer
invariably appears.  Recent commentators have suggested that we think
of this in terms of synchronic supervenience, specifically
“strong” supervenience. So, for example, McLaughlin (1997)
defines emergent properties as follows: “If P is a
property of w, then P is emergent if and only if (1)
P supervenes with nomological necessity, but not with logical
necessity, on properties the parts of w have taken separately
or in other combinations; and (2) some of the supervenience principles
linking properties of the parts of w with w's having
P are fundamental laws” (p. 39). (A law L is a
fundamental law if and only if it is not metaphysically necessitated
by any other laws, even together with initial conditions.) And though
he does not say it explicitly here, it's clear that he thinks of this
supervenience synchronically: given the ‘basal’ conditions
at time t, there will be the emergent property at
t. Van Cleve (1990) and Kim (1999, 2006a, 2006b) also think
of the relation as a metaphysically contingent but nomologically
necessary form of (synchronic) strong supervenience. (For further
discussion see the entry on supervenience.)


On this picture, emergence is seen as a brute supervenience relation
which holds in virtue of emergent laws, which are fundamental
laws. This picture of ontological emergence is widely regarded as the
standard formulation of ontological emergence, of which Broad's (1925)
account of emergence and more recent accounts such as Van Cleve (1990), Kim (1990, 1999,
2006a), O'Connor (1994), McLaughlin (1997), and Wilson (1999, 2002) are
examples. Though supervenience emergentism remains the received
picture of ontological emergence (Crane 2001a, Kim 2006a), several
questions about its consistency with major emergentist tenets has
pushed emergentists toward alternative conceptions of ontological
emergence. In particular, it is unclear how supervenience emergentism
allows for novel, downward causal powers for emergent properties
whilst still guaranteeing the covariation of emergent properties with
basal properties in a way consistent with the fundamental emergent
laws which ensure the supervenience of emergent properties on basal
properties (Wong 2010). This suggests that if emergent properties are
not to be epiphenomenal or explanatorily irrelevant, we need to
introduce novel causal roles for emergent properties, which is a key
motivation driving both alternative conceptions of ontological
emergence discussed in the next subsection. One question is what the
consequences of such a move are for the debate with the physicalist in
terms of key claims such as the causal closure of the physical. (See Wilson 2015 for an overview of accounts of emergence with an eye to their consistency with physicalism.)
3.2 Alternative Conceptions of Ontological Emergence
3.2.1 Emergence as a non-supervening, causal relationship


Timothy O'Connor (2000a, 2000b) contends that the standard construal
of emergence as a synchronic supervenience relation is suspect. If
token emergent features are metaphysically primitive, their necessary
appearance in the right circumstances should admit of causal
explanation. This leads him to adopt a non-supervening, dynamical
conception of emergence, which relation is nonsynchronic and causal in
character. (This work repudiates in part his (1994), which allowed
that emergence might be thought of as a species of supervenience.) He
argues that supervenience will fail given a dynamical account, once we
consider the contribution that other, prior emergent
properties play (alongside more fundamental properties) in determining
which emergent properties are instanced at a time. As some of these
antecedent factors may be indeterministic, there could be two
nomological possibilities instancing the same physical properties at
t while instancing different emergent
 properties.[7]
O'Connor suggests that dynamical emergence is a promising approach to
understanding the relation of mental and neural states. Though a
dynamical account of emergence appears to be a coherent model, one
question about this view is whether it is merely a metaphysical
possibility or whether there are actual instances of phenomena which
fit this model. (For more details see O'Connor and Wong (2005), which
sets up the dialectical context within which this emergentist view is
situated.) 
3.2.2 Emergence as ‘fusion’


Paul Humphreys also rejects the general suitability of the formal
relation of supervenience of basal conditions to emergent features,
and instead favors a metaphysical relation he terms
“fusion”: “[Emergent properties] result from an
essential interaction [i.e. fusion] between their constituent
properties, an interaction that is nomologically necessary for the
existence of the emergent property.” Fused entities lose certain
of their causal powers and cease to exist as separate entities, and
the emergents generated by fusion are characterized by novel causal
powers. Humphreys emphasizes that fusion is a “real physical
operation, not a mathematical or logical operation on predicative
representations of properties.”


To explain the dynamics of fusion, Humphreys makes use of the notion
of levels:


(L) There is a hierarchy of levels of properties
L0, L1, …,
Ln, … of which at least one distinct level
is associated with the subject matter of each special science, and
Lj cannot be reduced to Li,
for any i < j.
 



He also assumes a Kimian event ontology, where events are property
instantiations at a time. Events, so understood, are the relata of
causation. (When Humphreys speaks of “property instances,”
we take it that he is referring to Kimian events, not tropes.)
Humphreys formally represents events as follows:
Pmi(x
ri) denotes an i-level entity
(i.e., xr) instantiating an
i-level property (i.e., Pm), for
i > 0. Properties and entities are indexed to the first
level at which they are instanced. Now let “*” denote the
fusion operator. If
Pmi(x
ri)(t1) and
Pni(x
si)(t1) are
i-level events (i.e., the event of x
r's exemplifying Pm at
t1, etc.), then the fusion of these two
events,
[Pmi(x
ri)(t1)*P
ni(xs
i)(t1)], produces an
i+1-level event,
[Pmi*P
ni][(xri)+(x
si)](t2),
which can also be denoted as
Pli+1[(xri)+(x
si)](t2).
The fusion operation is not necessarily causal, but it is a
diachronic, dynamic
 process.[8]



The key feature of a fused event
[Pmi*P
ni][(xri)
+
(xsi)](t2)
 is that it is a unified whole, in the sense that its causal effects
cannot be correctly represented in terms of the separate causal
effects of its constituents. Moreover, within the fusion the original
property instances
Pmi(x
ri)(t1) and
Pni(x
si)(t1) no longer
exist as separate entities and they do not have all their i-level
causal powers available for use at the i+1-level. (But note
that the objects themselves will often retain their separate
identities, e.g.,
[(xri) +
(xsi)] in the example
of fusion above.)  Properties that undergo fusion do not
realize the i+1 property instance, as supervenient,
realized properties would be co-present with subvenient
properties. Rather, in the course of fusion the basal conditions
become the i+1 property instance. For this reason,
supervenience cannot obtain, as the basal conditions do not co-exist
with the emergent
 feature.[9]


This innovative feature of fusion emergentism — the destruction
of the basal property instances once they are fused into the emergent
property instance — is what enables the emergent property
instances to escape worries about their being causally superfluous
(the causal exclusion worry that we will discuss in 3.3.1), since the
fused property instances, which are the emergence bases of the
emergent property instance resulting from fusion, are no longer
present to compete causally with the emergent property instance.

The primary questions for Humphreys's view all concern the distinctive
character of fusion: What is the extent of applicability of the fusion
model? Do certain consequences of the novelty that fusion emergentism
introduces undermine the innovation? Quantum entanglement is held up
as an example for fusion. Even if we accept that fusion provides us
with a model for quantum entanglement, the question still remains
about the plausibility of fusion operation outside cases of quantum
entanglement. A more serious worry is whether the novelty of fusion
that the base instances are destroyed presents internal problems for
the view (Wong 2006). One example is the correlation problem. For the
range of special science properties that have empirically established
lower-level correlates with which they are copresent, if we are to
treat them as fusion emergents, then, as the framework stands, we
appear to be committed to denying the copresence of their lower-level
correlates, which is empirically implausible. Such worries link back
to the issue of the extent of applicability of the view.
3.3 Objections to Emergence


Here we will briefly note two central arguments against the coherence
of ontological emergence.
3.3.1 Kim's metaphysical argument


In “Making Sense of Emergence” (1999), Jaegwon Kim argues
that emergent properties are epiphenomenal. His argument uses variants
on two much discussed arguments he has developed in the course of
challenging the tenability of contemporary nonreductive physicalism
— the downward causation and causal exclusion arguments.

Downward causation argument. Kim argues that both upward and
same-level causation entail downward causation. Consider a property
M1, at nonfundamental level L and time
t1, that causes another property
M2, at nonfundamental level L and time
t2. (Read this as shorthand for the
occurrence of M1 at
t1
 .) Since M2 is a
property at a nonfundamental level, by hypothesis, it has emergence
base, P2, at t2 at level
L-1. Kim sees a tension in this situation because there
appear to be two answers to why M2 is instantiated
at t2: First, M2 is
instantiated at t2 because M1
at t1 caused it (ex hypothesi); second,
M2 must of (at least) nomological necessity be
instantiated at t2 because its emergence base,
P2, is present. There appears to be two competing
causes for the instantiation of M2 at
t2, jeopardizing M1's causal
responsibility for M2. Kim suggests that to
preserve M1's causal responsibility for
M2, we must suppose that M1
causes M2 via causing its emergence base
P2. This gives us a general principle: that we can
cause a supervenient (and hence emergent) property only by causing its
emergence base.


Note that both O'Connor and Humphreys resist Kim's two-stage argument
here at this first stage, since they deny that emergent properties
will synchronically supervene. For O'Connor, the conditions on an
emergent feature are all prior to its occurrence, as would be true of
any primitive property described by physics. And emergent properties
themselves can have emergent properties directly at the emergent
level. For Humphreys, the ‘basal’ properties
undergo fusion, and so cease to exist in the
resulting emergent property. Thus the fusion
Pli+1[x
li](t1) can
directly cause
Pmi+1[x
mi](t2)
without first causing the i-level properties which upon undergoing
fusion would result in
Pmi+1[x
mi](t2).

Causal exclusion argument. Kim's next step is to argue that
emergent properties are epiphenomenal (and hence emergentism is
incoherent). Here is his argument:


…I earlier argued that any upward causation or same-level
causation of effect M* by cause M presupposes
M's causation of M*'s lower level base, P*
(it is supposed that M* is a higher-level property with a
lower-level base; M* may or may not be an emergent
property). But if this is a case of downward emergent causation,
M is a higher-level property and as such it must have an
emergent base, P. Now we are faced with P's threat
to preempt M's status as a cause of P* (and hence of
M*). For if causation is understood as nomological
(law-based) sufficiency, P, as M's emergence base,
is nomologically sufficient for it, and M, as P*'s
cause, is nomologically sufficient for P*.  Hence P
is nomologically sufficient for P* and hence qualifies as its
cause. The same conclusion follows if causation is understood in terms
of counterfactuals — roughly, as a condition without which the
effect would not have occurred. Moreover, it is not possible to view
the situation as involving a causal chain from P to
P* with M as an intermediate causal link. The reason
is that the emergence relation from P to M cannot
properly be viewed as causal. This appears to make the emergent
property M otiose and dispensable as a cause of P*;
it seems that we can explain the occurrence of P* simply in
terms of P, without invoking M at all. If M
is to be retained as a cause of P*, or of M*, a
positive argument has to be provided, and we have yet to see one. In
my opinion, this simple argument has not so far been overcome by an
effective counter-argument. (p. 32)


We shall not analyze this complex argument here against supervenience
emergentism, which turns on subtle issues concerning the nature of
causation and counterfactuals. (See Wong (2010) for a detailed
analysis of this argument and responses on behalf of the emergentist.)
However, the reader should note that Kim's argument above does not
employ the premise of physical causal closure: that every physical
event has a sufficient physical cause, assuming it has a cause at
all. Once this assumption is in play, the more familiar variation of
the causal exclusion argument where physical causal closure plays a
driving role is available. (In his most recent work (2006a), Kim
employs just such an argument against emergence.) Kim's (1998)
precisely parallel argument against the ostensibly different
contemporary view, nonreductive physicalism, has been trenchantly
criticized by Loewer (2001b).  The reader may also consult the rather
different form of reply on behalf of the emergentist made by Wilson (1999) and Shoemaker
(2002). A more recent response is the development of interventionist
accounts of causation and their application to special science
causation (Woodward 2008, Campbell 2010, Menzies and List 2010). Such
accounts probe two aspects of the dialectic: first, the causal
exclusion argument does not go through because there may not be a
control variable for the effect (of which the emergent or higher level
property is a putative cause) at the basal level, and so no basal
cause to compete with; second, on such an account of causation, the
thesis that physics is causally closed is not well formed, as
causation is primarily a macroscopic phenomena at which potential
interventions can be made, rather than a microscopic phenomena. Thus
there is no challenge to the causal efficacy of higher level
properties from lower level proerties. But the availability of such
dialectical strategies also calls into question the need to develop a
robust form of ontological emergentism in order to vouchsafe the
causal efficacy of emergent properties. (For further discussion see
the entries on
 mental causation,
 physicalism, and
 causation and manipulability.)
3.3.2 Pepper's Epistemological Objection to Emergence


Stephen Pepper (1926) developed a form of criticism of emergence that
resurfaces in different guises. Pepper's own argument is
metaphysical. He argued that emergent laws quantifying over primitive
macroscopic qualities will be epiphenomenal, since we can also
represent ‘novel’ macroscopic phenomena of the sort the
emergentist envisions within a more comprehensive physical theory. We
need only augment the theory to include variables for the precise
structural conditions in which the novel phenomena occur, and then
draw up more complex functional laws of dynamical evolution that
specify the ‘ordinary’ behavior when the new variables are
not satisfied and the ‘novel’ behavior when the variables
are satisfied. Now, taken as a metaphysical objection, this is easily
 overcome.[10]
 If the emergent properties are there and are in fact (partly)
causally responsible for the novel behavior, then they are not
epiphenomenal, even if there are empirically adequate descriptions of
the trajectories of microscopic entities constituting such behavior
that do not refer to them.


 But Pepper's argument can be transformed into an epistemological
challenge: there could never be good reason to posit an emergent
property as opposed to complicating our fundamental theory to
accommodate unusual macroscopic behavior. O'Connor (1994, 2000a) has
replied to this that from the standpoint of fundamental metaphysics,
it is unsatisfactory to rest content with such disjoint laws. It is
always appropriate to posit properties to account for fundamental,
systematic discontinuity. Where there is discontinuity in microscopic
behavior associated with precisely specifiable macroscopic parameters,
emergent properties of the system are clearly implicated, unless we
can get an equally elegant resulting theory by complicating the
dispositional structure of the already accepted inventory of basic
properties.


Sydney Shoemaker has contended that such hidden-micro-dispositions
theories are indeed always
 available.[11]
 Assuming sharply discontinuous patterns of effects within complex
systems, we could conclude that the microphysical entities have
otherwise latent dispositions towards effects within macroscopically
complex contexts alongside the dispositions which are continuously
manifested in (nearly) all contexts. The observed difference would be
a result of the manifestation of these latent dispositions.


We'll leave it to the reader to assess the force of Shoemaker's
challenge, which, like Kim's argument, involves subtle issues. (In
this case, issues concerning ontological simplicity and the nature of
dispositions.) O'Connor (2000b) questions the coherence of Shoemaker's
picture on abstract metaphysical grounds. The present authors
challenge its claim to greater simplicity than the standard
emergentist ontology in O'Connor and Wong (2005).
4. Possible Applications


 Epistemological conceptions of emergence have clear and
straightforward applications in current scientific contexts. Indeed,
such notions have been carefully defined to capture macroscopic
phenomena of current interest within the special sciences.


Whether there are any instances of ontological emergence is
highly controversial. Some metaphysicians and philosophers of mind
contend that there are strong first-person, introspective grounds for
supposing that consciousness, intentionality, and/or human agency are
ontologically emergent. The intrinsic qualitative and intentional
properties of our experience, they suggest, appear to be of a
fundamentally distinct character from the properties described by the
physical and biological
 sciences.[12]
 And our experience of our own deliberate agency suggests a form of
‘direct’, macroscopic control over the general parameters
of our behavior that cannot be reduced to the summation of individual
causal interchanges of relevant portions of the cerebral and motor
 cortex.[13]


Other philosophers reject such appeals to introspection. Some of these
grant the appearance but dismiss it as of little evidential value and
likely, on indirect grounds, to be
 illusory.[14]
 Others deny the emergentist claims about the character of our
experience on one of the following grounds: there is no qualitative
aspect to conscious experience beyond its intentional or
representational
 content[15];
 there is a qualitative aspect to conscious experience that we are
able reliably to discriminate but we are not aware of its true,
underlying nature (which is
 neurophysiological)[16];
 intentional quality is not an intrinsic and immediately apprehendable
feature of
 experience[17];
 in our experience of agency we are not aware of a primitive form of
direct, macroscopic control but are simply unaware of the
underlying microscopic activities which in fact constitute our
 control.[18]
 Note that, if one grants the phenomenological claims of the
mind-emergentist while denying their veridicality, one is doing
something very different from twentieth-century scientists who
debunked vitalist and strong emergentist views about life by
uncovering life's physico-chemical basis. In the latter case, one
accepts a challenge to provide a reductionist story of a seemingly
unique sort of phenomenon, and meets it by developing better
experimental and analytical tools. In the former case, on the other
hand, one accepts the claims about how experience and agency seem to
us but simply dismisses such seemings as illusory. Here, one is not
simply overcoming an argument from ignorance with new, powerful
theories; instead, one is doing something rather more like denying
the data. (Further, classic empiricist accounts of the
justification of our empirical beliefs assume that beliefs about the
character of experience are veridical. Rejecting this assumption, it
seems, entails a radical overhaul of one's epistemology, and it may be
that this can be accomplished only by giving an implausible,
deflationary conception of epistemic justification.)


Adjudicating the case for or against ontological emergence outside the
mental realm is equally difficult. The Nobel laureate chemist, Ilya
Prigogine, has long suggested that the ‘dissipative
structures’ of non-equilibrium thermodynamics involve properties
and dynamical principles irreducible to basic
 physics.[19]
 More recently, Nobel laureate physicist R.B. Laughlin and others have
focused attention on a rich range of “protected”
properties — properties that are insensitive to microscopics
— of various kinds of macroscopic matter, such as the
crystalline state. They argue that the behavior of these properties is
well-understood through high-level principles while inexplicable in
fundamental physical terms. Laughlin freely used the term
“emergent” to describe such
 states.[20]


 With both Prigogine and Laughlin, it is very difficult to tell
whether they conceive the phenomena that concern them to be not only
epistemologically, but also ontologically, emergent. Consider these
assertions in Laughlin and Pine's manifesto against
“reductionism”:


… the generic low-energy properties [of the crystalline state]
are determined by a higher organizing principle and nothing else.
(p. 29) 


The belief on the part of many that the renormalizability of the
universe is a constraint on an underlying microscopic Theory of
Everything rather than an emergent property is nothing but an
unfalsifiable article of faith (p. 29).




And, discussing the quantum Hall effect and the Josephson quantum:


Neither of these things can be deduced from microscopics, and both are
transcendent, in that they would continue to be true and to lead to
exact results even if the Theory of Everything were changed. Thus the
existence of these effects is profoundly important, for it shows us
that for at least some fundamental things in nature the Theory of
Everything is irrelevant. (pp. 28–29)




The first two assertions can easily be read in context as suggesting a
type of ontological emergence. But they stand alongside other claims
about the practical impossibility of directly deriving predictions
from quantum mechanics for systems containing more than ten
particles. So it is also possible to understand Laughlin and Pine as
arguing only that science must, as a practical matter, work with
high-level principles in dealing with complex systems, and that these
principles are confirmed independently of the nature of, or evidence
for, our best fundamental theories. (That's a natural way of reading
the third quoted statement.)  Finally, one might argue that even if
Laughlin and Pine are advancing a stronger, ontological claim, the
evidence they adduce clearly supports only an epistemological
conception, while being neutral on the question of ontological
emergence.


A similarly uncertain verdict, we believe, must be given to
Prigogine's claims in the context of thermodynamics. Still, the
apparent independence of various confirmed high-level principles and
the practical impossibility of deriving them from fundamental
principles suggest that Brian McLaughlin's (1992) claim that there is
‘not a scintilla of evidence’ in favor of any sort of
ontological emergence is overstated or at least highly misleading. The
practical difficulties that prevent one from putting the ontological
reductionist's vision to the test can hardly be counted as a strike
against the emergentist. (While not explicitly discussing ontological emergence, Nancy Cartwright [1994, 1999] has argued influentially for a non-reductionist understanding of special science properties and mechanisms quite generally. We cannot consider here the issues raised by Cartwright's drawing of metaphysical conclusions from the broad methodology of science. For useful discussion see section 5 of the entry on the unity of science.)
5. Emergent Substance


Thus far, we have assumed that the concept of emergence applies to
properties (or the event or states consisting in a system's having a
property), rather than to a system or object. This is in keeping with
the British emergentists' view of emergence as midway between
‘mechanistic’ reductionism and vitalism of a sort which
posited entelechies, substances embodying life-governing
principles. However, considerations from general metaphysics may make
this ‘halfway house’ unstable. Composite objects having
ontologically emergent features appear to be truer unities than those
lacking such features. Since such features will make a nonredundant
difference to the dynamical unfolding of the physical universe, one
must quantify over their bearers in giving a minimally
complete account of this evolution. Indeed, in some austere
ontologies, there simply are not composite systems lacking
emergent features. Talk of such ‘objects’ is a convenient
fiction suited to human perceptual and linguistic
proclivities. Merricks (2001) takes such a position and affirms
emergence as the criterion for the existence of true composites. He
does not, however, give an account of what emergence is, apart from
its involving macroscopic causal powers that do not supervene on the
causal powers of and relations among the basic microphysical
entities. (Is the relation of physical substrate to emergent features
one of causal determination, as above, or is it a brute fact? Do
emergent features necessarily appear in all systems attaining a
requisite level of complexity, or is this at best a contingent fact?)
Nor does he indicate a position on the nature of causation itself, an
issue that is crucial to understanding what the nonsupervenience of
causal powers amounts to.  (Presumably Merricks would reject a Humean
account, on which causation is reductively analyzed in terms of actual
or counterfactual patterns in the distribution of qualities over the
world's history.) In any case, it seems fair to conclude from this
overall account that Merricks believes there are emergent composite
individuals.


William Hasker (1999) goes one step further in arguing for the
existence of the mind conceived as a non-composite substance which
‘emerges’ from the brain at a certain point in its
development. He dubs his position ‘emergent dualism,’ and
claims for it all the philosophical advantages of traditional,
Cartesian substance dualism while being able to overcome a central
difficulty, viz., explaining how individual brains and mental
substances come to be linked in a persistent, ‘monogamous’
relationship. Here, Hasker, is using the term to express a view
structurally like one (vitalism) that the British emergentists were
anxious to disavow, thus proving that the term is capable of evoking
all manner of ideas for metaphysicians.