This article discusses several interrelated questions that
philosophers, theologians, and psychologists address about religious
emotions. Do they have some essence? Is there one emotion-type that
warrants the title “religious,” or are there many
religious emotion-types? How do religious emotions differ from
“ordinary” emotions? Are they “cognitive” or
“non-cognitive,” “rational” or
“non-rational”? What good are they? What epistemic import,
if any, have they? This article will focus on emotions in or
purportedly in the Judeo-Christian tradition.
 
1. Does religion have a single emotional center?

In his usual pluralistic spirit, William James frames and answers a
basic question about religious emotions:

Consider … the ‘religious sentiment’ which we see
referred to in so many books, as if it were a single sort of mental
entity. In the psychologies and in the philosophies of religion, we
find the authors attempting to specify just what entity it is. One man
allies it to the feeling of dependence; one makes it a derivative from
fear; others connect it with the sexual life; others still identify it
with the feeling of the infinite; and so on. Such different ways of
conceiving it ought of themselves to arouse doubt as to whether it
possibly can be one specific thing; and the moment we are willing to
treat the term ‘religious sentiment’ as a collective name
for the many sentiments which religious objects may arouse in
alternation, we see that it probably contains nothing whatever of a
psychologically specific nature. There is religious fear, religious
love, religious joy, and so forth. But religious love is only man's
natural emotion of love directed to a religious object; religious fear
is only the ordinary fear of commerce, so to speak, the common quaking
of the human breast, in so far as the notion of divine retribution may
arouse it; religious awe is the same organic thrill which we feel in a
forest at twilight, or in a mountain gorge; only this time it comes
over us at the thought of our supernatural relations; and similarly of
all the various sentiments which may be called into play in the lives
of religious persons. As concrete states of mind, made up of a feeling
plus a specific sort of object, religious emotions of course are
psychic entities distinguishable from other concrete emotions; but
there is no ground of assuming a simply abstract ‘religious
emotion’ to exist as a distinct elementary mental affection by
itself, present in every religious experience without exception
(The Varieties of Religious Experience, Lecture II, p. 46).


James here assimilates religious emotions to emotions more generally,
and eschews the project of trying to identify some particular
emotion-type to which every instance of religious emotion belongs and
which makes it religious, though a few pages later (p. 49) he
“arbitrarily” for purposes of his exposition says that
religion is the feelings, acts, and experiences of individuals when
they apprehend themselves to be in the presence of the divine. A
question can be raised whether the famous Jamesian theory of emotions,
referred to in this quotation, is the best account for understanding
religious emotions. But first, let us look at a couple of the
theorists who engage in the kind of monistic reductionism or
essentialism that James criticizes.

Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768–1834) held that the essence of
religion is piety and that piety consists in the feeling of absolute
dependence. What is the feeling of absolute dependence, and how is it
related to religious emotions?

Feeling is “immediate” self-consciousness as contrasted
with “that consciousness of self which is more like an objective
consciousness, being a representation of oneself, and thus mediated by
self-contemplation” (The Christian Faith, §3.2).
For Schleiermacher ‘immediate’ contrasts with
‘analytic’; he seems to have in mind something like what
people mean when they say that feelings are
‘non-cognitive’: that they precede and cannot be captured
in articulate thought. Joy, he says, is a genuine state of feeling,
but self-approval “belong[s] to the objective consciousness of
self” (ibid.). One might feel joy without knowing why,
but presumably self-approval requires that one have reasons; thus the
former is immediate, the latter analytic.

Schleiermacher says that at a certain stage of cultural and individual
development all human beings have two feelings (states of
self-consciousness) with respect to the world: the feeling of
freedom and the feeling of dependence. The feeling of freedom
corresponds to Activity, and is the feeling of effectiveness
with respect to changes in the world. This will include not only
bringing about physical changes (say, digging a hole in the earth) but
also perceiving things (perceiving is a sort of activity with respect
to the thing perceived) and thinking about them. By contrast, the
feeling of dependence corresponds to Receptivity and is the
feeling of being acted upon by things in the world (say, being
affected by the food one eats or helped by fellow human beings).
Vis-à-vis the world and the things in the world,
people always have a mixture of the feeling of freedom and the feeling
of dependence. One never has a feeling of absolute (unqualified,
schlechthinig) freedom with respect to anything, for no
matter how active one is with respect to it, there will always be an
element of receptivity or dependence on it or some aspect of it or
something closely associated with it.

The same is true of dependence, as far as the relation to things in
the world is concerned. One is never purely or absolutely
dependent on things in the world. If, for example, one were completely
paralyzed but still conscious, one would be very dependent, but
presumably could still focus one's attention or this or that thing on
which one was dependent, and to that extent would engage in free
activity and have the corresponding feeling. It is another matter,
however, if one thinks beyond the world. If one thinks, not of
anything in the world, but of the world as a whole
(including oneself as part of the world) and then thinks what is
beyond that, then the feeling one has with respect to that absolute
Beyond is absolute dependence, in the sense of being conscious of
having no power with respect to it, being utterly unable to affect it
(even by perceiving or thinking it). On this account, the object of
the feeling of absolute dependence is what is utterly beyond the world
or universe, regarded as everything that exists, and it is the feeling
of one's own impotence with respect to that “object.”

How is the feeling of absolute dependence related to episodes of the
particular religious emotion-types, such as joy, gratitude, hope,
contrition, compassion, and sorrow? The short answer is that for
Schleiermacher the feeling of absolute dependence is the essentially
religious element in these emotions (see ibid.,
§5.4–5). Without that element, no emotion would be
religious. The feeling of absolute dependence is, in itself, not about
events taking place in the world; it is about what is beyond the
world, so its “object” is completely unchanging. The
particular religious emotions, by contrast, are responses, some
pleasant and some unpleasant, to changes in the finite or sensible
self-consciousness. Gratitude, for example, is a response to a
particular kind of situation in which the subject is the recipient of
some benefit; contrition is a response to a situation in which the
subject has committed some fault; and so forth. In a more traditional
theology, the difference between gratitude to a kind neighbor for a
benefit and religious gratitude would be that in the latter case the
subject is grateful to God for the benefit. The subject would
causally attribute the benefit to God. Similarly, the difference
between feeling guilty for having lied to one's neighbor and religious
contrition would be that the subject would think of his fault as
having offended God. Something like this idea is behind
Schleiermacher's claim that the feeling of absolute dependence is the
religious element in every religious emotion. However, he certainly
does not think of the Beyond as actually supplying worldly benefits to
people, or as being actually offended when they perform nasty actions.
This would bring the Beyond smack into the world and thus destroy the
feeling of absolute dependence. Schleiermacher does not give a careful
analytic account of the relation between the feeling of absolute
dependence and the particular emotions, but just says that the feeling
“unites with a sensibly determined self-consciousness, and thus
becomes an emotion…” (ibid., §5.5).

The feeling of absolute dependence, so conceived, presents
Schleiermacher with several problems that he does not seem to resolve.
1) Despite his claim that the feeling is “immediate” in
the sense of non-cognitive, we have just given a quite cognitive
account of the feeling. It seems to depend on a particular way of
thinking about the world and what is beyond the world. Both world and
agent need to be thought of in terms of effect and receptivity to
effect; and then the Beyond needs to be conceived in analogy and
contrast with this aspect of the world, in its relation to the agent
(subject of the feeling). A person who did not engage in this process
of thought, at least covertly, would never get to the feeling of
absolute dependence as Schleiermacher describes it. 2) Schleiermacher
is a Christian theologian and thinks he has given an account of the
most basic experience of God. But any God who existed would be part of
the “world” on Schleiermacher's conception and thus could
not be the object of the feeling of absolute dependence. Furthermore,
the God of Christian tradition is not utterly incapable of being
affected by human beings. He responds to states of the world with
actions and emotions, and hears and answers prayer. 3) Absolutizing
the dependency relationship in the way that Schleiermacher does seems
to evacuate ‘dependency’ of its usual meaning. The
“other” towards which one feels absolutely
“dependent” in Schleiermacher's conception must be
predicateless to protect it against any influence (in particular,
epistemic contact) from the side of the world; but that move
eliminates any positive sense in which we depend on it. Absolute
dependence in the object comes to equal absolute incapability of being
affected, and the feeling of absolute dependence amounts to a feeling
of complete lack of effective agency vis-à-vis the
other — that is, it becomes a purely negative conception. So the
feeling of absolute dependence might better be called the feeling of
absolute impotence.

In the opening chapter of Civilization and Its Discontents,
Sigmund Freud considers a proposal of his friend Romain Rolland, that
the “fons et origo” of religious needs,
“the source of the religious energy which is seized upon by the
various Churches and religious systems,” is an
“oceanic” feeling, a feeling which Rolland calls “a
sensation of ‘eternity’, a feeling as of something
limitless, unbounded” (p. 11). It is “a feeling of an
indissoluble bond, of being one with the external world as a
whole” (p. 12). Freud himself thinks that this feeling (which he
cannot find in himself) is probably a vestige of infantile
consciousness prior to the time when the infant begins to distinguish
himself from his human and non-human environment; and he thinks that
the oceanic feeling does not involve a strong enough need to be the
source of all religious energy. That is, a person feeling the emotion
has a sense of being continuous with the rest of the
universe, but does not so much feel a drive toward something,
as does, for example, Saint Augustine in feeling a restlessness which
only a love for God can quiet (Augustine, Confessions, Book
One, Chapter One). By contrast, the infant's need for protection in a
dangerous and uncertain world, which continues into adulthood
“permanently sustained by fear of the superior power of
Fate” (p. 20), is strong enough to explain religion as a
wish-fulfilling projection (illusion) of a divine Father who is both
protective and demanding.

A prominent representative of the essentialist thinking to which
William James objects is Rudolf Otto in The Idea of the Holy
(published 1923). The feeling basic to religion is that of the
numinous, of the mysterium tremendum et fascinans (roughly,
“the mysterious presence of the wholly other that inspires awe
and devotion”). “There is no religion in which it does not
live as the real innermost core, and without it no religion would be
worthy of the name” (p. 6). This feeling is not in itself
ethical; it is not, for example, the feeling of being in the presence
of a moral judge or command-giver. Thus religion is not just a kind of
ethics, as Kant tended to think. The numinous feeling is “a
unique original feeling-response, which can be in itself ethically
neutral and claims consideration in its own right”
(ibid.). The feeling bears some resemblance to, but also
differs from, a sense of dread, of horror, of the uncanny, the eerie,
the weird; it also corresponds to a kind of “wrath” of the
divine, a divine demeanor that has about it something incalculable and
arbitrary, a kind of unpredictable majestic overpowering fearsomeness.
However, one can have a feeling of the mysterium that is not
fear-like; a feeling not of tremor, but of stupor.
“Stupor is plainly a different thing from tremor; it signifies
blank wonder, an astonishment that strikes us dumb, amazement
absolute” (p. 26).

Otto does not attempt to give us a straightforward grammar of the
numinous feeling, and says in fact that this cannot be done. Instead,
he approaches it by comparing it with other experiences and trying out
various terms that might approach to it in meaning, without exactly
getting it; then the idea is that the reader will find the feeling
among his own experiences, and thus be informed. Otto chides
Schleiermacher for making the feeling of absolute dependence a mode of
self-consciousness and for leaving the non-subjective object of the
feeling uncharacterized (p. 10). Contrary to Schleiermacher, Otto says
the concept of causation is absent from the most basic feeling.
“The point from which speculation starts is not a
‘consciousness of absolute dependence’ — of myself
as a result and effect of a divine cause — for that would in
point of fact lead to insistence upon the reality of the self [which
on Otto's construction virtually disappears in the confrontation with
the mysterium tremendum]; it starts from a consciousness of
the absolute superiority or supremacy of a power other than myself,
and it is only as it falls back upon ontological terms to achieve its
end — terms generally borrowed from natural science — that
that element of the tremendum, originally apprehended as
‘plenitude of power’, becomes transmuted into
‘plenitude of being’” (p. 21).

We can see two tendencies in Otto's thought: his striving to make the
numinous feeling sui generis, to protect it from
encroachments of other spheres such as ethics and science; and his
striving to make it do justice to the variety of the emotions that
actually occur in religious life. These tendencies are hard to combine
in a consistent account, especially if the supposed encroachments of
the “other spheres” are actually native to the religion
whose emotions are being examined.
2. How do religious emotions differ from “ordinary” emotions?

Consider Christianity, the religion with which Otto and Schleiermacher
are most deeply concerned. Christian theology ascribes to God a
variety of attributes, both attributed qualities and attributed
actions. These attributes determine the type-identities of the
believer's diverse emotions by providing, in turn, the various
considerations to which the emotions are diverse responses. Let us
look at some examples.
2.1 Gratitude

We may begin with the emotion that is perhaps closest to
Schleiermacher's feeling of absolute dependence, that of gratitude.
The central sentence from the General Thanksgiving in the Book of
Common Prayer is as follows:

We bless thee for our creation, preservation, and all the blessings of
this life; but above all, for thine inestimable love in the redemption
of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ; for the means of grace, and for
the hope of glory (p. 19).


The attributes of God that especially come into play in the emotion of
gratitude are his creation and providence for our present life and his
work of redeeming us from sin in the life, death, and resurrection of
Jesus Christ. It is true that in this standard Christian gratitude the
believer does not feel “absolutely dependent” in
Schleiermacher's peculiar sense of that phrase; as we have seen, the
feeling of absolute dependence does not allow for God to have
any positive attributes. But the believer certainly does feel
very dependent on God in the ordinary sense of
‘dependent.’ In so feeling, the believer attributes
causality to God as the creator, preserver, and redeemer of the
believer's life; and this concept of causality is not “borrowed
from natural science,” as Otto suggests, but antedates natural
science by several millennia. It is a concept of causation that is
embedded in the Jewish-Christian tradition. (Notice that gratitude, as
a construal of what God has done for us, also has the
Schleiermacherian property of self-consciousness.)
2.2 Contrition

Next, consider contrition. Again, we can get a good idea of the
qualities and actions that this emotion attributes to God by
considering a prayer from the Book of Common Prayer (in this
emotion, much of what the believer attributes she attributes to
herself; however, attributes of God, such as his holiness and status
as judge, and his redeeming action, are essential posits of the
believer's construal):

Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things,
Judge of all men; we acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and
wickedness, which we, from time to time, most grievously have
committed, by thought, word, and deed, against thy Divine Majesty,
provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against us. We do
earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for these our misdoings; the
remembrance of them is grievous unto us; the burden of them is
intolerable. Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful
Father; For thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that
is past… (p. 73).


This emotion again fits very well Schleiermacher's characterization of
religious emotion as a “self-consciousness,” but it is at
the same time, as Otto suggests, a consciousness of a God who has
definite, positive features. Salient in the consciousness of the
contrite person are her misdoings and her sullied moral status before
the divine judge. In contrition God is thought of as an eminently
moral figure. But if we take this prayer as canonical for the emotion,
then both the notion of God as creator (opening sentence) and Otto's
privileged attribute of the divine majesty are also in the believer's
construal of God, though they seem to be less salient than the
attribute of moral judge. Another attribute that is very much in the
content of Christian contrition is God's mercy. Thus a serenity and
honesty about the grievousness and intolerable burden of sin are
characteristic of contrition that are not characteristic of a plain
feeling of guilt. The contrite believer feels herself, in her sin, to
be welcomed and embraced by a loving and forgiving God, a merciful
Father.
2.3 Compassion

Another emotion that is rather prominent in Christian life is
compassion. The following prayer was composed by Mother Teresa of
Calcutta for daily use in her Home for the Dying:

Dearest Lord, may I see you today and every day in the person of your
sick, and while nursing them, minister to you.


Though you hide yourself behind the unattractive disguise of the
irritable, the exacting, the unreasonable, may I still recognize you,
and say:

“Jesus, my patient, how sweet it is to serve you.”

Lord, give me this seeing faith, then my work will never be
monotonous. I will ever find joy in humoring the fancies and
gratifying the wishes of all poor sufferers.

O beloved sick, how doubly dear you are to me, when you personify
Christ; and what a privilege is mine to be allowed to tend you.

Sweetest Lord, make me appreciative of the dignity of my high
vocation, and its many responsibilities. Never permit me to disgrace
it by giving way to coldness, unkindness, or impatience.

And O God, while you are Jesus, my patient, deign also to be to me a
patient Jesus, bearing with my faults, looking only to my intention,
which is to love and serve you in the person of each of your sick.

Lord, increase my faith, bless my efforts and work, now and for
evermore. Amen.


In compassion the primary focus is on the sufferer — someone who
is in trouble and in need of help. But as Mother Teresa expresses the
emotion in this prayer, it is very much a religious emotion because of
the way in which the sufferer is seen. She sees Christ in the
sufferer, and in doing so takes herself to be seeing something true
about him, a truth that risks being obscured by the outward
repulsiveness, both sensory and behavioral, of many of those to whom
she ministered.

The religious character and distinctiveness of Christian compassion
can be brought out by comparing it with an emotion that we might call
tragic compassion, since it is central to the ethos and teaching of
the Greek tragedians. Aristotle neatly summarizes the grammar of this
compassion:

Let compassion then be a kind of pain excited by the sight of evil,
deadly or painful, which befalls one who does not deserve it, an evil
which one might expect to come upon oneself or one of one's friends,
and when it seems near. For it is evident that one who is likely to
feel pity must be such as to think that he, or one of his friends, is
liable to suffer some evil… (The Art of Rhetoric
1385b).


Aristotle analyses tragic compassion as involving three propositions,
so to speak: (1) the sufferer's suffering is serious; (2) the sufferer
does not deserve his suffering; 3) the sufferer's suffering is of a
kind that could well touch me [the subject of the emotion] too (Martha
Nussbaum devotes Part II of her Upheavals of Thought to this
emotion-type). We might say that compassion is a construal of the
situation — the sufferer, his suffering, the etiology of the
suffering, and the emotional subject's own condition compared with
that of the sufferer — in terms of these three formal
propositions.

Perhaps the most obvious difference between tragic compassion and
Mother Teresa's is the fact that the latter involves the proposition
the sufferer is a type (brother, sister, beloved) of Christ.
This has the implication that Christian compassion is not primarily a
“kind of pain.” It is uncomfortable certainly, and the
subject of this compassion is moved to alleviate the suffering as she
can; but it is also a joy, and the work is “sweet,” and
the poor sufferers are “doubly dear” — dear on their
own account and on Christ's. Mother Teresa expresses an almost erotic
enthusiasm for the people she serves, and it is because she loves
Christ above all. The prayer exudes not just compassion, but also
gratitude and devotion, and the compassion derives its character in
part from these other emotions, which in turn have their character
because of the belief-system in which Mother Teresa lives.

An equally significant departure from the grammar of tragic compassion
is the denial of the necessity of proposition 2) the sufferer does
not deserve his suffering. This denial comes out in one of the
paradigm texts for Christian compassion, the Parable of the Prodigal
Son in Luke 15.11–32. The younger of two sons asks his father
for his share of the inheritance ahead of time, and the son takes the
money and goes abroad where he “squander[s] his property in
loose living” (vs. 13). When the money is depleted a famine
descends on his country of residence, and he is destitute. He gets a
job feeding pigs, and is miserable and hungry. He has the bright idea
of returning to his father in the role of a common laborer on the home
farm.

And he arose and came to his father. But while he was yet at a
distance, his father saw him and had compassion, and ran and embraced
him and kissed him. And the son said to him, “Father, I have
sinned against heaven and before you; I am no longer worthy to be
called your son; treat me as one of your hired servants.” But
the father said to his servants, “Bring quickly the best robe,
and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet;
and bring the fatted calf and kill it, and let us eat and make merry;
for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found.” And they began to make merry (vss 20–24).


The father can hardly be ignorant of the proposition my son
deserves this suffering that he has brought on himself; and the
son himself dins the proposition into his father's head. But the
father's compassion is unaffected by the knowledge. The father in the
parable is of course God, whose nature as gracious and forgiving is
indicated in the parable. So Mother Teresa, unlike the characters in
the Greek tragedies, is not interested in the question whether the
sufferer brought his woes on himself through his choices. It is this
gracious and forgiving God whose Son Mother Teresa sees and loves in
each of her poor sufferers.

As to the third proposition, the Christian would no doubt generally
acknowledge it, but it seems to figure differently in Christian than
in tragic compassion. It does not seem to be a major consideration in
Mother Teresa's compassion that the same thing might happen to her as
has happened to her poor sufferers. The difference turns on the phrase
“might happen.” It is part of Mother Teresa's spiritual
discipline — her self-cultivation in the Christian emotions
— that she deliberately puts herself, as much as practicable, in
the position of those she ministers to. Early in her ministry she had
to be persuaded to provide herself and her fellow nuns a bit
more food than the average Calcutta street person consumed, so as to
maintain her health well enough to continue her ministry. In this
aspiration to identify with sufferers she imitates Christ, who lowered
himself to the status of a servant and died the death of a criminal,
out of compassion for humanity. In the nervous “it might happen
to me too” of tragic compassion there is an aloofness from the
sufferer and his suffering that is absent in the most paradigmatic
exemplars of Christian compassion.

Christian compassion, like contrition and gratitude, does have an
element faintly reminiscent of Schleiermacher's feeling of absolute
dependence. And again, it comes from the gratitude that is in the near
vicinity of compassion. Unlike the subject of tragic compassion, the
subject of Christian compassion construes herself as having been first
the object of God's compassion. One might say that Mother Teresa's
compassion towards poor sufferers springs from her gratitude to Christ
for his compassion towards her and all humankind. But the reminiscence
is only faint. Gratitude is not what Schleiermacher calls the feeling
of absolute dependence. Indeed, the feeling of absolute dependence is
not the essence of any of the Christian emotions. Rudolf Otto's stress
on fear (tremor) or blank wonder (stupor) also seems
not to express the essence of Christian compassion. Christian doctrine
does teach that God is fearsome and wonderful, but other attributes of
God are much more to the fore in the emotion of compassion: God's
fatherly nurturing tenderness and forgiveness, his long-suffering
love. William James's critique of the essentialist tendency in the
religious philosophy of the emotions seems on target: God has a
variety of attributes, and these are reflected in a variety of
emotion-types, none of which has any more claim than the others to
constitute the essence of religious emotion.

Otto states that the response to the mysterium tremendum is
not necessarily moral and explains this by saying that the emotion
does not necessarily posit God as a moral judge or law-giver. But
compassion does seem to be necessarily moral, though it is true that
the idea of God as judge or law-giver is not particularly in the
picture. The moral attribute of God that is quite directly posited by
the emotion is that of mercy or compassion. The sufferer is construed
as one with whom Christ has identified and for whom Christ has
suffered. The other two emotions that we have looked at are also
essentially moral: contrition is a construal of oneself as morally at
fault and spoiled, and here the idea of God as judge is involved; and
gratitude, as a construal of oneself as indebted for a gift, has
reference to a kind of justice (though it is clearly not standard
retributive justice [see Roberts 2004]).
3. Are religious emotions “cognitive”?

Both Schleiermacher and Otto hold that the most basic religious
emotions are unsusceptible of propositional definition. Yet both
theologians specify, in propositions, the object of the religious
emotion in question. Our accounts of gratitude, contrition, and
compassion have likewise treated the emotions as having a
propositional structure, one deriving from the teachings of the
Christian tradition. Let us think for a moment about the sense in
which these emotions are and are not propositional. The Christian
emotions are given their distinctive character by their doctrinal
content: The three cited prayers expressive of the distinctively
Christian emotions all trade on propositional beliefs of the kind that
the Christian community routinely teaches its members. The situation
of the emotional subject is then seen (felt) in terms of the teaching;
for example, the sufferer on whom the subject has compassion is seen
as one for whom Christ died; the object of gratitude is seen as a gift
from the hand of God; etc. The particular character of each religious
emotion-type would be impossible apart from this doctrinal content.
This is the sense in which the Christian emotions are propositional.
But still, the emotions themselves escape reduction to their
propositional content because emotions are a sort of concern-based
impression or perception or construal of
the situation in these terms. Emotions transcend propositionality in
the same way that any actual perception (e.g. visual perception) does.
A Rembrandt painting can be truly characterized in many propositions,
and in individual cases some of the propositions may need to be made
explicit as a condition for seeing some things that are in the
painting. But no amount of discourse or discursive thought about the
content of the painting is a substitute for seeing the
painting. This immediate acquaintance with the canvas is analogous to
the actual having of the emotion (religious or otherwise). (For more
on the view of emotions taken here, see Roberts 2013, chapters
3–5; for an excellent discussion of the relationship between
religious feelings and religious doctrines, see Wynn, 2004, especially
chapter 5. For more, and more extended, accounts of particular
religious emotions, see Roberts 2007.) So religious emotions are no
less propositional than other standard adult human emotions; and like
the other emotions, they cannot be reduced to their propositional
content.

When James says that the religious emotions are just like all other
emotions in being “made up of a feeling plus a specific sort of
object,” the specific sort of object is just the situational
object specified in propositional terms such as the examples in this
article have illustrated. But the peculiarity of the Jamesian theory
comes in the reference to “a feeling.” The feeling he
refers to (1884) is a bodily sensation, which he takes to be the
element that makes the mental state into an emotion, and is a
“quaking of the human breast,” an “organic
thrill,” or the like. (See James 1884.) This account of affect
seems to many to fail to capture the meaning that the object has for
the subject – meaning that is conveyed through the emotion.
Schleiermacher, with his talk of feeling dependent, and Otto, with his
talk of awesome mystery, are closer to capturing the kind of affect in
question. A sensation of quaking or a contraction of the gut are not
the same kind of thing as the sense that the sufferer before one is a
brother for whom Christ died, or that one's sins are an intolerable
burden. There may indeed be organic thrill or quaking, but if so, such
sensations are incorporated into a perception of personal meaning
wrought by the subject's caring about the object.

Jesse Prinz (2004) tries to introduce correct intentionality into the
Jamesian idea that emotional experience is awareness of a gut reaction
by making the gut reaction indicate the instantiation of a “core
relational theme”. The notion of a core relational theme, which
originates with Richard S. Lazarus (1993), is the idea of a way that
benefit or harm is mediated to the emotional subject from the
environment. Lazarus gives a list of 15 core relational themes (see
1993 p. 122), among which are a demeaning offense against me and
mine (anger), facing uncertain, existential threat
(anxiety), and having failed to live up to an ego-ideal
(shame). Such themes seem to be types of events or states of affairs
that impinge on some concern of the subject. Prinz envisions the
sequence that characterizes an emotion episode as follows: An
eliciting event triggers a thought (say, Aaron tells me that my real
father is not the man I have taken him all my life to be, but the
Fuller brush man who used to visit the house; which triggers a
characteristic reaction in my gut; which triggers my perception of the
reaction in my gut; which I read as indicating a core relational
theme, namely, a demeaning offense against me and mine; which
triggers my socking Aaron in the jaw. But why would the identification
of my father with the Fuller brush man trigger that reaction in my gut
(which is characteristic of anger), unless I already heard it as a
demeaning offense against me and mine? Prinz's construction seems to
misplace the gut reaction in the emotional process. The gut reaction
seems, rather, to presuppose some emotional awareness of the
core relational theme, which gives rise to the gut reaction (for
discussion, see Roberts 2013, 73–75).

Mark Wynn (2013, 27–33) points out that in James's discussion of
religious emotion, it is not the gut reaction that is primarily felt,
but a sensory awareness of “the world” under a certain
description. In other words, religious feelings are instances of what
Peter Goldie (2000) calls “feeling-towards”. And in still
other words, the James of The Varieties of Religious
Experience isn't a Jamesian in the standard sense. As Wynn points
out, it doesn't follow from religious emotions' not being primarily
gut reactions that gut reactions are not involved in their
phenomenology; but their involvement would be in the nature of a
feedback loop or integrated non-focal awareness. I would also add
that, while gut sensations are frequently included in the
phenomenology of emotions, they may not be necessary or universal.
James himself, in a postscript to his 1884 article, cites the case of
a 15-year-old shoemaker's apprentice who, being entirely without
bodily sensations (though otherwise aware of the world around him),
nevertheless exhibited shame, grief, fear, and anger, as his situation
warranted. In acknowledgment of the possibility of emotions without
bodily sensations, the Jamesian neuroscientist Antonio Damasio (1994)
posits the existence of an “as-if” bodily feedback loop in
the brain to provide for the “somatic markers” required,
on the theory, by emotions. 
4. The importance of religious emotions

The foregoing helps us to answer the question about the importance of
religious emotions. Aristotle points out that the character virtues
are dispositions of the appetitive (desiring, caring) part of the soul
as shaped by logos (see Nicomachean Ethics, Book
One, Chapter 13). The three Christian emotions used as examples in
this article are episodes that arise out of dispositions of caring
shaped by beliefs (each of the emotion-types gives its name to a
Christian virtue). The episodes are important, from the viewpoint of
the Christian tradition, because they express a character that is
attuned to the way things are: to our nature as creatures, to God's
nature as God, to the relations we bear to the goods and evils of
life. In an article titled “Why Christianity Works: An
Emotion-Focused Phenomenological Account,” Christian Smith
proposes to explain the tenacity of Christianity in the face of
various secularizing influences by reference to the character of
religious emotions. 

As dispositions of caring, the virtues of gratitude, contrition, and
compassion have the value of motivating appropriate actions: acts of
that special gracious justice that is an appropriate response to gifts
and their givers, acts of self-correction and atonement for wrongs
committed, and acts of helping those who suffer. As dispositions of
perception, these virtues have the value of putting their possessor in
direct perceptual acquaintance with moral aspects of reality: her
indebtedness for gifts, the evil of her actions and the forgiveness of
God, and the distress of her fellows and the relation of that distress
to the life of Christ. And the emotions themselves are the episodes in
which these motives and perceptions are particularized to the concrete
circumstances of daily life.

So one epistemic value of religious emotions is that of bringing the
subject into perceptual acquaintance with truths as the religious
tradition conceives them. Another potential epistemic value is that of
providing evidence for those purported truths. The more concretely one
treats the religious emotions — moving in the direction of James
and away from the direction of Schleiermacher and Otto, as this
article has done — the less evidential value the religious
emotions have. The reason is that the perceptions are so shaped by the
propositions that they might be called upon to provide evidence for,
that the “evidence” is undercut by circularity.

So the value that the particular religious emotion-types have for
adherents of any particular religious tradition is very great. They
are a sine qua non for genuine adherence to the tradition,
and the degree to which they are actual in the life of any adherent is
an index of the depth with which that adherent represents his or her
tradition and is a successful human specimen by its lights. No wonder,
then, that one strand of philosophical reflection about religious
emotions, differing even more from the Schleiermacher-Otto and James
axes than these differ from each other, is self-consciously
criteriological or regulative. Clarificatory reflection about
religious emotions serves a purpose of buffering the tradition against
the demoralizing corrosions of the spirit of the age. One thinks of
the work of Jonathan Edwards and Søren Kierkegaard. (See the
entry on
 Søren Kierkegaard.)
5. Criteriological work on religious emotions

In a book that Kierkegaard didn't publish but rewrote many times
(On Authority and Revelation), he reflected about the case of
a Hegelian pastor, a certain Adolph Peter Adler, who claimed to have
had a revelation from Jesus Christ. By comparison with most of his
contemporaries in the Danish Lutheran Church, Adler was a man of
strong religious passion / feeling, and Kierkegaard respected him for
that. But he also noted that Adler's religious emotion was entirely
generic, having no just claim to be in any sense Christian. Adler's
emotion was not Christian emotion because it did not show the
distinctive conceptual marks.

…it was Magister Adler's advantage that he was deeply moved,
shaken in his inmost being…. But to be thus profoundly moved is
a very indefinite expression for something so concrete as Christian
awakening or conversion … emotion which is Christian is checked
by the definition of concepts … to express oneself Christianly
there is required, besides the more universal language of the heart,
also skill and schooling in the definition of Christian concepts,
while at the same time…the emotion is of a specific,
qualitative sort, the Christian emotion (pp. 163, 164).


Kierkegaard goes on to point out that using the distinctively
Christian terms is no guarantee that the emotions themselves will
display the Christian conceptual structure, because such terms as
‘sin,’ ‘redemption,’
‘forgiveness,’ and ‘Holy Spirit,’ have
“become in a volatilized sense the conversational language of
the whole of Europe” (p. 166). In other words, the terms are
used in a different sense from the one they have in original
Christianity, because they have been dissociated from Christian
thought and practice.

A major aim of Kierkegaard's writings as a philosopher (or
“dialectician” as he usually describes himself) is to
offer analyses of emotion-concepts (which are at the same time
virtue-concepts) that can function in a regulative or criteriological
way. That is, they specify the conceptual shape of these emotions when
they are authentically Christian. The analyses are written in a richly
literary way (for besides being a “dialectician,”
Kierkegaard is, as he says, a “poet”), and this is
important for Kierkegaard's regulative purpose, since he aims not just
to inform people about the logic of religious emotions, but to move
them to see the world in their terms and to take action in their
terms. Examples of such emotion-regulative discourse are the
following: Works of Love about the virtue of love; “The
Expectancy of Faith”, “Patience in Expectancy”, and
“The Expectancy of an Eternal Salvation”, all about the
virtue of hope and found in Eighteen Upbuilding Discourses;
“Every Good and Every Perfect Gift Is from Above” and
“One Who Prays Aright Struggles in Prayer and Is Victorious
— in That God Is Victorious” about the virtue of gratitude
and also in Eighteen Upbuilding Discourses; “On the
Occasion of a Confession: Purity of Heart Is to Will One Thing”
about contrition and found in Upbuilding Discourses in Various
Spirits; and the discourses in Part Three of the same book, which
are all about joy. These are just a few of many examples of religious
emotion-regulative thought in Kierkegaard's writings.

Another well-known author whose work on religious emotions is
regulative is Jonathan Edwards. In A Treatise Concerning Religious
Affections, Edwards aims to correct both a passionless
Christianity and a revivalist “enthusiasm” that confuses
emotional intensity with the work of the Holy Spirit. Edwards begins
by discussing the nature and importance of emotions in the Christian
life, and then turns to a systematic treatment of twenty-four supposed
“signs” or criteria for the genuineness of religious
emotions. The first twelve signs turn out not to be genuine criteria:
They do not rule out the emotion's being a work of the Spirit, but
neither do they entail it. Thus, for example, a person's emotions in a
revival meeting might be extremely intense (sign 1), or attended by
great bodily perturbations (sign 2), or might dispose the subject to
talk volubly about religion (sign 3), but these marks show nothing one
way or the other about the Christian character of the affection.

Edwards then turns to the twelve signs that do indicate the gracious
work of the Spirit in the believer's life. Sign 5 is that one's
emotions involve an immediate conviction that the great things of the
gospel are true, and sign 6, “evangelical humiliation,” is
a strong disinclination to judge oneself better than others or to
believe that one's spiritual attainments entitle one to some claim on
God. Sign 12 is Christian practice: affections that dissipate
themselves in excitement and feelings without leading to Christian
action are bogus; genuine spiritual affections motivate characteristic
Christian action. Sign 7 is that such action is persistent: genuine
spiritual affections signal a lasting change of character. Edwards
endorses the signs not as criteria by which to discern how well one's
neighbor measures up in the kingdom of God, but as criteria to be used
in self-examination and self-discipline.

Edwards's work is conceptually and artistically inferior to
Kierkegaard's, but the two authors agree that religious emotions are
diverse, that they embody religious teachings, that they are important
epistemic and ethical indicators of character, and that in consequence
there are conceptual criteria for their rightness that can and should
be carefully clarified.
6. Conclusion James seems to be right in claiming that there is no
emotion type that is distinctive of religion as such. Religious
emotions come in the usual types — contrition, gratitude, joy,
fear, anxiety, anger, and so forth — and what makes them
distinctive of one religion or another is their shaping by the
teachings of the religion about God or the transcendent. Emotions are
important to adherents of a religion because, like the actions that
they sometimes motivate, they are expressions of the moral and
spiritual life enjoined by the religion. They constitute an important
part of the substance of the religious life. For this reason, teachers
of the religion, as guardians and regulators of the life in question,
sometimes formulate criteria of genuineness of religious emotions.