Environmental ethics is the discipline in philosophy that studies the
moral relationship of human beings to, and also the value and moral
status of, the environment and its non-human contents. This entry
covers: (1) the challenge of environmental ethics to the
anthropocentrism (i.e., human-centeredness) embedded in traditional
western ethical thinking; (2) the early development of the discipline
in the 1960s and 1970s; (3) the connection of deep ecology, feminist
environmental ethics, animism and social ecology to politics; (4) the
attempt to apply traditional ethical theories, including
consequentialism, deontology, and virtue ethics, to support
contemporary environmental concerns; (5) the preservation of
biodiversity as an ethical goal; (6) the broader concerns of some
thinkers with wilderness, the built environment and the politics of
poverty; (7) the ethics of sustainability and climate change, and (8)
some directions for possible future developments of the
discipline. 
 
1. Introduction: The Challenge of Environmental Ethics

Suppose putting out natural fires, culling feral animals or
destroying some individual members of overpopulated indigenous species
is necessary for the protection of the integrity of a certain
ecosystem. Will these actions be morally permissible or even required?
Is it morally acceptable for farmers in non-industrial countries to
practise slash and burn techniques to clear areas for agriculture?
Consider a mining company which has performed open pit mining in some
previously unspoiled area. Does the company have a moral obligation to
restore the landform and surface ecology? And what is the value of a
humanly restored environment compared with the originally natural
environment? It is often said to be morally wrong for human beings to
pollute and destroy parts of the natural environment and to consume a
huge proportion of the planet’s natural resources. If that is wrong,
is it simply because a sustainable environment is essential to
(present and future) human well-being? Or is such behaviour also wrong
because the natural environment and/or its various contents have
certain values in their own right so that these values ought to be
respected and protected in any case? These are among the questions
investigated by environmental ethics. Some of them are specific
questions faced by individuals in particular circumstances, while
others are more global questions faced by groups and communities. Yet
others are more abstract questions concerning the value and moral
standing of the natural environment and its non-human components.

In the literature on environmental ethics the distinction between
instrumental value and
 intrinsic value
(in the sense of “non-instrumental value”) has been of
considerable importance. The former is the value of things as
means to further some other ends, whereas the latter is the
value of things as ends in themselves regardless of whether
they are also useful as means to other ends. For instance, certain
fruits have instrumental value for bats who feed on them, since
feeding on the fruits is a means to survival for the bats. However, it
is not widely agreed that fruits have value as ends in themselves. We
can likewise think of a person who teaches others as having
instrumental value for those who want to acquire knowledge. Yet, in
addition to any such value, it is normally said that a person, as a
person, has intrinsic value, i.e., value in his or her own right
independently of his or her prospects for serving the ends of
others. For another example, a certain wild plant may have
instrumental value because it provides the ingredients for some
medicine or as an aesthetic object for human observers. But if the
plant also has some value in itself independently of its prospects for
furthering some other ends such as human health, or the pleasure from
aesthetic experience, then the plant also has intrinsic value. Because
the intrinsically valuable is that which is good as an end in itself,
it is commonly agreed that something’s possession of intrinsic value
generates a prima facie direct moral duty on the part of moral agents
to protect it or at least refrain from damaging it (see O’Neil 1992
and Jamieson 2002 for detailed accounts of intrinsic value).

Many traditional western ethical perspectives, however, are
anthropocentric or human-centered in that either they assign
intrinsic value to human beings alone (i.e., what we might call
anthropocentric in a strong sense) or they assign a
significantly greater amount of intrinsic value to human beings than
to any non-human things such that the protection or promotion of human
interests or well-being at the expense of non-human things turns out
to be nearly always justified (i.e., what we might call
anthropocentric in a weak sense). For example, Aristotle
(Politics, Bk. 1, Ch. 8) maintains that “nature has
made all things specifically for the sake of man” and that the
value of non-human things in nature is merely instrumental. Generally,
anthropocentric positions find it problematic to articulate what is
wrong with the cruel treatment of non-human animals, except to the
extent that such treatment may lead to bad consequences for human
beings. Immanuel Kant (“Duties to Animals and Spirits”, in
Lectures on Ethics), for instance, suggests that cruelty
towards a dog might encourage a person to develop a character which
would be desensitized to cruelty towards humans. From this standpoint,
cruelty towards non-human animals would be instrumentally, rather than
intrinsically, wrong. Likewise, anthropocentrism often recognizes some
non-intrinsic wrongness of anthropogenic (i.e. human-caused)
environmental devastation. Such destruction might damage the
well-being of human beings now and in the future, since our well-being
is essentially dependent on a sustainable environment (see Passmore
1974; Bookchin 1990; Norton et al. (eds.) 1995).

When environmental ethics emerged as a new sub-discipline of
philosophy in the early 1970s, it did so by posing a challenge to
traditional anthropocentrism. In the first place, it questioned the
assumed moral superiority of human beings to members of other species
on earth. In the second place, it investigated the possibility of
rational arguments for assigning intrinsic value to the natural
environment and its non-human contents. It should be noted, however,
that some theorists working in the field see no need to develop new,
non-anthropocentric theories. Instead, they advocate what may be
called enlightened anthropocentrism (or, perhaps more
appropriately called, prudential anthropocentrism). Briefly,
this is the view that all the moral duties we have towards the
environment are derived from our direct duties to its human
inhabitants. The practical purpose of environmental ethics, they
maintain, is to provide moral grounds for social policies aimed at
protecting the earth’s environment and remedying environmental
degradation. Enlightened anthropocentrism, they argue, is sufficient
for that practical purpose, and perhaps even more effective in
delivering pragmatic outcomes, in terms of policy-making, than
non-anthropocentric theories given the theoretical burden on the
latter to provide sound arguments for its more radical view that the
non-human environment has intrinsic value (cf. Norton 1991, de Shalit
1994, Light and Katz 1996). Furthermore, some prudential
anthropocentrists may hold what might be called cynical
anthropocentrism, which says that we have a higher-level
anthropocentric reason to be non-anthropocentric in our day-to-day
thinking. Suppose that a day-to-day non-anthropocentrist tends to act
more benignly towards the non-human environment on which human
well-being depends. This would provide reason for encouraging
non-anthropocentric thinking, even to those who find the idea of
non-anthropocentric intrinsic value hard to swallow. In order for such
a strategy to be effective one may need to hide one’s cynical
anthropocentrism from others and even from oneself. The position can
be structurally compared to some indirect form of
 consequentialism
 and may attract parallel critiques (see
 Henry Sidgwick
on utilitarianism and esoteric morality, and
 Bernard Williams
 on indirect utilitarianism).
2. The Early Development of Environmental Ethics

Although nature was the focus of much nineteenth and twentieth century
philosophy, contemporary environmental ethics only emerged as an
academic discipline in the 1970s. The questioning and rethinking of
the relationship of human beings with the natural environment over the
last thirty years reflected an already widespread perception in the
1960s that the late twentieth century faced a human population
explosion as well as a serious environmental crisis. Among the
accessible work that drew attention to a sense of crisis was Rachel
Carson’s Silent Spring (1963), which consisted of a number of
essays earlier published in the New Yorker magazine detailing
how pesticides such as DDT, aldrin and deildrin concentrated through
the food web. Commercial farming practices aimed at maximizing crop
yields and profits, Carson speculates, are capable of impacting
simultaneously on environmental and public health.

In a much cited essay (White 1967) on the historical roots of the
environmental crisis, historian Lynn White argued that the main
strands of Judeo-Christian thinking had encouraged the
overexploitation of nature by maintaining the superiority of humans
over all other forms of life on earth, and by depicting all of nature
as created for the use of humans. White’s thesis was widely discussed
in theology, history, and has been subject to some sociological
testing as well as being regularly discussed by philosophers (see
Whitney 1993, Attfield 2001). Central to the rationale for his thesis
were the works of the Church Fathers and The Bible itself, supporting
the anthropocentric perspective that humans are the only things that
matter on Earth. Consequently, they may utilize and consume everything
else to their advantage without any injustice. For example,
Genesis 1: 27–8 states: “God created man in his own
image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he
them. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion
over fish of the sea, and over fowl of the air, and over every living
thing that moveth upon the earth.” Likewise, Thomas Aquinas
(Summa Contra Gentiles, Bk. 3, Pt 2, Ch 112) argued that
non-human animals are “ordered to man’s use”. According to
White, the Judeo-Christian idea that humans are created in the image
of the transcendent supernatural God, who is radically separate from
nature, also by extension radically separates humans themselves from
nature. This ideology further opened the way for untrammeled
exploitation of nature. Modern Western science itself, White argued,
was “cast in the matrix of Christian theology” so that it
too inherited the “orthodox Christian arrogance toward
nature” (White 1967: 1207). Clearly, without technology and
science, the environmental extremes to which we are now exposed would
probably not be realized. The point of White’s thesis, however, is
that given the modern form of science and technology,
Judeo-Christianity itself provides the original deep-seated drive to
unlimited exploitation of nature. Nevertheless, White argued that some
minority traditions within Christianity (e.g., the views of
St. Francis) might provide an antidote to the “arrogance”
of a mainstream tradition steeped in anthropocentrism.

Around the same time, the Stanford ecologists Paul and Anne Ehrlich
warned in The Population Bomb (Ehrlich 1968) that the growth
of human population threatened the viability of planetary life-support
systems. The sense of environmental crisis stimulated by those and
other popular works was intensified by NASA’s production and wide
dissemination of a particularly potent image of earth from space taken
at Christmas 1968 and featured in the Scientific American in
September 1970. Here, plain to see, was a living, shining planet
voyaging through space and shared by all of humanity, a precious
vessel vulnerable to pollution and to the overuse of its limited
capacities. In 1972 a team of researchers at MIT led by Dennis Meadows
published the Limits to Growth study, a work that summed up
in many ways the emerging concerns of the previous decade and the
sense of vulnerability triggered by the view of the earth from
space. In the commentary to the study, the researchers wrote:
We affirm finally that any deliberate attempt to reach a
rational and enduring state of equilibrium by planned measures, rather
than by chance or catastrophe, must ultimately be founded on a basic
change of values and goals at individual, national and world
levels. (Meadows et al. 1972: 195)
 The call for a “basic change of values” in connection
to the environment (a call that could be interpreted in terms of
either instrumental or intrinsic values) reflected a need for the
development of environmental ethics as a new sub-discipline of
philosophy.

The new field emerged almost simultaneously in three countries—the
United States, Australia, and Norway. In the first two of these
countries, direction and inspiration largely came from the earlier
twentieth century American literature of the environment. For
instance, the Scottish emigrant John Muir (founder of the Sierra Club
and “father of American conservation”) and subsequently the
forester Aldo Leopold had advocated an appreciation and conservation
of things “natural, wild and free”. Their concerns were
motivated by a combination of ethical and aesthetic responses to
nature as well as a rejection of crudely economic approaches to the
value of natural objects (a historical survey of the confrontation
between Muir’s reverentialism and the human-centred conservationism of
Gifford Pinchot (one of the major influences on the development of the
US Forest Service) is provided in Norton 1991; also see Cohen 1984 and
Nash (ed) 1990). Leopold’s A Sand County Almanac (1949), in
particular, advocated the adoption of a “land ethic”:
That land is a community is the basic concept of ecology,
but that land is to be loved and respected is an extension of
ethics. (Leopold 1949: vii–ix)


A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability,
and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends
otherwise. (Leopold 1949: 224–5)

However, Leopold himself provided no systematic ethical theory or
framework to support these ethical ideas concerning the
environment. His views therefore presented a challenge and opportunity
for moral theorists: could some ethical theory be devised to justify
the injunction to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the
biosphere?
 The land ethic sketched by Leopold, attempting to extend our moral
concern to cover the natural environment and its non-human contents,
was drawn on explicitly by the Australian philosopher Richard Routley
(later Sylvan). According to Routley (1973 (cf. Routley and Routley
1980)), the anthropocentrism imbedded in what he called the
“dominant western view”, or “the western
superethic”, is in effect “human chauvinism”. This
view, he argued, is just another form of class chauvinism, which is
simply based on blind class “loyalty” or prejudice, and
unjustifiably discriminates against those outside the privileged
class. Echoing the plot of a popular movie some three years earlier
(see Lo and Brennan 2013), Routley speculates in his “last
man” (and “last people”) arguments about a
hypothetical situation in which the last person, surviving a world
catastrophe, acts to ensure the elimination of all other living things
and the last people set about destroying forests and ecosystems after
their demise. From the human-chauvinistic (or absolutely
anthropocentric) perspective, the last person would do nothing morally
wrong, since his or her destructive act in question would not cause
any damage to the interest and well-being of humans, who would by then
have disappeared. Nevertheless, Routley points out that there is a
moral intuition that the imagined last acts would be morally wrong. An
explanation for this judgment, he argued, is that those non-human
objects in the environment, whose destruction is ensured by the last
person or last people, have intrinsic value, a kind of value
independent of their usefulness for humans. From his critique, Routley
concluded that the main approaches in traditional western moral
thinking were unable to allow the recognition that natural things have
intrinsic value, and that the tradition required overhaul of a
significant kind.
 Leopold’s idea that the “land” as a whole is an object
of our moral concern also stimulated writers to argue for certain
moral obligations toward ecological wholes, such as species,
communities, and ecosystems, not just their individual
constituents. The U.S.-based theologian and environmental philosopher
Holmes Rolston III, for instance, argued that species protection was a
moral duty (Rolston 1975). It would be wrong, he maintained, to
eliminate a rare butterfly species simply to increase the monetary
value of specimens already held by collectors. Like Routley’s
“last man” arguments, Rolston’s example is meant to draw
attention to a kind of action that seems morally dubious and yet is
not clearly ruled out or condemned by traditional anthropocentric
ethical views. Species, Rolston went on to argue, are intrinsically
valuable and are usually more valuable than individual specimens,
since the loss of a species is a loss of genetic possibilities and the
deliberate destruction of a species would show disrespect for the very
biological processes which make possible the emergence of individual
living things (also see Rolston 1989, Ch 10). Natural processes
deserve respect, according to Rolston’s quasi-religious perspective,
because they constitute a nature (or God) which is itself
intrinsically valuable (or sacred).

 Meanwhile, the work of Christopher Stone (a professor of law at the
University of Southern California) had become widely discussed. Stone
(1972) proposed that trees and other natural objects should have at
least the same standing in law as corporations. This suggestion was
inspired by a particular case in which the Sierra Club had mounted a
challenge against the permit granted by the U.S. Forest Service to
Walt Disney Enterprises for surveys preparatory to the development of
the Mineral King Valley, which was at the time a relatively remote
game refuge, but not designated as a national park or protected
wilderness area. The Disney proposal was to develop a major resort
complex serving 14000 visitors daily to be accessed by a purpose-built
highway through Sequoia National Park. The Sierra Club, as a body with
a general concern for wilderness conservation, challenged the
development on the grounds that the valley should be kept in its
original state for its own sake.

 Stone reasoned that if trees, forests and mountains could be given
standing in law then they could be represented in their own right in
the courts by groups such as the Sierra Club. Moreover, like any other
legal person, these natural things could become beneficiaries
of compensation if it could be shown that they had suffered
compensatable injury through human activity. When the case went to the
U.S. Supreme Court, it was determined by a narrow majority that the
Sierra Club did not meet the condition for bringing a case to court,
for the Club was unable and unwilling to prove the likelihood of
injury to the interest of the Club or its members. In a dissenting
minority judgment, however, justices Douglas, Blackmun and Brennan
mentioned Stone’s argument: his proposal to give legal standing to
natural things, they said, would allow conservation interests,
community needs and business interests to be represented, debated and
settled in court.

Reacting to Stone’s proposal, Joel Feinberg (1974) raised a serious
problem. Only items that have interests, Feinberg argued, can be
regarded as having legal standing and, likewise, moral standing. For
it is interests which are capable of being represented in legal
proceedings and moral debates. This same point would also seem to
apply to political debates. For instance, the movement for
“animal liberation”, which also emerged strongly in the
1970s, can be thought of as a political movement aimed at representing
the previously neglected interests of some animals (see Regan and
Singer (eds.) 1976, Clark 1977, and also the entry on
 the moral status of animals). Granted that
some animals have interests that can be represented in this way, would
it also make sense to speak of trees, forests, rivers, barnacles, or
termites as having interests of a morally relevant kind?  This issue
was hotly contested in the years that followed. Meanwhile, John
Passmore (1974) argued, like White, that the Judeo-Christian tradition
of thought about nature, despite being predominantly
“despotic”, contained resources for regarding humans as
“stewards” or “perfectors” of God’s
creation. Skeptical of the prospects for any radically new ethic,
Passmore cautioned that traditions of thought could not be abruptly
overhauled. Any change in attitudes to our natural surroundings which
stood the chance of widespread acceptance, he argued, would have to
resonate and have some continuities with the very tradition which had
legitimized our destructive practices. In sum, then, Leopold’s land
ethic, the historical analyses of White and Passmore, the pioneering
work of Routley, Stone and Rolston, and the warnings of scientists,
had by the late 1970s focused the attention of philosophers and
political theorists firmly on the environment.
 The confluence of ethical, political and legal debates about the
environment, the emergence of philosophies to underpin animal rights
activism and the puzzles over whether an environmental ethic would be
something new rather than a modification or extension of existing
ethical theories were reflected in wider social and political
movements. The rise of environmental or “green” parties in
Europe in the 1980s was accompanied by almost immediate schisms
between groups known as “realists” versus
“fundamentalists” (see Dobson 1990). The
“realists” stood for reform environmentalism, working with
business and government to soften the impact of pollution and resource
depletion especially on fragile ecosystems or endangered species. The
“fundies” argued for radical change, the setting of
stringent new priorities, and even the overthrow of capitalism and
liberal individualism, which were taken as the major ideological
causes of anthropogenic environmental devastation. It is not clear,
however, that collectivist or communist countries do any better in
terms of their environmental record (see Dominick 1998).
 Underlying these political disagreements was the distinction
between “shallow” and “deep” environmental
movements, a distinction introduced in the early 1970s by another
major influence on contemporary environmental ethics, the Norwegian
philosopher and climber Arne Næss. Since the work of Næss
has been significant in environmental politics, the discussion of his
position is given in a separate section below.
3. Environmental Ethics and Politics
3.1 Deep Ecology

“Deep ecology” was born in Scandinavia, the result of
discussions between Næss and his colleagues Sigmund
Kvaløy and Nils Faarlund (see Næss 1973 and 1989; also
see Witoszek and Brennan (eds.) 1999 for a historical survey and
commentary on the development of deep ecology). All three shared a
passion for the great mountains. On a visit to the Himalayas, they
became impressed with aspects of “Sherpa culture”
particularly when they found that their Sherpa guides regarded certain
mountains as sacred and accordingly would not venture onto
them. Subsequently, Næss formulated a position which extended
the reverence the three Norwegians and the Sherpas felt for mountains
to other natural things in general.

The “shallow ecology movement”, as Næss (1973) calls it,
is the “fight against pollution and resource depletion”, the
central objective of which is “the health and affluence of people
in the developed countries.” The “deep ecology
movement”, in contrast, endorses “biospheric
egalitarianism”, the view that all living things are alike in
having value in their own right, independent of their usefulness to
others. The deep ecologist respects this intrinsic value, taking care,
for example, when walking on the mountainside not to cause unnecessary
damage to the plants.

Inspired by Spinoza’s metaphysics, another key feature of Næss’s
deep ecology is the rejection of atomistic individualism. The idea
that a human being is such an individual possessing a separate
essence, Næss argues, radically separates the human self from the
rest of the world. To make such a separation not only leads to
selfishness towards other people, but also induces human selfishness
towards nature. As a counter to egoism at both the individual and
species level, Næss proposes the adoption of an alternative
relational “total-field image” of the
world. According to this relationalism, organisms (human or otherwise)
are best understood as “knots” in the biospherical net. The
identity of a living thing is essentially constituted by its relations
to other things in the world, especially its ecological relations to
other living things. If people conceptualise themselves and the world
in relational terms, the deep ecologists argue, then people will take
better care of nature and the world in general.

As developed by Næss and others, the position also came to focus
on the possibility of the identification of the human ego
with nature. The idea is, briefly, that by identifying with nature I
can enlarge the boundaries of the self beyond my skin. My 
larger—ecological—Self (the capital “S” emphasizes that I am
something larger than my body and consciousness), deserves respect as
well. To respect and to care for my Self is also to respect and to
care for the natural environment, which is actually part of me and
with which I should identify. “Self-realization”, in other
words, is the reconnection of the shriveled human individual with the
wider natural environment. Næss maintains that the deep
satisfaction that we receive from identification with nature and close
partnership with other forms of life in nature contributes
significantly to our life quality. (One clear historical antecedent to
this kind of nature spiritualism is the romanticism of Jean-Jacques
Rousseau as expressed in his last work, the Reveries of the
Solitary Walker)
 When Næss’s view crossed the Atlantic, it was sometimes
merged with ideas emerging from Leopold’s land ethic (see Devall and
Sessions 1985; also see Sessions (ed) 1995). But 
Næss—wary of the apparent totalitarian 
political implications of Leopold’s
position that individual interests and well-being should be
subordinated to the holistic good of the earth’s biotic community (see
section 4 below)—has always taken care to distance himself
from advocating any sort of “land ethic”. (See Anker 1999
for cautions on interpreting Næss’s relationalism as an
endorsement of the kind of holism displayed in the land ethic;
cf. Grey 1993, Taylor and Zimmerman 2005). Some critics have argued
that Næss’s deep ecology is no more than an extended
social-democratic version of utilitarianism, which counts human
interests in the same calculation alongside the interests of all
natural things (e.g., trees, wolves, bears, rivers, forests and
mountains) in the natural environment (see Witoszek 1997). However,
Næss failed to explain in any detail how to make sense of the
idea that oysters or barnacles, termites or bacteria could have
interests of any morally relevant sort at all. Without an account of
this, Næss’s early “biospheric egalitarianism”—that 
all living things whatsoever had a similar right to live
and flourish—was an indeterminate principle in practical
terms. It also remains unclear in what sense rivers, mountains and
forests can be regarded as possessors of any kind of interests. This
is an issue on which Næss always remained elusive.

Biospheric egalitarianism was modified in the 1980s to the weaker
claim that the flourishing of both human and non-human life have value
in themselves. At the same time, Næss declared that his own
favoured ecological philosophy—“Ecosophy T”, as he called
it after his Tvergastein mountain cabin—was only one of several
possible foundations for an environmental ethic. Deep ecology ceased
to be a specific doctrine, but instead became a “platform”,
of eight simple points, on which Næss hoped all deep green thinkers
could agree. The platform was conceived as establishing a middle
ground, between underlying philosophical orientations, whether
Christian, Buddhist, Daoist, process philosophy, or whatever, and the
practical principles for action in specific situations, principles
generated from the underlying philosophies. Thus the deep ecological
movement became explicitly pluralist (see Brennan 1999; c.f. Light
1996).

While Næss’s Ecosophy T sees human Self-realization as a solution
to the environmental crises resulting from human selfishness and
exploitation of nature, some of the followers of the deep ecology
platform in the United States and Australia further argue that the
expansion of the human self to include non-human nature is supported by
the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory, which is said to have
dissolved the boundaries between the observer and the observed (see
Fox 1984, 1990, and Devall and Sessions 1985; cf. Callicott
1985). These "relationalist" developments of deep ecology are,
however, criticized by some feminist theorists. The idea of nature as
part of oneself, one might argue, could justify the continued
exploitation of nature instead. For one is presumably more entitled to
treat oneself in whatever ways one likes than to treat another
independent agent in whatever ways one likes. According to some
feminist critics, the deep ecological theory of the “expanded
self” is in effect a disguised form of human colonialism, unable
to give nature its due as a genuine “other” independent of
human interest and purposes (see Plumwood 1993, Ch. 7, 1999, and
Warren 1999). 

Meanwhile, some third-world critics accused deep ecology of
being elitist in its attempts to preserve wilderness experiences for
only a select group of economically and socio-politically well-off
people. The Indian writer Ramachandra Guha (1989, 1999) for instance,
depicts the activities of many western-based conservation groups as a
new form of cultural imperialism, aimed at securing converts to
conservationism (cf. Bookchin 1987 and Brennan 1998a). “Green
missionaries”, as Guha calls them, represent a movement aimed at
further dispossessing the world’s poor and indigenous
people. “Putting deep ecology in its place,” he writes,
“is to recognize that the trends it derides as
“shallow” ecology might in fact be varieties of
environmentalism that are more apposite, more representative and more
popular in the countries of the South.” Although Næss himself
repudiates suggestions that deep ecology is committed to any
imperialism (see Witoszek and Brennan (eds.) 1999, Ch. 36–7 and 41),
Guha’s criticism raises important questions about the application of
deep ecological principles in different social, economic and cultural
contexts. Finally, in other critiques, deep ecology is portrayed as
having an inconsistent utopian vision (see Anker and Witoszek
1998).
3.2 Feminism and the Environment

Broadly speaking, a feminist issue is any that contributes in some
way to understanding the oppression of women. Feminist theories
attempt to analyze women’s oppression, its causes and consequences,
and suggest strategies and directions for women’s liberation. By the
mid 1970s, feminist writers had raised the issue of whether
patriarchal modes of thinking encouraged not only widespread
inferiorizing and colonizing of women, but also of people of colour,
animals and nature. Sheila Collins (1974), for instance, argued that
male-dominated culture or patriarchy is supported by four interlocking
pillars: sexism, racism, class exploitation, and ecological
destruction.

Emphasizing the importance of feminism to the environmental movement
and various other liberation movements, some writers, such as Ynestra
King (1989a and 1989b), argue that the domination of women by men is
historically the original form of domination in human society, from
which all other hierarchies—of rank, class, and political 
power—flow. For instance, human exploitation of nature may be seen as a
manifestation and extension of the oppression of women, in that it is
the result of associating nature with the female, which had been
already inferiorized and oppressed by the male-dominating culture. But
within the plurality of feminist positions, other writers, such as Val
Plumwood (1993), understand the oppression of women as only one of the
many parallel forms of oppression sharing and supported by a common
ideological structure, in which one party (the colonizer, whether
male, white or human) uses a number of conceptual and rhetorical
devices to privilege its interests over that of the other party (the
colonized: whether female, people of colour, or animals). Facilitated
by a common structure, seemingly diverse forms of oppression can
mutually reinforce each other (Warren 1987, 1990, 1994, Cheney 1989,
and Plumwood 1993).

Not all feminist theorists would call that common underlying
oppressive structure “androcentric” or
“patriarchal”. But it is generally agreed that core features
of the structure include “dualism”, hierarchical thinking,
and the “logic of domination”, which are typical of, if not
essential to, male-chauvinism. These patterns of thinking and
conceptualizing the world, many feminist theorists argue, also nourish
and sustain other forms of chauvinism, including, human-chauvinism
(i.e., anthropocentrism), which is responsible for much human
exploitation of, and destructiveness towards, nature. The dualistic
way of thinking, for instance, sees the world in polar opposite terms,
such as male/female, masculinity/femininity, reason/emotion,
freedom/necessity, active/passive, mind/body, pure/soiled,
white/coloured, civilized/primitive, transcendent/immanent,
human/animal, culture/nature. Furthermore, under dualism all the first
items in these contrasting pairs are assimilated with each other, and
all the second items are likewise linked with each other. For example,
the male is seen to be associated with the rational, active, creative,
Cartesian human mind, and civilized, orderly, transcendent culture;
whereas the female is regarded as tied to the emotional, passive,
determined animal body, and primitive, disorderly, immanent
nature. These interlocking dualisms are not just descriptive
dichotomies, according to the feminists, but involve a prescriptive
privileging of one side of the opposed items over the other. Dualism
confers superiority to everything on the male side, but inferiority to
everything on the female side. The “logic of domination”
then dictates that those on the superior side (e.g., men, rational
beings, humans) are morally entitled to dominate and utilize those on
the inferior side (e.g., women, beings lacking in rationality,
non-humans) as mere means.

The problem with dualistic and hierarchical modes of thinking,
however, is not just that that they are epistemically unreliable. It
is not just that the dominating party often falsely sees the dominated
party as lacking (or possessing) the allegedly superior (or inferior)
qualities, or that the dominated party often internalizes false
stereotypes of itself given by its oppressors, or that stereotypical
thinking often overlooks salient and important differences among
individuals. More important, according to feminist analyses, the very
premise of prescriptive dualism—the valuing of attributes of one
polarized side and the devaluing of those of the other, the idea that
domination and oppression can be justified by appealing to attributes
like masculinity, rationality, being civilized or developed, etc.—is 
itself problematic.

Feminism represents a radical challenge for environmental thinking,
politics, and traditional social ethical perspectives. It promises to
link environmental questions with wider social problems concerning
various kinds of discrimination and exploitation, and fundamental
investigations of human psychology. However, whether there are
conceptual, causal or merely contingent connections among the
different forms of oppression and liberation remains a contested issue
(see Green 1994). The term “ecofeminism” (first coined by
Françoise d’Eaubonne in 1974) or “ecological
feminism” was for a time generally applied to any view that
combines environmental advocacy with feminist analysis. However,
because of the varieties of, and disagreements among, feminist
theories, the label may be too wide to be informative and has
generally fallen from use.
3.3 Disenchantment and the New Animism

An often overlooked source of ecological ideas is the work of the
neo-Marxist Frankfurt School of critical theory founded by Max
Horkheimer and Theodore Adorno (Horkheimer and Adorno 1969). While
classical Marxists regard nature as a resource to be transformed by
human labour and utilized for human purposes, Horkheimer and Adorno
saw Marx himself as representative of the problem of “human
alienation”. At the root of this alienation, they argue, is a
narrow positivist conception of rationality—which sees rationality
as an instrument for pursuing progress, power and technological
control, and takes observation, measurement and the application of
purely quantitative methods to be capable of solving all
problems. Such a positivistic view of science combines determinism
with optimism. Natural processes as well as human activities are seen
to be predictable and manipulable. Nature (and, likewise, human
nature) is no longer mysterious, uncontrollable, or fearsome. Instead,
it is reduced to an object strictly governed by natural laws, which
therefore can be studied, known, and employed to our benefit. By
promising limitless knowledge and power, the positivism of science and
technology not only removes our fear of nature, the critical theorists
argue, but also destroys our sense of awe and wonder towards it. That
is to say, positivism “disenchants” nature—along with
everything that can be studied by the sciences, whether natural,
social or human.

The progress in knowledge and material well-being may not be a bad
thing in itself, where the consumption and control of nature is a
necessary part of human life. However, the critical theorists argue
that the positivistic disenchantment of natural things (and, likewise,
of human beings—because they too can be studied and manipulated by
science) disrupts our relationship with them, encouraging the
undesirable attitude that they are nothing more than things to be
probed, consumed and dominated. According to the critical theorists,
the oppression of “outer nature” (i.e., the natural
environment) through science and technology is bought at a very high
price: the project of domination requires the suppression of our own
“inner nature” (i.e., human nature)—e.g., human
creativity, autonomy, and the manifold needs, vulnerabilities and
longings at the centre of human life. To remedy such an alienation,
the project of Horkheimer and Adorno is to replace the narrow
positivistic and instrumentalist model of rationality with a more
humanistic one, in which the values of the aesthetic, moral, sensuous
and expressive aspects of human life play a central part. Thus, their
aim is not to give up our rational faculties or powers of analysis and
logic. Rather, the ambition is to arrive at a dialectical synthesis
between Romanticism and Enlightenment, to return to anti-deterministic
values of freedom, spontaneity and creativity.
 In his later work, Adorno advocates a re-enchanting aesthetic
attitude of “sensuous immediacy” towards nature. Not only
do we stop seeing nature as primarily, or simply, an object of
consumption, we are also able to be directly and spontaneously
acquainted with nature without interventions from our rational
faculties. According to Adorno, works of art, like natural things,
always involve an “excess”, something more than their mere
materiality and exchange value (see Vogel 1996, ch. 4.4 for a detailed
discussion of Adorno’s views on art, labour and domination). The
re-enchantment of the world through aesthetic experience, he argues,
is also at the same time a re-enchantment of human lives and
purposes. Adorno’s work remains largely unexplored in mainstream
environmental philosophy, although the idea of applying critical
theory (embracing techniques of deconstruction, psychoanalysis and
radical social criticism) to both environmental issues and the
writings of various ethical and political theorists has spawned an
emerging field of “ecocritique” or
“eco-criticism” (Vogel 1996, Luke 1997, van Wyk 1997,
Dryzek 1997).

Some students of Adorno’s work have argued that his account
of the role of “sensuous immediacy” can be understood as
an attempt to defend a “legitimate anthropomorphism” that
comes close to a weak form of animism (Bernstein 2001, 196). Others,
more radical, have claimed to take inspiration from his notion of
“non-identity”, which, they argue, can be used as the
basis for a deconstruction of the notion of nature and perhaps even
its elimination from eco-critical writing. For example, Timothy Morton
argues that “putting something called Nature on a pedestal and
admiring it from afar does for the environment what patriarchy does
for the figure of Woman. It is a paradoxical act of sadistic
admiration” (Morton 2007, 5), and that “in the name of all
that we value in the idea of ‘nature’, [ecocritique]
thoroughly examines how nature is set up as a transcendental, unified,
independent category. Ecocritique does not think that it is
paradoxical to say, in the name of ecology itself: ‘down with
nature!’ ” (ibid., 13).

It remains to be seen, however, whether the radical attempt to purge
the concept of nature from eco-critical work meets with
success. Likewise, it is unclear whether the dialectic project on
which Horkheimer and Adorno embarked is coherent, and whether Adorno,
in particular, has a consistent understanding of “nature”
and “rationality” (see Eckersley 1992 and Vogel 1996, for a
review of the Frankfurt School’s thinking about nature).

On the other hand, the  new animists have been much inspired
by the serious way in which some indigenous peoples placate and
interact with animals, plants and inanimate things through ritual,
ceremony and other practices. According to the new animists, the
replacement of traditional animism (the view that personalized souls
are found in animals, plants, and other material objects) by a form of
disenchanting positivism directly leads to an anthropocentric
perspective, which is accountable for much human destructiveness
towards nature. In a disenchanted world, there is no meaningful order
of things or events outside the human domain, and there is no source
of sacredness or dread of the sort felt by those who regard the
natural world as peopled by divinities or demons (Stone 2006). When a
forest is no longer sacred, there are no spirits to be placated and no
mysterious risks associated with clear-felling it. A disenchanted
nature is no longer alive. It commands no respect, reverence or
love. It is nothing but a giant machine, to be mastered to serve human
purposes. The new animists argue for reconceptualizing the boundary
between persons and non-persons. For them, “living nature”
comprises not only humans, animals and plants, but also mountains,
forests, rivers, deserts, and even planets.

Whether the notion that a mountain or a tree is to be regarded as a
person is taken literally or not, the attempt to engage with the
surrounding world as if it consists of other persons might possibly
provide the basis for a respectful attitude to nature (see Harvey 2005
for a popular account of the new animism). If disenchantment is a
source of environmental problems and destruction, then the new animism
can be regarded as attempting to re-enchant, and help to save,
nature. More poetically, David Abram has argued that a
phenomenological approach of the kind taken by Merleau-Ponty can
reveal to us that we are part of the “common flesh” of the
world, that we are in a sense the world thinking itself (Abram
1995).

In her work, Freya Mathews has tried to articulate a version
of animism or panpsychism that captures ways in which the world (not
just nature) contains many kinds of consciousness and sentience. For
her, there is an underlying unity of mind and matter in that the world
is a “self-realizing” system containing a multiplicity of
other such systems (cf. Næss). According to Mathews, we are
meshed in communication, and potential communication, with the
“One” (the greater cosmic self) and its many lesser selves
(Mathews 2003, 45–60). Materialism (the monistic theory that the
world consists purely of matter), she argues, is self-defeating by
encouraging a form of “collective solipsism” that treats
the world either as unknowable or as a social-construction (Mathews
2005, 12). Mathews also takes inspiration from her interpretation of
the core Daoist idea of  wuwei  as “letting be” and bringing
about change through “effortless action”. The focus in
environmental management, development and commerce should be on
“synergy” with what is already in place rather than on
demolition, replacement and disruption. Instead of bulldozing away old
suburbs and derelict factories, the synergistic panpsychist sees these
artefacts as themselves part of the living cosmos, hence part of what
is to be respected. Likewise, instead of trying to eliminate feral or
exotic plants and animals, and restore environments to some imagined
pristine state, ways should be found—wherever possible—to
promote synergies between the newcomers and the older native
populations in ways that maintain ecological flows and promote the
further unfolding and developing of ecological processes (Mathews
2004). Panpsychism, Mathews argues, frees us from the
“ideological grid of capitalism”, can reduce our desire
for consumer novelties, and can allow us and the world to grow old
together with grace and dignity.

In summary, if disenchantment is a source of environmentally
destructive or uncaring attitudes, then both the aesthetic and the
animist/panpsychist re-enchantment of the world are intended to offer
an antidote to such attitudes, and perhaps also inspirations for new
forms of managing and designing for sustainability.
3.4 Social Ecology and Bioregionalism

Apart from feminist-environmentalist theories and Næss’s deep
ecology, Murray Bookchin’s “social ecology” has also claimed
to be radical, subversive, or countercultural (see Bookchin 1980,
1987, 1990). Bookchin’s version of critical theory takes the
“outer” physical world as constituting what he calls
“first nature”, from which culture or “second
nature” has evolved. Environmentalism, on his view, is a social
movement, and the problems it confronts are social problems. While
Bookchin is prepared, like Horkheimer and Adorno, to regard (first)
nature as an aesthetic and sensuous marvel, he regards our
intervention in it as necessary. He suggests that we can choose to put
ourselves at the service of natural evolution, to help maintain
complexity and diversity, diminish suffering and reduce
pollution. Bookchin’s social ecology recommends that we use our gifts
of sociability, communication and intelligence as if we were
“nature rendered conscious”, instead of turning them against
the very source and origin from which such gifts derive. Exploitation
of nature should be replaced by a richer form of life devoted to
nature’s preservation.

John Clark has argued that social ecology is heir to a historical,
communitarian tradition of thought that includes not only the
anarchist Peter Kropotkin, but also the nineteenth century socialist
geographer Elisée Reclus, the eccentric Scottish thinker
Patrick Geddes and the latter’s disciple, Lewis Mumford (Clark
1998). Ramachandra Guha has described Mumford as “the pioneer
American social ecologist” (Guha 1996, 210). Mumford adopted a
regionalist perspective, arguing that strong regional centres of
culture are the basis of “active and securely grounded local
life” (Mumford 1944, 403). Like the pessimists in critical
theory, Mumford was worried about the emergence under industrialised
capitalism of a “megamachine”, one that would oppress and
dominate human creativity and freedom, and one that—despite being a
human product—operates in a way that is out of our control. While
Bookchin is more of a technological optimist than Mumford, both
writers have inspired a regional turn in environmental
thinking. Bioregionalism gives regionalism an environmental
twist. This is the view that natural features should provide the
defining conditions for places of community, and that secure and
satisfying local lives are led by those who know a place, have learned
its lore and who adapt their lifestyle to its affordances by
developing its potential within ecological limits. Such a life, the
bioregionalists argue, will enable people to enjoy the fruits of
self-liberation and self-development (see the essays in List 1993, and
the book-length treatment in Thayer 2003, for an introduction to
bioregional thought).

However, critics have asked why natural features should significant
in defining the places in which communities are to be built, and have
puzzled over exactly which natural features these should be—geological, 
ecological, climatic, hydrological, and so on (see Brennan
1998b). If relatively small, bioregional communities are to be home to
flourishing human societies, then a question also arises over the
nature of the laws and punishments that will prevail in them, and also
of their integration into larger regional and global political and
economic groupings. For anarchists and other critics of the
predominant social order, a return to self-governing and
self-sufficient regional communities is often depicted as liberating
and refreshing. But for the skeptics, the worry remains that the
bioregional vision is politically over-optimistic and is open to the
establishment of illiberal, stifling and undemocratic communities.
Further, given its emphasis on local self-sufficiency and the virtue
of life in small communities, a question arises over whether
bioregionalism is workable in an overcrowded planet.

Deep ecology, feminism, and social ecology have had a considerable
impact on the development of political positions in regard to the
environment. Feminist analyses have often been welcomed for the
psychological insight they bring to several social, moral and
political problems. There is, however, considerable unease about the
implications of critical theory, social ecology and some varieties of
deep ecology and animism. Some writers have argued, for
example, that critical theory is bound to be ethically
anthropocentric, with nature as no more than a “social
construction” whose value ultimately depends on human
determinations (see Vogel 1996). Others have argued that the demands
of “deep” green theorists and activists cannot be
accommodated within contemporary theories of liberal politics and
social justice (see Ferry 1998). A further suggestion is that there is
a need to reassess traditional theories such as virtue ethics, which
has its origins in ancient Greek philosophy (see the following
section) within the context of a form of stewardship similar to that
earlier endorsed by Passmore (see Barry 1999). If this last claim is
correct, then the radical activist need not, after all, look for
philosophical support in radical, or countercultural, theories of the
sort deep ecology, feminism, bioregionalism and social ecology claim
to be (but see Zimmerman 1994).
4. Traditional Ethical Theories and Contemporary Environment Ethics

Although environmental ethicists often try to distance themselves
from the anthropocentrism embedded in traditional ethical views
(Passmore 1974, Norton 1991 are exceptions), they also quite often
draw their theoretical resources from traditional ethical systems and
theories. Consider the following two basic moral questions: (1) What
kinds of thing are intrinsically valuable, good or bad? (2) What makes
an action right or wrong?

Consequentialist ethical theories consider intrinsic
“value” / “disvalue” or “goodness” /
“badness” to be more fundamental moral notions than
“rightness” / “wrongness”, and maintain that
whether an action is right/wrong is determined by whether its
consequences are good/bad. From this perspective, answers to question
(2) are informed by answers to question (1). For instance,
utilitarianism, a paradigm case of consequentialism, regards pleasure
(or, more broadly construed, the satisfaction of interest, desire,
and/or preference) as the only intrinsic value in the world, whereas
pain (or the frustration of desire, interest, and/or preference) is the
only intrinsic disvalue, and maintains that right actions are those
that would produce the greatest balance of pleasure over pain.

As the utilitarian focus is the balance of pleasure and pain as such,
the question of to whom a pleasure or pain belongs is irrelevant to
the calculation and assessment of the rightness or wrongness of
actions. Hence, the eighteenth century utilitarian Jeremy Bentham
(1789), and now Peter Singer (1993), have argued that the interests of
all the sentient beings (i.e., beings who are capable of experiencing
pleasure or pain)—including non-human ones—affected by an action
should be taken equally into consideration in assessing the
action. Furthermore, rather like Routley (see section 2 above), Singer
argues that the anthropocentric privileging of members of the species
Homo sapiens is arbitrary, and that it is a kind of
“speciesism” as unjustifiable as sexism and racism. Singer
regards the animal liberation movement as comparable to the liberation
movements of women and people of colour. Unlike the environmental
philosophers who attribute intrinsic value to the natural environment
and its inhabitants, Singer and utilitarians in general attribute
intrinsic value to the experience of pleasure or interest satisfaction
as such, not to the beings who have the experience. Similarly, for the
utilitarian, non-sentient objects in the environment such as plant
species, rivers, mountains, and landscapes, all of which are the
objects of moral concern for environmentalists, are of no intrinsic
but at most instrumental value to the satisfaction of sentient beings
(see Singer 1993, Ch. 10). Furthermore, because right actions, for the
utilitarian, are those that maximize the overall balance of interest
satisfaction over frustration, practices such as whale-hunting and the
killing of an elephant for ivory, which cause suffering to non-human
animals, might turn out to be right after all: such practices might
produce considerable amounts of interest-satisfaction for human
beings, which, on the utilitarian calculation, outweigh the non-human
interest-frustration involved. As the result of all the above
considerations, it is unclear to what extent a utilitarian ethic can
also be an environmental ethic. This point may not so readily apply to
a wider consequentialist approach, which attributes intrinsic value
not only to pleasure or satisfaction, but also to various objects and
processes in the natural environment.

Deontological ethical theories, in contrast, maintain that
whether an action is right or wrong is for the most part independent
of whether its consequences are good or bad. From the deontologist
perspective, there are several distinct moral rules or duties (e.g.,
“not to kill or otherwise harm the innocent”, “not to
lie”, “to respect the rights of others”, “to keep
promises”), the observance/violation of which is intrinsically
right/wrong; i.e., right/wrong in itself regardless of
consequences. When asked to justify an alleged moral rule, duty or its
corresponding right, deontologists may appeal to the intrinsic value
of those beings to whom it applies. For instance, “animal
rights” advocate Tom Regan (1983) argues that those animals with
intrinsic value (or what he calls “inherent value”) have the
moral right to respectful treatment, which then generates a general
moral duty on our part not to treat them as mere means to other
ends. We have, in particular, a prima facie moral duty not to harm
them. Regan maintains that certain practices (such as sport or
commercial hunting, and experimentation on animals) violate the moral
right of intrinsically valuable animals to respectful treatment. Such
practices, he argues, are intrinsically wrong regardless of whether or
not some better consequences ever flow from them. Exactly which
animals have intrinsic value and therefore the moral right to
respectful treatment? Regan’s answer is: those that meet the criterion
of being the “subject-of-a-life”. To be such a subject is a
sufficient (though not necessary) condition for having intrinsic
value, and to be a subject-of-a-life involves, among other things,
having sense-perceptions, beliefs, desires, motives, memory, a sense
of the future, and a psychological identity over time.

Some authors have extended concern for individual well-being further,
arguing for the intrinsic value of organisms achieving their own good,
whether those organisms are capable of consciousness or not. Paul
Taylor’s version of this view (1981 and 1986), which we might call
biocentrism, is a deontological example. He argues that each
individual living thing in nature—whether it is an animal, a plant,
or a micro-organism—is a “teleological-center-of-life”
having a good or well-being of its own which can be enhanced or
damaged, and that all individuals who are teleological-centers-of life
have equal intrinsic value (or what he calls “inherent
worth”) which entitles them to moral respect. Furthermore, Taylor
maintains that the intrinsic value of wild living things generates a
prima facie moral duty on our part to preserve or promote their goods
as ends in themselves, and that any practices which treat those beings
as mere means and thus display a lack of respect for them are
intrinsically wrong.  A more recent and biologically detailed defence
of the idea that living things have representations and goals and
hence have moral worth is found in Agar 2001. Unlike Taylor’s
egalitarian and deontological biocentrism, Robin Attfield (1987)
argues for a hierarchical view that while all beings having a good of
their own have intrinsic value, some of them (e.g., persons) have
intrinsic value to a greater extent. Attfield also endorses a form of
consequentialism which takes into consideration, and attempts to
balance, the many and possibly conflicting goods of different living
things (also see Varner 1998 for a defense of biocentric
individualism with affinities to both consequentialist and
deontological approaches). However, some critics have pointed out that
the notion of biological good or well-being is only descriptive not
prescriptive (see Williams 1992 and O’Neill 1993, Ch. 2). For
instance, even if HIV has a good of its own this does not mean that
we ought to assign any positive moral weight to the realization of
that good.

More recently, the distinction between these two traditional
approaches has taken its own specific form of development in
environmental philosophy.  Instead of pitting conceptions of value
against conceptions of rights, it has been suggested that there may be
two different conceptions of intrinsic value in play in discussion
about environmental good and evil.  One the one side, there is the
intrinsic value of states of affairs that are to be promoted - and
this is the focus of the consequentialist thinkers.  On the other
(deontological) hand there is the intrinsic values of entities to be
respected (see Bradley 2006, McShane 2014).  These two different foci
for the notion of intrinsic value still provide room for fundamental
argument between deontologists and consequentialist to continue,
albeit in a somewhat modified form.


Note that the ethics of animal liberation or animal rights and
biocentrism are both individualistic in that their various
moral concerns are directed towards individuals only—not ecological
wholes such as species, populations, biotic communities, and
ecosystems. None of these is sentient, a subject-of-a-life, or a
teleological-center-of-life, but the preservation of these collective
entities is a major concern for many environmentalists. Moreover, the
goals of animal liberationists, such as the reduction of animal
suffering and death, may conflict with the goals of
environmentalists. For example, the preservation of the integrity of
an ecosystem may require the culling of feral animals or of some
indigenous animal populations that threaten to destroy fragile habitats. So
there are disputes about whether the ethics of animal liberation is a
proper branch of environmental ethics (see Callicott 1980, 1988,
Sagoff 1984, Jamieson 1998, Crisp 1998 and Varner 2000).

Criticizing the individualistic approach in general for failing to
accommodate conservation concerns for ecological wholes, J. Baird
Callicott (1980) once advocated a version of land-ethical
holism which takes Leopold’s statement “A thing is right
when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the
biotic community. It is wrong when it tends otherwise” to be the
supreme deontological principle. In this theory, the earth’s biotic
community per se is the sole locus of intrinsic value, whereas the
value of its individual members is merely instrumental and dependent
on their contribution to the “integrity, stability, and
beauty” of the larger community. A straightforward implication of
this version of the land ethic is that an individual member of the
biotic community ought to be sacrificed whenever that is needed for
the protection of the holistic good of the community. For instance,
Callicott maintains that if culling a white-tailed deer is necessary
for the protection of the holistic biotic good, then it is a
land-ethical requirement to do so. But, to be consistent, the same
point also applies to human individuals because they are also members
of the biotic community. Not surprisingly, the misanthropy implied by
Callicott’s land-ethical holism was widely criticized and
regarded as a reductio of the position (see Aiken (1984), Kheel
(1985), Ferré (1996), and Shrader-Frechette (1996)). Tom Regan
(1983, p.362), in particular, condemned the holistic land ethic’s
disregard of the rights of the individual as “environmental
fascism”. 
 Under pressure from the charge of ecofascism and misanthropy,
Callicott (1989 Ch. 5, and 1999, Ch. 4) later revised his position and
now maintains that the biotic community (indeed, any community to
which we belong) as well as its individual members (indeed, any
individual who shares with us membership in some common community) all
have intrinsic value. To further distance himself from the charge of
ecofascism, Callicott introduced explicit principles which prioritize
obligations to human communities over those to natural ones.  He
called these “second-order” principles for specifying the
conditions under which the land ethic’s holistic and individualistic
obligations were to be ranked.  As he put it:
... obligations generated by membership in more
venerable and intimate communities take precedence over these
generated in more recently-emerged and impersonal communities... The
second second-order principle is that stronger interests (for
lack of a better word) generate duties that take precedence over
duties generated by weaker interests. (Callicott 1999,
76)

Lo (in Lo 2001) provides an overview and critique of Callicott’s
changing position over two decades, while Ouderkirk and Hill (eds.)
2002 gives an overview of debates between Callicott and others
concerning the metaethical and metaphysical foundations for the land
ethic and also its historical antecedents.  As Lo pointed out, the
final modified version of the land ethic needs more than two
second-order principles, since a third-order principle is needed to
specify Callicott’s implicit view that the second second-order
principle generally countermands the first one when they come into
conflict (Lo 2001, 345).  In his most recent work, Callicott follows
Lo’s suggestion, while cautioning against aiming for too much
precision in specifying the demands of the land ethic (Callicott 2013,
66 - 7).
 The controversy surrounding Callicott’s original position,
however, has inspired efforts in environmental ethics to investigate
possibilities of attributing intrinsic value to ecological wholes, not
just their individual constituent parts.  Following in Callicott’s
footsteps, and inspired by Næss’s relational account of value,
Warwick Fox has championed a theory of “responsive
cohesion” which apparently gives supreme moral priority to the
maintenance of ecosystems and the biophysical world (Fox 2007).  It
remains to be seen if this position escapes the charges of misanthropy
and totalitarianism laid against earlier holistic and relational
theories of value. 

Individual natural entities (whether sentient or not, living or not),
Andrew Brennan (1984, 2014) argues, are not designed by anyone to fulfill
any purpose and therefore lack “intrinsic function” (i.e.,
the function of a thing that constitutes part of its essence or
identity conditions). This, he proposes, is a reason for thinking that
individual natural entities should not be treated as mere instruments,
and thus a reason for assigning them intrinsic value. Furthermore, he
argues that the same moral point applies to the case of natural
ecosystems, to the extent that they lack intrinsic function. In the
light of Brennan’s proposal, Eric Katz (1991 and 1997) argues that all
natural entities, whether individuals or wholes, have intrinsic value
in virtue of their ontological independence from human purpose,
activity, and interest, and maintains the deontological principle that
nature as a whole is an “autonomous subject” which deserves
moral respect and must not be treated as a mere means to human
ends. Carrying the project of attributing intrinsic value to nature to
its ultimate form, Robert Elliot (1997) argues that naturalness itself
is a property in virtue of possessing which all natural things,
events, and states of affairs, attain intrinsic value. Furthermore,
Elliot argues that even a consequentialist, who in principle allows
the possibility of trading off intrinsic value from naturalness for
intrinsic value from other sources, could no longer justify such kind
of trade-off in reality. This is because the reduction of intrinsic
value due to the depletion of naturalness on earth, according to him,
has reached such a level that any further reduction of it could not be
compensated by any amount of intrinsic value generated in other ways,
no matter how great it is.
 As the notion of “natural” is understood in terms of
the lack of human contrivance and is often opposed to the notion of
“artifactual”, one much contested issue is about the value
of those parts of nature that have been interfered with by human
artifice—for instance, previously degraded natural environments
which have been humanly restored. Based on the premise that the
properties of being naturally evolved and having a natural continuity
with the remote past are “value adding” (i.e., adding
intrinsic value to those things which possess those two properties),
Elliot argues that even a perfectly restored environment would
necessarily lack those two value-adding properties and therefore be
less valuable than the originally undegraded natural
environment. Katz, on the other hand, argues that a restored nature is
really just an artifact designed and created for the satisfaction of
human ends, and that the value of restored environments is merely
instrumental. However, some critics have pointed out that advocates of
moral dualism between the natural and the artifactual run the risk of
diminishing the value of human life and culture, and fail to recognize
that the natural environments interfered with by humans may still have
morally relevant qualities other than pure naturalness (see Lo
1999). Two other issues central to this debate are that the key
concept “natural” seems ambiguous in many different ways
(see Hume 1751, App. 3; Mill 1874; Brennan [1988] 2014; Ch. 6; Elliot 1997,
Ch. 4), and that those who argue that human interference reduces the
intrinsic value of nature seem to have simply assumed the crucial
premise that naturalness is a source of intrinsic value. Some thinkers
maintain that the natural, or the “wild” construed as that
which “is not humanized” (Hettinger and Throop 1999,
p. 12) or to some degree “not under human control” (ibid.,
p. 13) is intrinsically valuable. Yet, as Bernard Williams points out
(Williams 1992), we may, paradoxically, need to use our technological
powers to retain a sense of something not being in our power. The
retention of wild areas may thus involve planetary and ecological
management to maintain, or even “imprison” such areas
(Birch 1990), raising a question over the extent to which national
parks and wilderness areas are free from our control. An important
message underlying the debate, perhaps, is that even if ecological
restoration is achievable, it might have been better to have left
nature intact in the first place.

Given the significance of the concept of naturalness in these debates,
it is perhaps surprising that there has been relatively little
analysis of that concept itself in environmental thought.  In his
pioneering work on the ethics of the environment, Holmes Rolston has
worked with a number of different conceptions of the natural (see
Brennan and Lo 2010, pp.116–23, for an analysis three senses of
the term "natural" that may be found in Rolston’s work).  An explicit
attempt to provide a conceptual analysis of a different sort is found
in Siipi 2008, while an account of naturalness linking this to
historical narratives of place is given in O’Neill, Holland and Light
2008, ch. 8 (compare the response to this in Siipi 2011).


As an alternative to consequentialism and deontology both of which
consider “thin” concepts such as “goodness”
and “rightness” as essential to morality, virtue
ethics proposes to understand morality—and assess the
ethical quality of actions—in terms of “thick”
concepts such as “kindness”, “honesty”,
“sincerity” and “justice”. As virtue ethics
speaks quite a different language from the other two kinds of ethical
theory, its theoretical focus is not so much on what kinds of things
are good/bad, or what makes an action right/wrong.  Indeed, the
richness of the language of virtues, and the emphasis on moral
character, is sometimes cited as a reason for exploring a
virtues-based approach to the complex and always-changing questions of
sustainability and environmental care (Hill 1983, Wensveen 2000,
Sandler 2007). One question central to virtue ethics is what the moral
reasons are for acting one way or another. For instance, from the
perspective of virtue ethics, kindness and loyalty would be moral
reasons for helping a friend in hardship. These are quite different
from the deontologist’s reason (that the action is demanded by a moral
rule) or the consequentialist reason (that the action will lead to a
better over-all balance of good over evil in the world). From the
perspective of virtue ethics, the motivation and justification of
actions are both inseparable from the character traits of the acting
agent. Furthermore, unlike deontology or consequentialism the moral
focus of which is other people or states of the world, one central
issue for virtue ethics is how to live a flourishing human life, this
being a central concern of the moral agent himself or
herself. “Living virtuously” is Aristotle’s recipe for
flourishing. Versions of virtue ethics advocating virtues such as
“benevolence”, “piety”,
“filiality”, and “courage”, have also been
held by thinkers in the Chinese Confucian tradition. The connection
between morality and psychology is another core subject of
investigation for virtue ethics. It is sometimes suggested that human
virtues, which constitute an important aspect of a flourishing human
life, must be compatible with human needs and desires, and perhaps
also sensitive to individual affection and temperaments. As its
central focus is human flourishing as such, virtue ethics may seem
unavoidably anthropocentric and unable to support a genuine moral
concern for the non-human environment. But just as Aristotle has
argued that a flourishing human life requires friendships and one can
have genuine friendships only if one genuinely values, loves,
respects, and cares for one’s friends for their own sake, not merely
for the benefits that they may bring to oneself, some have argued that
a flourishing human life requires the moral capacities to value, love,
respect, and care for the non-human natural world as an end in itself
(see O’Neill 1992, O’Neill 1993, Barry 1999).

 Supplementary Document:
Biodiversity Preservation

5. Wilderness, the Built Environment, Poverty and Politics
 Despite the variety of positions in environmental ethics developed
over the last thirty years, they have focused mainly on issues
concerned with wilderness and the reasons for its preservation (see
Callicott and Nelson 1998 for a collection of essays on the ideas and
moral significance of wilderness). The importance of wilderness
experience to the human psyche has been emphasized by many
environmental philosophers. Næss, for instance, urges us to
ensure we spend time dwelling in situations of intrinsic value,
whereas Rolston seeks “re-creation” of the human soul by
meditating in the wilderness. Likewise, the critical theorists believe
that aesthetic appreciation of nature has the power to re-enchant
human life. As wilderness becomes increasingly rare, people’s exposure
to wild things in their natural state has become reduced, and
according to some authors this may reduce the chance of our lives and
other values being transformed as a result of interactions with
nature.  An argument by Bryan Norton draws attention to an analogy
with music.  Someone exposed for the first time to a new musical genre
may undergo a transformation in musical preferences, tastes and values
as a result of the experience (Norton 1987.  Such a transformation can
affect their other preferences and desires too, in both direct and
indirect ways (see Sarkar 2005, ch. 4, esp. pp. 82–7).  In the
attempt to preserve opportunities for experiences that can change or
enhance people’s valuations of nature, there has been a move since the
early 2000s to find ways of rewilding degraded environments, and even
parts of cities (Fraser 2009, Monbiot 2013).(
 By contrast to the focus on wild places, relatively little
attention has been paid to the built environment, although this is the
one in which most people spend most of their time. In post-war
Britain, for example, cheaply constructed new housing developments
were often poor replacements for traditional communities. They have
been associated with lower amounts of social interaction and increased
crime compared with the earlier situation. The destruction of highly
functional high-density traditional housing, indeed, might be compared
with the destruction of highly diverse ecosystems and biotic
communities. Likewise, the loss of the world’s huge diversity of
natural languages has been mourned by many, not just professionals
with an interest in linguistics. Urban and linguistic environments are
just two of the many “places” inhabited by humans. Some
philosophical theories about natural environments and objects have
potential to be extended to cover built environments and non-natural
objects of several sorts (see King 2000, Light 2001, Palmer 2003,
while Fox 2007 aims to include both built and natural environments in
the scope of a single ethical theory). Certainly there are many
parallels between natural and artificial domains: for example, many of
the conceptual problems involved in discussing the restoration of
natural objects also appear in the parallel context of restoring
human-made objects.

The focus on the value of wilderness and the importance of its
preservation has overlooked another important problem—namely
that lifestyles in which enthusiasms for nature rambles, woodland
meditations or mountaineering can be indulged demand a standard of
living that is far beyond the dreams of most of the world’s
population. Moreover, mass access to wild places would likely destroy
the very values held in high esteem by the “natural
aristocrats”, a term used by Hugh Stretton (1976) to
characterize the environmentalists “driven chiefly by love of
the wilderness”. Thus, a new range of moral and political
problems open up, including the environmental cost of tourist access
to wilderness areas, and ways in which limited access could be
arranged to areas of natural beauty and diversity, while maintaining
the individual freedoms central to liberal democracies.
 Lovers of wilderness sometimes consider the high human populations
in some developing countries as a key problem underlying the
environmental crisis. Rolston (1996), for instance, claims that (some)
humans are a kind of planetary “cancer”. He maintains that
while “feeding people always seems humane, ... when we face up
to what is really going on, by just feeding people, without attention
to the larger social results, we could be feeding a kind of
cancer.” This remark is meant to justify the view that saving
nature should, in some circumstances, have a higher priority than
feeding people. But such a view has been criticized for seeming to
reveal a degree of misanthropy, directed at those human beings least
able to protect and defend themselves (see Attfield 1998, Brennan
1998a). The empirical basis of Rolston’s claims has been queried by
work showing that poor people are often extremely good environmental
managers (Martinez-Alier 2002). Guha’s worries about the elitist and
“missionary” tendencies of some kinds of deep green
environmentalism in certain rich western countries can be quite
readily extended to theorists such as Rolston (Guha 1999). Can such an
apparently elitist sort of wilderness ethics ever be democratised? How
can the psychically-reviving power of the wild become available to
those living in the slums of Calcutta or São Paolo? These questions so
far lack convincing answers.
 Furthermore, the economic conditions which support the kind of
enjoyment of wilderness by Stretton’s “natural
aristocrats”, and more generally the lifestyles of many people
in the affluent countries, seem implicated in the destruction and
pollution which has provoked the environmental turn in the first
place. For those in the richer countries, for instance, engaging in
outdoor recreations usually involves the motor car. Car dependency,
however, is at the heart of many environmental problems, a key factor
in urban pollution, while at the same time central to the economic and
military activities of many nations and corporations, for example
securing and exploiting oil reserves. In an increasingly crowded
industrialised world, the answers to such problems are pressing. Any
adequate study of this intertwined set of problems must involve
interdisciplinary collaboration among philosophers and theorists in
the social as well as the natural sciences.
 Connections between environmental destruction, unequal resource
consumption, poverty and the global economic order have been discussed
by political scientists, development theorists, geographers and
economists as well as by philosophers. Links between economics and
environmental ethics are particularly well established. Work by Mark
Sagoff (1988), for instance, has played a major part in bringing the
two fields together. He argues that “as citizens rather than
consumers” people are concerned about values, which cannot
plausibly be reduced to mere ordered preferences or quantified in
monetary terms.  Sagoff’s distinction between people as consumers and
people as citizens was intended to blunt the use of cost-benefit
analysis as the final arbiter in discussions about nature’s value.  Of
course, spouses take out insurance on each others’ lives.  We pay
extra for travel insurance to cover the cost of cancellation, illness,
or lost baggage.  Such actions are economically rational.  They
provide us with some compensation in case of loss.  No-one, however,
would regard insurance payments as replacing lost limbs, a loved one
or even the joys of a cancelled vacation. So it is for nature,
according to Sagoff.  We can put dollar values on a stand of timber, a
reef, a beach, a national park.  We can measure the travel costs, the
money spent by visitors, the real estate values, the park fees and all
the rest.  But these dollar measures do not tell us the value of
nature any more than my insurance premiums tell you the value of a
human life (also see Shrader-Frechette 1987, O’Neill 1993, and Brennan
1995). If Sagoff is right, cost-benefit analysis of the kind mentioned
in section 5 above cannot be a basis for an ethic of sustainability
any more than for an ethic of biodiversity.  The potentially
misleading appeal to economic reason used to justify the expansion of
the corporate sector has also come under critical scrutiny by
globalisation theorists (see Korten 1999). These critiques do not aim
to eliminate economics from environmental thinking; rather, they
resist any reductive, and strongly anthropocentric, tendency to
believe that all social and environmental problems are fundamentally
or essentially economic.

Other interdisciplinary approaches link environmental ethics with
biology, policy studies, public administration, political theory,
cultural history, post-colonial theory, literature, geography, and
human ecology (for some examples, see Norton, Hutchins, Stevens, Maple
1995, Shrader-Frechette 1984, Gruen and Jamieson (eds.) 1994, Karliner
1997, Diesendorf and Hamilton 1997, Schmidtz and Willott 2002). Many
assessments of issues concerned with biodiversity, ecosystem health,
poverty, environmental justice and sustainability look at both human
and environmental issues, eschewing in the process commitment either
to a purely anthropocentric or purely ecocentric perspective (see
Hayward and O’Neill 1997, and Dobson 1999 for collections of essays
looking at the links between sustainability, justice, welfare and the
distribution of environmental goods). The future development of
environmental ethics depend on these, and other interdisciplinary
synergies, as much as on its anchorage within philosophy.
6. Sustainability and Climate Change 

The Convention on Biological Diversity discussed in section 5 was
influenced by
 Our Common Future,
 an earlier United Nations document on sustainability
produced by the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED
1987).  The commission was chaired by Gro Harlem Brundtland, Prime
Minister of Norway at the time, and the report is sometimes known as
the Brundtland Report.  This report noted the increasing tide of
evidence that planetary systems vital to supporting life on earth were
under strain.  The key question it raised is whether it is equitable
to sacrifice options for future well-being in favour of supporting
current lifestyles, especially the comfortable, and sometimes lavish,
forms of life enjoyed in the rich countries.  As Bryan Norton puts it,
the world faces a global challenge to see whether different human
groups, with widely varying perspectives, can perhaps “accept
responsibility to maintain a non-declining set of opportunities based
on possible uses of the environment”. The preservation of
options for the future can be readily linked to notions of equity if
it is agreed that “the future ought not to face, as a result of
our actions today, a seriously reduced range of options and choices,
as they try to adapt to the environment that they face” (Norton
2001: 419).  Note that references to “the future” need not
be limited to the future of human beings only. In keeping with the
non-anthropocentric focus of much environmental philosophy, a care for
sustainability and biodiversity can embrace a care for opportunities
available to non-human living things.

However, when the concept “sustainable development” was
first articulated in the Brundtland Report, the emphasis was clearly
anthropocentric. In face of increasing evidence that planetary systems
vital to life-support were under strain, the concept of sustainable
development is constructed in the report to encourage certain globally
coordinated directions and types of economic and social
development. The report defines “sustainable development”
in the following way:
Sustainable development is development that meets the
needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs. It contains within it two key
concepts:

the concept of “needs”, in particular the essential
needs of the world’s poor, to which overriding priority should be
given; and 
the idea of limitations imposed by the state of technology and
social organization on the environment’s ability to meet present and
future needs.


Thus the goals of economic and social development must be defined in
terms of sustainability in all countries—developed or
developing, market-oriented or centrally planned. Interpretations will
vary, but must share certain general features and must flow from a
consensus on the basic concept of sustainable development and on a
broad strategic framework for achieving it. (WCED 1987, Ch. 2,
paragraphs 1–2)

The report goes on to argue that “the industrial world has already
used much of the planet’s ecological capital.  This inequality is the
planet’s main ‘environmental’ problem; it is also its main
‘development’ problem” (WCED 1987, Overview, paragraph 17).  In the
concept of sustainable development the report combines the resource
economist’s notion of “sustainable yield” with the recognition that
developing countries of the world are entitled to economic growth and
prosperity.  The notion of sustainable yield involves thinking of
forests, rivers, oceans and other ecosystems, including the natural
species living in them, as a stock of “ecological capital” from which
all kinds of goods and services flow.  Provided the flow of such goods
and services does not reduce the capacity of the capital itself to
maintain its productivity, the use of the systems in question is
regarded as sustainable.  Thus, the report argues that “maximum
sustainable yield must be defined after taking into account
system-wide effects of exploitation” of ecological capital (WCED 1987,
Ch. 2, paragraph 11).

There are clear philosophical, political and economic precursors to
the Brundtland concept of sustainability. For example, John Stuart
Mill (1848, IV. 6. 1) distinguished between the
“stationary state” and
the “progressive state”
and argued that at the end of the progressive state lies the
stationary state, since “the increase of wealth
is not boundless”. Mill also recognized a debt
to the gloomy prognostications of Thomas Malthus,
 who had conjectured that population tends to increase
geometrically while food resources at best increase only
arithmetically, so that demand for food will inevitably outstrip the
supply (see Milgate and Stimson 2009, Ch. 7, and the discussion of
 Malthus in the Political Economy section of the entry on
 Mill
  in the Spring 2016 Edition). Reflection on Malthus
led Mill to argue for restraining human population growth:
Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries,
a conscientious or prudential restraint on population is
indispensable, to prevent the increase of numbers from outstripping
the increase of capital, and the condition of the classes who are at
the bottom of society from being deteriorated (Mill 1848,
IV. 6. 1).
Such warnings resonate with more recent pessimism about increasing
human population and its impact on the poorest people, as well as on
loss of biodiversity, fresh water scarcity, overconsumption and
climate change.  In their controversial work The Population
Bomb, Paul and Anne Ehrlich, argue that without restrictions on
population growth, including the imposition of mandatory birth
control, the world faced “mass starvation” in the short
term (Ehrlich 1968). In a subsequent defence of their early work, the
Ehrlichs declared that the most serious flaw in their original
analysis “was that it was much too optimistic about the
future”, and comment that “Since The Bomb was written,
increases in greenhouse gas flows into the atmosphere, a consequence
of the near doubling of the human population and the near tripling of
global consumption, indicate that the results will likely be
catastrophic climate disruption caused by greenhouse heating”
(Ehrlich and Ehrlich 2009, 66).  It was also in 1968 that Garrett
Hardin published his much cited article on the “tragedy of the
commons” showing that common resources are always subject to
degradation and extinction in the face of the rational pursuit of self
interest.  For Hardin, the increasing pressure on shared resources,
and increasing pollution, are inevitable results of the fact that
“there is no technical solution to the population problem”
(Hardin 1968). The problem may be analysed from the perspective of the
so-called
 prisoner’s dilemma
 (also see the
 free rider problem).
 Despite the pessimism of writers at the time, and the
advocacy of setting limits to population growth, there was also an
optimism that echoes Mill’s own view that a “stationary
state” would not be one of misery and decline, but rather one in
which humans could aspire to more equitable distribution of available
and limited resources. This is clear not only among those who
recognize limits to economic growth (Meadows et al. 1972) but also
among those who champion the move to a steady state economy (Daly
1991) or at least want to see more account taken of ecology in
economics (Norgaard 1994).

The Brundtland report puts less emphasis on limits than do Mill,
Malthus and these more recent writers. It depicts sustainability as a
challenge and opportunity for the world to become more socially,
politically and environmentally fair.  In pursuit of
 intergenerational justice,
 it suggests that there should be new
human rights added to the standard list, for example, that “All human
beings have the fundamental right to an environment adequate for their
health and well being” (WCED 1987, Annexe 1, paragraph 1). The report
also argues that “The enjoyment of any right requires respect for the
similar rights of others, and recognition of reciprocal and even joint
responsibilities. States have a responsibility towards their own
citizens and other states” (ibid., chapter 12, paragraph 83).  Since
the report’s publication, many writers have supported and defended the
view that global and
 economic justice
 require that nations which had become wealthy through
earlier industrialization and environmental exploitation should allow
less developed nations similar or equivalent opportunities for
development especially in term of access to environmental resources
(Redclift 2005).  As intended by the report the idea of sustainable
development has become strongly integrated into the notion of
environmental conservation.  The report has also set the scene for a
range of subsequent international conferences, declarations, and
protocols many of them maintaining the emphasis on the prospects for
the future of humanity, rather than considering sustainability in any
wider sense.
 Some early commentators on the notion of sustainable development
have been critical of the way the notion mixes together moral ideas of
justice and fairness with technical ideas in economics.  The objection
is that sustainability as, in part, an economic and scientific notion,
should not be fused with evaluative ideals (Beckerman 1994). This
objection has not generally been widely taken up. Mark Sagoff has
observed that environmental policy “is most characterized by the
opposition between instrumental values and aesthetic and moral
judgments and convictions” (Sagoff 2004: 20).  Some
non-anthropocentric environmental thinkers have found the language of
economics unsatisfactory in its implications since it already appears
to assume a largely instrumental view of nature.  The use of notions
such as “asset”, “capital” and even the word
“resources” in connection with natural objects and systems
has been identified by some writers as instrumentalizing natural
things which are in essence wild and free.  The objection is that such
language promotes the tendency to think of natural things as mere
resources for humans or as raw materials with which human labour could
be mixed, not only to produce consumable goods, but also to generate
human ownership (Plumwood 1993, Sagoff 2004). If natural objects and
systems have intrinsic value independent of their possible use for
humans, as many environmental philosophers have argued, then a policy
approach to sustainability needs to consider the environment and
natural things not only in instrumental and but also in intrinsic
terms to do justice to the moral standing that many people believe
such items possess. Despite its acknowledgment of there being
“moral, ethical, cultural, aesthetic, and purely scientific
reasons for conserving wild beings” (WCED 1987, Overview,
paragraph 53), the strongly anthropocentric and instrumental language
used throughout the Brundtland report in articulating the notion of
sustainable development can be criticised for defining the notion too
narrowly, leaving little room for addressing sustainability questions
directly concerning the Earth’s environment and its non-human
inhabitants: should, and if so, how should, human beings reorganise
their ways of life and the social-political structures of their
communities to allow sustainability and equity not only for all humans
but also for the other species on the planet?

The preservation concern for nature and non-human species is addressed
to some extent by making a distinction between weaker and stronger
conceptions of sustainability (Beckerman 1995).  The distinction
emerged from considering the question: what exactly does sustainable
development seek to sustain?  Is the flow of goods and services from
world markets that is to be maintained, or is it the current—or
some future—level of consumption?  In answering such questions,
proponents of weak sustainability argue that it is acceptable to
replace natural capital with human-made capital provided that the
latter has equivalent functions.  If, for example, plastic trees could
produce oxygen, absorb carbon and support animal and insect
communities, then they could replace the real thing, and a world with
functionally equivalent artificial trees would seem just as good as
one with real or natural trees in it.  For weak sustainability
theorists, the aim of future development should be to maintain a
consistently productive stock of capital on which to draw, while not
insisting that some portion of that capital be natural. Strong
sustainability theorists, by contrast, generally resist the
substitution of human for natural capital, insisting that a critical
stock of natural things and processes be preserved.  By so doing, they
argue, we maintain stocks of rivers, forests and biodiverse systems,
hence providing maximum options—options in terms of experience,
appreciation, values, and ways of life—for the future human
inhabitants of the planet (Norton 2005). The Brundtland report can
also be seen as advocating a form of strong sustainability in so far
as it recommends that a “first priority is to establish the problem of
disappearing species and threatened ecosystems on political agendas as
a major resource issue” (ibid., chapter 6, paragraph 57). Furthermore,
despite its instrumental and economic language, the report in fact
endorses a wider moral perspective on the status of and our relation
to nature and non-human species, evidenced by its statement that “the
case for the conservation of nature should not rest only with
development goals. It is part of our moral obligation to other living
beings and future generations” (WCED 1987, chapter 2, paragraph 55).
Implicit in the statement is not only a strong conception of
sustainability but also a non-anthropocentric conception of the
notion.  Over time, strong sustainability has come to be focused not
only on the needs of human and other living things but also on their
rights (Redclift 2004, 218).  In a further development, the discourses
on forms of sustainability have generally given way in the last decade
to a more ambiguous usage, in which the term “sustainability”
functions to bring people into a debate rather than setting out a
clear definition of the terms of the debate itself.  As globalization
leads to greater integration of world economies, the world after the
Brundtland report has seen greater fragmentation among viewpoints,
where critics of globalization have generally used the concept of
sustainability in a plurality of different ways (Sneddon, Howarth and
Norgaard 2006).  Some have argued that “sustainability”, just like the
word “nature” itself, has come to mean very different things, carrying
different symbolic meaning for different groups, and reflecting very
different interests (Redclift 2004, 220).  For better or for worse,
such ambiguity can on occasion allow different parties in negotiations
to claim a measure of agreement.

The preservation of opportunities to live well, or at least to have a
minimally acceptable level of well being, is at the heart of
 population ethics
 and many contemporary conceptions of
sustainability. Many people believe such opportunities for the
existing younger generations, and also for the yet to arrive future
generations, to be under threat from continuing environmental
destruction, including loss of fresh water resources, continued
clearing of wild areas and a changing climate.  Of these, climate
change has come to prominence as an area of intense policy and
political debate, to which applied philosophers and ethicists have
much to contribute.  An early exploration of the topic by John Broome
shows how the economics of climate change could not be divorced from
considerations of intergenerational justice and ethics (Broome 1992),
and this has set the scene for subsequent discussions and
analyses. More than a decade later, when Stephen Gardiner analyses the
state of affairs surrounding climate change in an article entitled “A
Perfect Moral Storm” (Gardiner 2006), his starting point is also that
ethics plays a fundamental role in all discussions of climate
policy. But he argues that even if difficult ethical and conceptual
questions facing climate change (such as the so-called
 “non-identity problem”
along with the notion of
 historic injustices)
 could be answered, it would still be close to
politically and socially impossible to formulate, let alone to
enforce, policies and action plans to deal effectively with climate
change. This is due to the multi-faceted nature of a problem that
involves vast numbers of agents and players.  At a global level, there
is first of all the practical problem of motivating shared
responsibilities (see the entry on 
 moral motivation) 
in part due to the dispersed nature of greenhouse gas
emissions which makes the effects of increasing levels of atmospheric
carbon and methane not always felt most strongly in the regions where
they originate. Add to this the fact that there is an un-coordinated
and also dispersed network of agents—both individual and 
corporate—responsible for greenhouse gas emissions, and that there are no
effective institutions that can control and limit them.  But this
tangle of issues constitutes, Gardiner argues, only one strand in the
skein of quandaries that confronts us.  There is also the fact that by
and large only future generations will carry the brunt of the impacts
of climate change, explaining why current generations have no strong
incentive to act.  Finally, it is evident that our current mainstream
political, economic, and ethical models are not up to the task of
reaching global consensus, and in many cases not even national
consensus, on how best to design and implement fair climate
policies. 
 These considerations lead Gardiner to take a pessimistic view of
the prospects for progress on climate issues.  His view includes
pessimism about technical solutions, such as geoengineering as the
antidote to climate problems, echoing the concerns of others that
further domination of and large scale interventions in nature may turn
out to be a greater evil than enduring a climate catastrophe (Gardiner
2011, ch 11, Jamieson 1996). A key point in Gardiner’s analysis
is that the problem of climate change involves a tangle of issues, the
complexity of which conspires to encourage buck-passing, weakness of
will, distraction and procrastination , “mak[ing] us extremely
vulnerable to moral corruption” (ibid., 397; cf. Gardiner 2011;
also see the concept of “wicked problem” in Brennan
2004). Because of the grave risk of serious harms to future
generations, our failure to take timely mitigating actions on climate
isseus can be seen as a serious moral failing, especially in the light
of our current knowledge and understanding of the problem. Summarizing
widespread frustration over the issue, Rolston writes: “All this
inability to act effectively in the political arena casts a long
shadow of doubt on whether, politically or technologically, much less
ethically, we humans are anywhere near being smart enough to manage
the planet” (Rolston 2012, 216).  In the face of such pessimism
about the prospects for securing any action to combat climate change
other writers have cautioned against giving in to defeatism and making
self-fulfilling prophecies. These latter behaviours are always a
temptation when we confront worrying truths and insufficient
answers. Whatever the future holds, many thinkers now believe that
solving the problems of climate change is an essential ingredient in
any credible form of sustainable development and that the alternative
to decisive action may result in the diminution not only of nature and
natural systems, but also of human dignity itself (see Nanda 2011,
especially chapters by Heyd, Balafrej, Gutrich and Brennan and
Lo).

  Supplementary Document:
Pathologies of Environmental Crisis: Theories and Empirical Research