Epistemic contextualism (EC) is a recent and hotly debated position.
EC is roughly the view that what is expressed by a knowledge
attribution — a claim to the effect that S
‘knows’ that p — depends partly on
something in the context of ‘the attributor’, and hence
the view is often called ‘attributor contextualism’.
Because what such an utterance expresses is context-dependent, so too
is whether the knowledge attribution is true. The typical EC view
identifies the pivotal contextual features as the attributor’s
practical stake in the truth of p, or the prominence in the
attributor’s situation of skeptical doubts about knowledge. The
typical EC view has it that as the stakes rise or the skeptical doubts
become more serious, the contextual standard gets more demanding. It
requires S to be in a better position if the attributor's
claim, ‘S knows that p’, is to express a
truth. In contrast, ‘invariantists’ about knowledge hold
that such factors in the attributor’s context do not affect the
standards that must be met by a true ‘knowledge’
attribution.

In addition to marking an important departure from traditional
epistemological assumptions, EC is claimed to provide a novel
resolution to certain puzzles about knowledge—not least,
skeptical ones—as well as to best comport with our everyday
knowledge-attributing practices. What follows describes the leading
forms of EC, so understood, as well as the principal arguments for and
major objections to EC. Along the way, EC is situated with respect to
certain other views, both kindred and competing.
 
1. Some Recent History, By Way of Background[1]

EC, in the sense in which it concerns us here, is a relatively recent
development. Nevertheless, in the latter half of the 20th
century, several at-times overlapping strands emerged which, in one
way or another, made ‘contextual’ factors of central
importance to certain epistemological questions, thereby setting the
stage for EC in its contemporary form.

One such strand was the entertaining of the possibility of some kind
of pluralism concerning epistemic standards. In one instance, this
took the form of the claim, in response to skepticism, that there are
“two senses of ‘know’”—one
‘strong’ or ‘philosophical’, the other
‘weak’ or ‘ordinary’ (see, e.g., Malcolm
1952). So too, some of Wittgenstein’s (1953, 1969) claims about
the relation between meaning and use and the multiplicity of
“language games”, each with its own set of norms, opened
the way for a more thoroughgoing kind of semantic pluralism with
regard to epistemic concepts and/or terms. Further, in a move which
(as we will see) foreshadows contemporary contextualists’
methodology, there was the argument for pluralism from cases:
Hector-Neri Castañeda’s observing that “what counts
as knowing” that Columbus discovered America on October 12, 1492
might differ depending on whether we are considering (a) a television
quiz show, (b) a high school student’s essay, or (c) a defence
of the traditional date of Columbus’ discovery from some
ingenious and famous Harvard historian’s claim that it occurred
on October 11, 1492 (1980, 217); or Gail Stine’s taking it as
obvious that “[i]t is an essential characteristic of our concept
of knowledge that tighter criteria are appropriate in different
contexts. It is one thing in a street encounter, another in a
classroom, another in a law court—and who is to say it cannot be
another in a philosophical discussion?” (Stine 1976, 254).

Second, and relatedly, there was the emergence of ‘relevant
alternatives’ (RA) approaches to understanding knowledge.
Although, in the hands of Fred Dretske (1970, 1981) and Alvin Goldman
(1976), the RA approach was intended as an alternative to
justification-centered accounts of knowledge, it also, like the
strategy of multiplying senses of ‘know(s)’, promised a
way of giving skepticism its due while at the same time limiting the
threat it posed to our ordinary claims to know. The core RA notion is
simply that knowing that p is incompatible with any of the
relevant not-p alternatives’ not having been ruled out.
This provides a way of limiting skeptical threats, just because
skeptical possibilities (that a certain animal is really just a
cleverly disguised mule, that I am now merely dreaming that I am
sitting at my desk, that the seemingly intelligent agents around me
are in fact just automatons) might not be relevant, at least not
ordinarily. As Austin famously puts it:

[S]pecial cases where doubts arise and require resolving, are
contrasted with the normal cases which hold the field unless
there is some special suggestion that deceit, etc., is involved, and
deceit, moreover, of an intelligible kind in the circumstances, that
is, of a kind that can be looked into because motive, etc., is
specially suggested. There is no suggestion that I never know
what other people’s emotions are, nor yet that in particular
cases I might be wrong for no special reason or in no special way.
(1946, 113; cf. ibid., 88)


Various specific RA theories differ as to just what ‘ruling
out’ amounts to and whether it is the agent, his/her evidence,
or something else again which does the ruling out. So too, different
RA theorists proposed or appeared to assume different standards of
relevance—thus, at one point Dretske suggests that it has to do
with “the kind of possibilities that actually exist in the
objective situation” (1981b, 63; cf. 1981a, 131); while some
remarks of Goldman’s (1976, 89; 1989, 147) imply that it is
certain facts about the subject’s psychological/conversational
setting that determine which alternatives are relevant; etc. But,
insofar as there is some interesting variation in the set of relevant
alternatives to a given proposition, we have the possibility of there
being a corresponding variation in what it takes to know that
p, and so a kind of pluralism here as well.

Third, among some philosophers there was an increasing emphasis on
regarding epistemic subjects, activities, and/or accomplishments, as
deeply ‘social’ in ways typically overlooked and
unappreciated. (For some discussion, see Goldman 2007.) Included here
is Richard Rorty’s (1979) espousal of ‘epistemological
behaviorism’, as he calls it, as well as perhaps the first
explicit statement of a “contextualist” epistemic theory
by David Annis. Annis’ theory concerns justification, not
knowledge, and it appeals to the subject’s context rather than
the attributor’s. According Annis, while “man is a social
animal…when it comes to the justification of beliefs
philosophers have tended to ignore this fact” (1978,
215)—more specifically, they have tended to ignore the existence
of “contextual parameters essential to justification”
(ibid., 213). Thus, as Annis sees it, both foundationalists
and coherentists depict justification as a function of certain facts
about the subject alone, considered in isolation from his/her social
environment (‘context’). According to Annis, however, this
picture fails to do justice to what is in fact the social character of
justification. For instance:

Suppose we are interested in whether Jones, an ordinary non-medically
trained person, has the general information that polio is caused by a
virus. If his response to our question is that he remembers the paper
reporting that Salk said it was, then this is good enough. He has
performed adequately given the issue-context. But suppose the context
is an examination for the M. D. degree. Here we expect a lot more. If
the candidate simply said what Jones did, we would take him as being
very deficient in knowledge. Thus relative to one issue-context a
person may be justified in believing h but not justified
relative to another context. (Ibid., 215)


Finally, the potential relevance of social factors to epistemological
questions also arose in discussion of Gettier cases. In particular, in
response to cases involving evidence one does not possess, John
Pollock (1986, 190–193)—citing Harman (1968, 1980), who in
turn credits Sosa (1964) with the idea—suggested that there are
certain things which we are “socially expected” to be
aware of and that such expectations bear upon whether one knows. But
if that’s so, and if there is some kind of variability in such
expectations, there will be a similar, socially-based variation in the
standards for knowledge.

Each of the views or movements just mentioned makes
‘context’—of one sort or another—of central
importance—in one manner or another—to epistemology, in
ways not reflected in more traditional analytic writings on the
subject. Still, it is not difficult to discern in them rather
different views of the relevance of ‘context’ to
epistemology. Thus, among such views there are some—such as
Annis’, which he intends as an alternative to foundationalism
and coherentism—which are obviously concerned with making
substantive claims about knowledge or justification itself. On the
other hand, some proponents of the various ideas just discussed are at
times clearly speaking, not about knowledge/justification per
se, but rather about the linguistic items we use in speaking
about such things. For instance, among Castañeda’s goals
in his paper is to elucidate “the contextual semantics of
‘know’” (1980, 209).

So too, there are clear differences among the views just sketched as
to just how we are to conceive of context, insofar as it is thought to
be of central epistemological importance: sometimes it is conceived of
in ‘subject’ terms (facts about the putative subject of
knowledge, qua such subject, including features of his/her
environment, social or not); sometimes, the concern seems to be more
with facts about those who are attributing knowledge (which may
include the subject, albeit qua knowledge attributor), rather
than the subject of the
 attribution.[2]

In terms of the views mentioned above, just where to locate a given
theory or theorist along both of these dimensions—a substantive
versus a semantic orientation of the theory; a subject versus
attributor conception of ‘context’—is at times not
at all clear. In current work in epistemology,
‘contextualism’ is used to refer to either of these now
more clearly distinguished threads, with the discussion of each going
on largely in separation from the other. Thus, on the
‘substantive’ side, we have as perhaps its most prominent
exponent Michael Williams (1991, 2001), whose concern is with
providing an antidote and alternative to what he calls
“epistemological realism”. According to the latter view,
the objects of epistemological inquiry (centrally, various exemplars
of knowledge and/or justified belief) have some underlying
“structural unity” that makes them all
instances of a particular kind (1991, 108–109), independently of
any “situational, disciplinary and other contextually variable
factors” (ibid., 119; 2001, 159ff.). By contrast, as
defended by Williams, ‘contextualism’—which he sees
as present in the views of Dewey, Popper, Austin, and Wittgenstein,
for example—is the view that it is only in relation to the
latter type of factors that a proposition has any epistemic status at
all (ibid.), and that there is no need to suppose that the
objects of epistemological inquiry have some deep structural unity
which binds them all together. Meanwhile, on the semantic side, we
have such figures as Stewart Cohen, Keith DeRose, Mark Heller, David
Lewis, and Ram Neta, all of whom emphasize moreover the importance of
facts about the attributor (rather than the subject) of
knowledge—such things as “the purposes, intentions,
expectations, presuppositions, etc., of the speakers who utter these
sentences” (Cohen, 1999, 187–188; cf. DeRose, 1992, 1995,
2009; Heller, 1999b, 117ff.)—in affecting what is expressed by a
given utterance of a knowledge-attributing sentence.

The relation between these general sorts of
‘contextualism’—the substantive and the semantic, as
we might label them—is interesting and important. But, as
already indicated, the present entry will focus on the semantic view,
‘attributor
 contextualism’.[3]
 Henceforth, that will be the view referred to in speaking of
(epistemic) contextualism (EC).
2. Further Clarification

So EC, of the sort which will concern us here, is a semantic thesis:
it concerns the truth conditions of knowledge sentences,
and/or the propositions expressed by utterances
 thereof.[4]
 The thesis is that it is only relative to a contextually-determined
standard that a knowledge sentence expresses a complete proposition:
change the standard, and you change what the sentence expresses;
acontextually, however, no such proposition is expressed. In this
respect, knowledge utterances are supposed to resemble utterances
involving uncontroversially context-sensitive terms. For instance,
just what proposition is expressed by an utterance of

 ‘It is raining,’
 ‘I’m hungry,’ or
 ‘That’s red,’


depends in certain obvious ways upon such facts as the location (1) or
identity (2) of the speaker, and/or the referent of the demonstrative
(in 3). Similarly, it is plausible (though by no means universally
accepted—see, e.g., Capellen and LePore, 2005a & b) that
attributions of tallness or flatness are context-sensitive, insofar as
there are varying standards that one might have mind in applying
either predicate and which affect just what is said in doing so. Note,
though, that insofar as the truth value of such utterances
“depends on context”, that is because their truth
conditions—or, the proposition expressed
thereby—are so dependent. That is, it is not as though (1)-(3)
each has fixed truth-evaluable contents, the truth values of
which happen to depend on context. Rather, one is not in a position to
assess any of these sentences as true/false unless one knows the
location of the utterer of (1), the identity of the speaker (2), and
so on. For it is only relative to such facts that tokenings of such
sentences have specific contents, and just what contents they do have
depends on context. So too for epistemic contextualism: though the
thesis is sometimes put in terms of the context-variability of
knowledge sentences’ truth values (e.g., Rieber 1998,
190, Cohen 1998, 289 and 2005a, 57), this is misleading: those truth
values shift only because, according to EC, different propositions
are expressed in different contexts.

Likewise, just because EC is a thesis about knowledge-sentences’
truth conditions—namely, that they are
context-variable—it is not a thesis about knowledge itself. In
the same way: recognizing that ‘I’ is token-reflexive has
no metaphysical implications about the self, observing that
‘here’ is an indexical has no implications about
who’s where or what it is to be at some location, and so on. So
it is misleading too when EC of the form under discussion is
described, as it sometimes is, as the view that whether one
knows depends upon context, or as bearing on the nature of
knowledge (Bach 2005, 55, n. 4 provides some examples.) As Richard
Feldman says,

…it is not true that contextualism holds that the standards for
knowledge change with context. Rather, it holds that the standards for
the application of the word ‘knowledge’ change. (Feldman
2004, 24; cf. Cohen 1999, 65; Bach 2005, 54–55)


EC, then, is an epistemological theory because, but only
because, it concerns sentences used in attributing (/denying)
“knowledge”, as opposed to those employing some
non-epistemological term(s); it is not a theory about any
such epistemic property/relation itself. Nonetheless, as we will see,
when various proponents of EC flesh out their preferred version of the
views, the differences among the resulting theories largely
recapitulate some of the major lines of division among leading
theories of knowledge itself.

Finally, though there are connections between them (touched on briefly
in Section 4.4 below), EC should be distinguished from the general
semantical-linguistic approach, or cluster of theses, called
“contextualism,” which sees ‘context’ as
central in one or another way to certain fundamental semantic issues,
most centrally meaning itself. (See, e.g., Recanati (1989, 1994,
2005), Searle (1980).)
3. Support for EC: Apparently Inconsistent Knowledge Claims, Skeptical and Everyday

As its proponents generally admit, EC is something that one needs to
be argued into: it takes work to come to think, for example,
that there can be situations in which we have two subjects, exactly
alike psychologically, possessing the very same history and the same
evidence with regard to p, etc., with respect to only one of
whom ‘S knows that p’ expresses a truth,
since they are being evaluated from within different contexts: we
seem, if anything, to be ‘intuitive
 invariantists’.[5]
 As one leading contextualist says, many “resist [the
contextualist] thesis—some fiercely. Moreover, those who do
accept the thesis, generally do so only as a result of being convinced
by philosophical reflection” (Cohen 1999, 78).

But while, in the abstract, EC strikes many as quite contentious,
according to its proponents it has considerable merits. Thus, although
EC is not itself a theory of knowledge or related epistemic notions,
it has been said to afford a resolution of certain apparent
epistemological puzzles, both ordinary and extra-ordinary. More
specifically, EC is said to give us a way of responding to certain
cases in which we have apparently inconsistent knowledge claims, each
of which enjoys some real plausibility. Though these puzzles are not
exclusively of the skeptical variety, it is EC’s offering a
solution to skeptical problems that has figured most prominently in
current discussions. So that is the natural place to start.
3.1 A Skeptical Puzzle

Consider one particular form of skeptical argument upon which leading
contextualists have focused (e.g., Cohen 1986, 1988, 2005a; DeRose
1995; Neta 2003a & b; cf. Unger 1975). We can call it
‘SA’, for ‘skeptical argument’:



P1.
I don’t know that not-h [h
= some skeptical ‘hypothesis’; e.g., that I’m a
bodiless brain in a vat, being stimulated to have just those
experiences I would be having if I weren’t a
‘BIV’]. 

P2.
If I don’t know that not-h, then I
don’t know that p [p = some mundane
proposition which we commonly take ourselves to know; e.g., that I
have hands]. 

C.
So, I don’t know that p 



SA constitutes a puzzle just because (a) each of the premises enjoys a
fair amount of plausibility. As to P1, how, after all, could I know
that I’m not a bodiless brain in a vat? By waving my arms
around? As to P2, it is just an instance of the closure principle for
 knowledge,[6]
 which many are inclined to regard as axiomatic. But (b) given our
intuitive anti-skepticism, C seems immensely implausible,
even though (c) the argument appears to be formally valid.

On the face of it, then, we are confronted with a paradox—a set
of independently very plausible but seemingly mutually inconsistent
propositions. Because that is the problem, a complete
solution to SA will have to do two things (DeRose 1995): explain which
of the assumptions lying behind the generation of the paradox should,
in fact, be rejected, and why; and explain too how we got into this
mess — or, more formally, why the assumption singled out for
rejection struck us as plausible in the first place.
3.2 The General Form of the Contextualist Solution

At first blush, it might seem that there are just three possible
responses to SA:

we can simply capitulate to skepticism, accepting SA’s
conclusion and abandoning our claims to know such things as that we
have hands;
we can reject P2 and the closure principle upon which it trades;
or
we can reject P1.


Essential to EC is the idea that these three options do not exhaust
the possible responses to SA.—And, according to proponents of
EC, that is a good thing, since they generally hold that accepting
skepticism is something we should do only if we have to, that the
closure principle is extremely plausible, but also that it is hard to
see how P1 could be
 false.[7]
 But if none of (i)-(iii) make for an attractive response to SA, what
is left to deny?

Well, we might conclude (iv) that our concept of knowledge is somehow
deeply incoherent, and that epistemological paradoxes such as SA are
for this reason irresolvable. This is the view Stephen Schiffer (1996,
2004) recommends. But that strikes many as no more satisfactory than
(i) directly embracing skepticism. Like (i), (iv) is a result to be
avoided if it is at all possible to do so.

Fortunately, according to the contextualist, there is another way out.
The contextualist’s recommendation is (v) that we deny that
SA’s conclusion really does threaten our intuitive
anti-skepticism. According to EC, recall, the proposition expressed by
a given knowledge utterance crucially depends upon
‘context’. So if, in general, a token of ‘S
knows that p’ is true just in case the subject has a
true belief and is in a strong epistemic position, there are variable
standards governing just how strong the subject’s
epistemic position must be in order for the tokened sentence to
express a truth. 

In its general form, the contextualist’s solution to SA involves
claiming that there is something about SA, or the possibilities it
involves, which effects or reflects a shift in context, such that
there is a corresponding dramatic upwards shift in the operative
standards. Those standards are not epistemic in the strict sense, of
course, since they do not concern knowledge per se; but they
do affect what it takes for a given tokening of a sentence of the form
‘S knows that p’ to express a truth.

Thus an utterance of P1, such as occurs in SA, expresses a truth only
because, owing to the introduction of a high-standards context, what
it expresses is that the subject does not stand in an
extraordinarily strong epistemic position with regard to the
proposition that he has hands. But that, of course, is
compatible with his meeting lower, though still perhaps quite
demanding, standards, such as those in play in more ordinary contexts.
As DeRose puts it:

…the fact that the skeptic can…install very high
standards which we don’t live up to has no tendency to show that
we don’t satisfy the more relaxed standards that are in place in
ordinary conversations. Thus…our ordinary claims to know [are]
safeguarded from the apparently powerful attacks of the skeptic,
while, at the same time, the persuasiveness of the skeptical arguments
is explained. (DeRose 1992, 917)


Of course, the latter is explained only if we have, in addition, an
explanation as to why we thought that the skeptic’s
claims threatened our ordinary claims to know. After all, it is only
because we thought this that SA posed a problem to which
contextualism, or any of (i)-(iii), might be offered as a solution.
The contextualist seeks to explain why we might think this—more
generally, why we might think that what is said in a given ‘high
stakes’ case is in fact compatible with what is said in its
‘low stakes’ counterpart—as follows:

According to the contextualist treatment of the skeptical paradox,
competent speakers can fail to be aware of these context-sensitive
standards, at least explicitly, and so fail to distinguish between the
standards that apply in skeptical contexts, and the standards that
apply in everyday contexts. This misleads them into thinking that
certain knowledge ascriptions conflict, when they are in fact
compatible. Contextualism thus combines a contextualist semantics for
knowledge ascriptions with a kind of error theory—a claim that
competent speakers are systematically misled by the contextualist
semantics. (Cohen 1999, 77; see too: Cohen 2005a, 60; and DeRose 1995,
40–41; 1999, 194; 2004b, 37; 2009, 159).

3.3 Some Specific Forms of EC

While the general form of the preceding response to skeptical
arguments such as SA is widely accepted among contextualists,
different proponents of EC have proposed different specific versions
of the view, and so explanations of what is going on in such arguments
that differ in their details.

Thus, Robert Nozick (1981) is well-known for proposing that knowledge
requires what is come to be known as ‘sensitive belief’,
where one’s belief that p is sensitive just in case, if
p were not the case, one would not believe that p.
While he does not endorse sensitivity as a general condition on
knowing, and while he is not concerned with giving an analysis of
knowledge itself, Keith DeRose offers the following “Rule of
Sensitivity”:

When it is asserted that some subject S knows (or does not
know) some proposition P, the standards for knowledge (the
standards of how good an epistemic position one must be in to count as
knowing) tend to be raised, if need be, to such a level as to require
S’s belief in that particular P to be
sensitive for it to count as knowledge. (DeRose 1995, 36)


So, any particular utterance of ‘S knows that
p’ will be true only if S believes that
p, p, and S’s epistemic position is
such that his belief that p is sensitive. And for
propositions such as, “I’m not a bodiless brain in a vat
(a BIV),” the mere uttering of P1 (e.g.) induces very
high standards for knowledge, as the belief that I’m not a BIV
is manifestly insensitive; and at those very high standards,
P1 is true. As for P2, DeRose claims that it is true “regardless
of what epistemic standard it is evaluated at, so its plausibility is
easily accounted for” (ibid., 39). As it happens,
though, in SA P2 is being evaluated at fairly high standards; for
those standards are the ones put into play by the mentioning of P1.
But this just means that the only reading on which SA’s
conclusion is true is at the unusually inflated standards induced by
SA’s first premise.

DeRose’s brand of EC is ‘externalist’, in the sense
that it focuses on features —‘truth tracking’, as
some have called it—which are at center stage in externalist
theories of knowledge (/justification). Likewise externalist is Mark
Heller’s brand of contextualism, which can be understood as both
reliabilist in spirit and an instance of the RA approach. On
Heller’s view (1995), just how reliable a
belief-forming process must be for an attribution of knowledge to the
subject to be correct depends upon context, in the attributor sense
introduced above. And this in turn provides an answer to the question
of just which alternatives to what is believed are relevant: they are
those such that, if the process in question is reliable to the
contextually required degree, the subject will be able to discriminate
between them and what is in fact the case.

While sometimes, like Heller’s, framed in RA
 terms,[8]
 Stewart Cohen’s version of EC is ‘internalistic’.
According to Cohen (1986, 1987, 1988, 1999, 2005a-b)
‘knowledge’ inherits its “indexical”
nature (1988, 97) from that of ‘(is) justified’.
Justification, of course, comes in degrees; and what counts as
justification simpliciter—i.e., justification to the
level required for an attribution of knowledge to express a
truth—is governed by a ‘rule of salience’
(1998, 292, n. 11), whereby one’s evidence/reasons must be good
enough to preclude salient possibilities of error. What the skeptic
does is make salient certain not-p possibilities (e.g., the
BIV hypothesis), with the result that the standard(s) of how good
one’s reasons must be in order for one to be justified in
believing that one has hands, say, goes way up. So, whereas
DeRose’s Rule of Sensitivity deals with how far out into the
space of possible worlds one must be able to ‘track the
truth’, insofar as he locates the relevant standards in terms of
the strength or goodness of the subject’s reasons or evidence,
Cohen’s is an ‘internalist’ brand of
contextualism.

Similar to Cohen’s rule of salience is David Lewis’ (1996)
“rule of attention”, which is the mechanism that he takes
to underlie the power of skeptical arguments. According to Lewis:

Subject S knows proposition P iff P holds
in every possibility left uneliminated by P’s evidence;
equivalently, iff S’s evidence eliminates every
possibility in which not-P. (1996, 551)


Why doesn’t this just amount to infallibilism, and so a dramatic
shrinking of what we can be said truly to know? Because, according to
Lewis, “every” is restricted to a particular
conversational domain (ibid., 553–554). Thus, Lewis
thinks, certain not -p possibilities will be “properly
ignored” in any given situation—they will not be within
the scope of the “every”’s in the passage just
quoted. As to what determines whether a given possibility is
‘properly ignored’, Lewis suggests a number of rules.
“The Rule of Attention,” which Lewis regards as
“more a triviality than a rule,” has it that “a
possibility that is not ignored is ipso facto not properly
ignored” (559). And this is why the skeptic’s
argument is so irresistible, as Lewis sees it. For
skepticism—indeed, epistemology generally—just is
the making salient of certain possibilities of error. To ask, for
example, whether we know that we are not BIVs, as assessing the first
premise of SA requires, is ipso facto not to ignore that
possibility. And it is natural to think that one’s putative
evidence that one is not a BIV does not eliminate that
possibility. That indeed, is why the possibility that one is a BIV is
among the skeptical possibilities singled out by philosophers for
attention. So we do in fact have lots of knowledge, according to
Lewis, but it is ‘elusive’: “Examine it, and
straight-way it vanishes” (ibid., 560).

….S knows that P iff S’s
evidence eliminates every possibility in which
not-P—Psst!—except for those possibilities that
we are properly ignoring. That ‘psst’ marks an attempt to
do the impossible—to mention that which remains unmentioned.
(Ibid.,
 566)[9]


Recently, Michael Blome-Tillman (2009, 2014) has proposed an important
modification to Lewis’ view. Specifically, Blome-Tillman
recommends that Lewis’ ‘rule of attention’ be
replaced by the following ‘Rule of Presupposition’:

If w is compatible with the speakers’ pragmatic
presuppositions in C, then w cannot be properly ignored
in C. (2009, 256; 2014, 20)


Here, ‘pragmatic presupposition’ is to be understood along
the lines suggested by Stalnaker (1974, 2002). As stated by
Blome-Tillman,

x pragmatically presupposes p in C [iff]
x is disposed to behave, in her use of language, as if she
believed p to be common ground in C. (Ibid.))


Blome-Tillman regards the resultant Presuppositional Epistemic
Contextualism to be superior to more familiar views (including
Lewis’), not least because it allows that the mere
mentioning or thinking of a skeptical possibility
needn’t make a difference to the contents and truth-values of a
given knowledge claim—whether it does so depends on whether it
effects or reflects, which it need not do, a shift in the pragmatic
presuppositions of the parties involved. 

Still other versions of EC takes the shifting standards to directly
govern ascriptions of evidence. In Robert Hambourger’s variant
of this form of EC, it is “the amount of evidence
needed to know a proposition” which “varies with standards
of caution;” further, he claims “that the amount needed to
know a proposition under any given standard is just that needed to be
epistemically justified in claiming to know it” (1987, 260,
emphasis added). According to Ram Neta, it is not so much the
quantity of evidence required for a truthful utterance of
‘S knows that p’ that is governed by
context-sensitive standards, but rather whether certain mental states
of the subject’s count as evidence at all. The relevant rule
here once again bears certain similarities to those proposed by Cohen
and Lewis:

(R) When one raises an hypothesis H that is an uneliminated
counterpossibility with respect to S’s knowing that
p at t, one restricts what counts in one’s
context of appraisal… as S’s body of evidence at
t to just those mental states that S has, and would
have, at t whether or not H is true.… (2002, 674;
2003a, 23–4)


By exploiting this rule, the skeptic is able to disqualify certain
mental states—e.g., those involved in my current experience (as)
of seeing my hands—as constituting evidence for my belief that I
have hands. Although, once again, when the relevant skeptical
possibilities are not raised (as they typically aren’t), those
experiences qualify (as they typically do) as evidence sufficient for
truthful ascriptions of such “knowledge” to me.

Finally, some theorists have suggested that the context-sensitivity of
sentences involving ‘knows’ is owing to a more general
context-sensitivity in certain explanatory relations and claims. Thus,
for example, Steven Rieber (1998) has proposed that, in general,
S knows that P iff “the fact that P
explains why S believes that P” (1998, 194). According
to Rieber, however, explanations are always at least implicitly
contrastive, and whether one thing explains another will depends upon
which contrasts are
 salient.[10]
 As just presented, Rieber’s theory concerns the knowledge
relation itself; so, in the terminology of Section 1, it would qualify
as a ‘substantive’ contextualist view. But Rieber’s
is clearly better construed as a semantic theory, like the other views
just sketched. For, as applied to SA, it would have the consequence
that what the conclusion of that argument actually says is:

(C′) It is not the case that my having hands rather
than my being a handless BIV explains why I believe that I have hands
rather than that I’m a handless
 BIV.[11]


Whereas, that I am a handless BIV is not ordinarily a salient
counter-possibility to my having hands—though perhaps my having
had my hands amputated and replaced with prostheses after a bad car
accident, e.g., is. So the truth of C′ is compatible
with my ordinary claim to know, since the latter might strictly
express the proposition that My having hands rather than my having
had my hands amputated and replaced with prostheses is what explains
why I believe that I have hands rather than that I’ve had my
hands amputated and replaced with prostheses. Once again, then,
armed with the correct contextualist semantics for the relevant
claims, we can see that the conclusion of SA may be true, but that,
contrary to appearances, that conclusion is not incompatible with a
typical claim to know various mundane matters of fact.

Another version of EC that features explanatory relations and claims
is John Greco’s (2003, 2008, 2009). At the heart of
Greco’s view is a certain picture of knowledge—that it is
a kind of ‘success through ability’. Knowledge is, on this
account, creditable true belief; when one knows, one believes the
truth as a result of one’s own efforts and abilities. Of course,
knowing also requires that one’s circumstances be
favorable to the exercise of one’s abilities. So too, if one is
to know, the ability(/-ies) in question must be involved in the
right way with the production of a true belief—it
can’t be a matter of luck that one’s abilities, exercised
in the right kind of circumstances, issue in truth. But what counts as
a (true) belief’s being produced ‘in the right way’
by one’s efforts and abilities? More generally, when is the
attainment of a true belief genuinely creditable to the agent? It is
here that contextual matters enter in. For, in general, there can be
different—though, importantly,
non-competing—accounts of ‘the cause’ of a
given thing, event or phenomenon. (For an insurance claims adjuster,
that John wasn’t driving on winter tires might be what
explains his having gotten into a car accident on a snowy day; for the
concerned tax-payer, that the city fails to properly maintain its
roads in wintertime might be singled out as “the
cause” of this same event; and it can seem that, considered in
their respective contexts, each of these claims might be correct.) And
now we have an argument for EC: attributing knowledge involves giving
credit; credit attributions involve a kind of causal explanation; but
causal explanations require a contextualist semantics; so knowledge
attributions require a contextualist semantics too (2009, 107). (As
noted in Section 3.5 below, Greco also claims that the context shifts
he asserts have the advantage of accounting for the lack of knowledge
in Gettier cases.)

As the discussion of this section reveals, there is plenty of room for
variety among proponents of EC—both about, in Jonathan
Schaffer’s (2005, 115) phrase, “which epistemic gear the
wheels of context turn,” and about the exact mechanism or rule
which governs such shifts. Once again, however, there is a strong
degree of consensus among the theories under discussion that context
itself is to be understood in terms of such things as the interests,
purposes, expectations, and so forth, of the knowledge attributor.
Further, there is of course consensus among these theorists that,
understood along those lines, context affects the truth-conditional
content of knowledge sentences—and, in fact, that this
phenomenon is what underlies and explains the power of skeptical
arguments, even though it also reveals why those arguments do not
threaten our ordinary claims to know. For on all such views, it is
only by effecting shifts in the epistemic standards, and so in what
the relevant claims express, that the skeptic is able to truthfully
state his view.

Of course, as some proponents of EC point out, contextualists are not
forced to any view as to whether and/or under what circumstances,
exactly, the skeptic does succeed in raising the standards (Cohen
2001, 92–93; 2005, 58–59; DeRose 2006, Section 6; 2004a;
2009, Chapter 4). Still, that EC promises to provide a plausible
response to skeptical puzzles has been among its primary
‘selling points’. So, in this sense, the contextualist
stands to lose something if it in fact turns out that the skeptic is
only very rarely or never able to raise the
standards for a knowledge-ascribing sentence to express a truth. For
then some other account would be required to explain the apparent
power of arguments like SA.
3.4 Everyday Cases

While proponents of EC have made much of the fact that their view
promises a novel and appealing resolution of skeptical puzzles like
SA, contextualists have also emphasized what they regard as EC’s
consonance with our ordinary knowledge-attributing practices. For
there too, they say, we find evidence of the very same sort of
context-sensitivity which skeptical arguments are actually exploiting.
As Hookway puts the general claim: “Whether I can correctly
claim knowledge appears to be relative to the purposes underlying the
conversations to which I am contributing” (1996, 1).

For a couple of reasons, it is very important not to overlook the
appeal to everyday cases—that is, not to restrict ourselves to a
consideration of apparently inconsistent knowledge claims where one of
these claims arises in a clearly skeptical context. First, as we will
see, a number of philosophers have questioned just how effective EC is
in its response to skepticism; and if they are right about this, then
it matters a great deal that the effectiveness of that response is not
EC’s sole basis. Second, as Keith DeRose says, “the
contextualist’s appeal to varying standards for knowledge in his
solution to skepticism would rightly seem unmotivated and ad hoc if we
didn’t have independent reason from non-philosophical talk to
think such shifts in the content of knowledge attributions
occur” (2002, 169). But in fact, DeRose says, “The best
grounds for accepting contextualism concerning knowledge attributions
come from how knowledge-attributing (and knowledge-denying) sentences
are used in ordinary, non-philosophical talk: What ordinary speakers
will count as ‘knowledge’ in some non-philosophical
contexts they will deny is such in others” (2005, 172; 2006,
316; 2009, 47). Likewise, Cohen claims that examples such as the
following “strongly [suggest] that ascriptions of knowledge are
context-sensitive” (1999,
 59):[12]

Mary and John are at the L.A. airport contemplating taking a certain
flight to New York. They want to know whether the flight has a layover
in Chicago. They overhear someone ask a passenger Smith if he knows
whether the flight stops in Chicago. Smith looks at the flight
itinerary he got from the travel agent and respond, ‘Yes I
know—it does stop in Chicago.’ It turns out that Mary and
John have a very important business contact they have to make at the
Chicago airport. Mary says, ‘How reliable is that itinerary? It
could contain a misprint. They could have changed the schedule at the
last minute.’ Mary and John agree that Smith doesn’t
really know that the plane will stop in Chicago. They decide
to check with the airline agent. (Ibid., 58)


Once again, as with their skeptical counterparts, contextualists claim
that regarding the truth conditions of sentences used in
attributing/denying knowledge as depending on context makes best sense
of the flexibility in our knowledge-attributing behaviour. While, as
we have seen, different specific version of EC are possible,
contextualists tend to agree that, in everyday cases, such as
that just described, the practical importance of the subjects’
‘getting it right’ tends to raise the standards for the
truth of a sentence of the form ‘S knows that
p’. (Keep in mind, though, a point stressed in Section
2: namely, that just what an utterance of such a sentence expresses
changes, in the ‘high stakes’ case, to some more demanding
proposition—we do not have a fixed such proposition, with
different standards for its truth applying in the more
demanding context.) The result is that the knowledge denial (Mary and
John’s claim) in the high-stakes situation may be true, without
affecting the truth of the low stakes claim to know (by Smith
himself). What reason is there, though, for adopting this way of
resolving the apparent incompatibility between the two knowledge
utterances?

Well, it is important that the low-stakes claim be true, since that
preserves our intuitive anti-skepticism—the thought that we
do know many things: if you cannot know on the basis of
ordinary, non-entailing evidence such as what is printed in the flight
itinerary (which neither we nor Smith have any reason to think is
erroneous), then we will have to deny very many of our ordinary claims
to know (Ibid., 59). But, it is argued, the ‘high
stakes’ knowledge denial seems right too—that is
why the relevant (paired) cases constitute a puzzle and deserve
philosophical attention. And contextualism allows us to preserve the
sense that in such cases each of the two speakers is speaking
‘properly’, and “the presumption that what is
properly said is true” (DeRose 2005, Section 4). Whereas, if we
take John and Mary’s stricter standard to be too
demanding—if their denial of knowledge to Smith is
false—then, not only must we reject the feeling that what they
are saying is in some sense correct, but it is “hard to see how
Mary and John should describe their situation”:

Certainly they are being prudent in refusing to rely on the itinerary.
They have a very important meeting in Chicago. Yet if Smith knows on
the basis of the itinerary that the flight stops in Chicago, what
should they have said? ‘Okay, Smith knows that the
flight stops in Chicago, but still, we need to check further.’
To my ear, it is hard to make sense of that claim. (Cohen 1999,
58–9)


But we can avoid having to make sense of such claims, and having to
explain why we mistakenly thought that what Mary and John were saying
was correct, if we accept EC: in everyday no less than skeptical
contexts, the sentences used by someone in a ‘high-stakes’
context (here, John and Mary) and his ‘low stakes’
counterpart (Smith) can both be true, since they are (in some cases
 anyway[13])
 made in different contexts, and the propositions they express are not
really conflicting after all.

In short, contextualism promises to deliver up a nice symmetry between
the flexibility in our (alleged) judgments as to the truth of a given
knowledge claim/denial, on the one hand, and a parallel plasticity in
the truth conditions (and hence the truth values) of the
knowledge-attributing sentences we are in fact prepared to utter. And
on the assumption that speakers realize, however tacitly, that what is
expressed by an utterance of “S knows (/doesn’t
know) that p” is a context-sensitive matter, the
contextualist can invoke this to explain the observed tendency to
attribute/deny knowledge, depending on such things as “the
purposes, intentions, expectations, presuppositions, etc., of the
speakers who utter these sentences” (Cohen 1999: 57), even
though everything about the subject, his/her worldly situation and
history, and so on, remains quite fixed.
3.5 Other Cases, Other Differences—the Lottery, Gettier, Closure

There are some knowledge claims (/denials) which, though they concern
everyday matters, rather than unrealistic skeptical ones, can seem to
threaten skeptical consequences. As we saw, the perhaps-natural denial
of knowledge to Smith, in the preceding example, is like this. A more
familiar example is ‘the lottery paradox’. Thus, while the
probability of holding the winning ticket in a fair lottery may be
vanishingly small (assuming there are very many tickets, etc), many
balk at crediting any given ticket-holder with knowledge that their
ticket is not the winner. But why should that be if, as fallibilism
about knowledge has it, one does not need evidence that guarantees the
truth of a belief in order to know?

Several contextualists (e.g., Cohen 1988, 1998; Lewis 1996; Neta 2002;
Rieber 1998) have suggested that we can resolve the lottery paradox by
means of the same device(s) used to explain both skeptical paradoxes
and seeming inconsistencies among everyday knowledge
 attributions:[14]
 in brief, we are reluctant to attribute knowledge to the subject in
the lottery case just because the possibility of error has been made
salient; but if we are, instead, focusing on the vast improbability of
his ticket’s being the winner, that he does know that
he’ll lose can seem (some claim) like the right thing to say;
and, as above, EC enables us regard both the relevant claims as
expressing truths, albeit in different contexts.

Some contextualists again—notably Lewis (1996) and Greco (2003,
2009)—have assayed extending EC to the Gettier problem as well
(on the latter, see Steup 2006, Section 2). But this remains a much
more controversial move among proponents of EC. (See, e.g., Cohen 1998
and Heller 1999b for criticisms of Lewis on this score.)

Further, there is some disagreement among contextualists as to the
status of the closure principle for knowledge, mentioned in Section
3.1 above, in connection with SA. The majority view is that closure
should be preserved (Mark Heller is the notable exception; see note
#7, below), but also—of course, given EC—that it should be
seen as holding only within a given context, on pain of
equivocation. As such disagreement illustrates, what one makes of
closure and of EC are orthogonal issues—even if one prefers EC
in an RA guise. Each of EC, closure, and RA, then, may be endorsed
without taking a stand on either of the remaining issues.

Finally, while the differences among particular versions of EC can be
significant, they tend to recede into the background in critical
discussions of contextualism. Objections to EC either (a) deny that EC
really has the advantages that have been claimed for it, (b) assert
that EC has certain problematic features or consequences, and/or (c)
allege that EC does not in fact constitute the best response to the
data which are supposed to motivate it. And, to a very great extent,
such objections to EC are directed towards the central contextualist
thesis per se and so are independent of the details of any
particular contextualist theory.
4. Critical Reactions, Contextualist Responses
4.1 Some Not-So-Effective Objections

Among the objections to EC which have been made, some are more easily
dealt with by the contextualist than others. Thus, for instance, Fred
Dretske objects to the contextualist’s response to skeptical
problems as follows:

Skepticism, as a doctrine about what ordinary people know, cannot be
made true by being put in the mouth of a skeptic. Treating
knowledge as an indexical…[, however,] seems to have, or to
come dangerously close to having, exactly this result. For this reason
(among others) I reject it. (Dretske 1991, 192)


To this, however, the contextualist can reply that it is incorrect to
say that EC, even where it allows the skeptic to successfully state
some truth in uttering ‘You don’t know that
p’, thereby makes it easy for skepticism to be
true. To suppose that requires assuming that knowledge sentences do
not have context-sensitive contents—hence that skeptic’s
denials are true at the expense of the truth of our ordinary
claims to know. But, of course, that this is not so is the idea at the
heart of the contextualist’s treatment of SA. (As we will see
presently, there is another way of construing Dretske’s
objection, whereby it does not misfire in this way.)

For a second objection to EC that is not terribly effective, consider
Palle Yourgrau’s contention that, if true, EC would license some
rather bizarre dialogues, such as the following:


A: Is that a zebra?

B: Yes, it is a zebra.

A: But can you rule out its being merely a cleverly painted mule?

B: No, I cannot.

A: So, you admit you didn’t know it was a zebra?

B: No, I did know then that it was a zebra. But
after your question, I no longer know. (1983, 183)


That EC licenses such bizarre dialogues, however, is hardly clear.
For, once the skeptical possibility is raised, the subsequent claim
about the earlier belief is not true (DeRose 1992). Recall, as was
stressed above, that EC is a semantic thesis—it tells
us that the truth-conditional contents of knowledge attributions shift
with changes in context. Suppose that, prior to the skeptical
possibility’s having been raised, B had claimed to know that
there is or was a zebra before him. Suppose that this claim by B was
true. This does not imply the truth of a later sentence saying B
‘knew’ that proposition at the earlier time. The
‘knew’ in the later sentence might be used in a context in
which the standard for such ‘knowledge’ claims was not met
at the earlier time (DeRose 2000).

According to Keith DeRose (ibid., Section 6), what EC does
license, in terms of legitimate ways for B to close out the dialogue,
are only metalinguistic claims like:

I was previously such that an utterance of ‘B knows it is a
zebra’ would have expressed a true proposition, but the
different and more demanding proposition which such an utterance would
now express would not be true.


Nikola Kompa (2002, 5) has observed that EC would also seemingly
permit B to say,

Had I uttered ‘I know it is a zebra’ earlier, I would
thereby have expressed a truth, but I do not know that it is a zebra.


Kompa calls this “an unpleasant consequence” of EC. And
one might similarly regard claims in which there is explicit
relativization of ‘knows’ to the relevant standards, as
in,

I knowS1 that it is a zebra, but I don’t
knowS2 that it is a zebra.


As Kent Bach (2005, 58–61) says, there seems to be nothing in EC
that precludes the legitimacy of such claims. After all, they merely
involve making explicit what are, according to EC, the propositions
expressed by the relevant utterances. But the contextualist may reply
that any unpleasantness or feeling of unfamiliarity attending such
claims derives from our failing to be fully aware of the
context-sensitivity of the expressions in question. (Compare how Cohen
(2001, 89) responds to a certain objection of Feldman’s (2001,
77).) Whether this sort of error theory is problematic is a separate
issue, discussed below.

In any case, the non-skeptical contextualist can further say that it
is only because he engages in such an illegitimate descent into the
object language—speaking of knowledge, as opposed to the
propositions expressed in uttering “knowledge” sentences
— that David Lewis is able to say such apparently dramatic and
troubling things as that, once certain skeptical possibilities are
made salient, ‘knowledge vanishes’ (1996, 560; see Bach
2005, 54–55, and DeRose 2000).
4.2 EC and Skepticism

While reminders that EC is a semantic or meta-linguistic thesis helps
both to defuse objections like Dretske’s and Yourgrau’s
and to expose as misleading Lewisian presentations of the view, it
sets the stage for a more difficult objection for contextualists to
counter: namely, that it does not provide a satisfactory resolution of
certain skeptical problems. Various specific versions of this
objection have been lodged, with varying degrees of forcefulness (by,
e.g., Feldman 1999, 2001, 2004; Klein 2000, 2005; Kornblith 2000; Sosa
2000; Bach 2005), but they have in common the idea that EC, just
because it is a semantic or meta-linguistic thesis, fails to
successfully engage and respond to skepticism.

On one version of this complaint (e.g., Conee 2005, Feldman 2001), it
is said that EC per se does not generate the results
essential to the contextualist resolution of SA, for example. That the
propositions expressed by utterances of knowledge sentences in
ordinary contexts are true, for example, is not secured by EC
on its own, nor is the truth of skeptical propositions expressed in
contexts where skeptics assert them; only a substantive theory of what
conditions the ‘knowledge’ claims so require in their
respective contexts can secure either result. On another version, the
objection is simply that EC does not correctly characterize the
skeptic’s position at all. As we have seen, EC has it that
skeptical claims express truths only relative to extraordinarily high
epistemic standards. But surely, the objection runs, what is at issue
between skeptics and non-skeptics is whether we satisfy even our
ordinary epistemic standards. In Hilary Kornblith’s terms, it is
the ‘Full-Blooded’, rather than the merely ‘High
Standards’, skeptic “who is making an historically
important and philosophically interesting claim” (2000, 27).
Feldman puts it thus:

The debate about skepticism is…not as a debate in which the
quality of our evidence is agreed to and the debate results from
differing views about what the standards for knowledge are. Instead,
it is a debate about how good our evidence is. Understood that way, it
is difficult to see the epistemological significance of decisions
about which standards are associated with the word ‘knows’
in any particular context. Contextualism is, from this perspective,
skepticism neutral, in that it does not address this part of the
issue. (Feldman 2004, 32; cf. Feldman 1999, 2001)


And while he, like Peter Klein (2000, 2005), is prepared to grant the
contextualist his/her semantic thesis, Ernest Sosa (2000) likewise
takes it to have limited relevance to epistemology generally —
though, as he sees it, this is often overlooked, owing to
“incautious and faulty formulations of the view” (2000,
9). For, just because it is restricted to certain meta-linguistic
claims, EC has only limited significance for skepticism: from the fact
that, in non-skeptical contexts, we can use ‘S knows
that p’ to express propositions which are true, nothing
follows about whether we know anything—a question which
we can and do wonder about in philosophical contexts. The proponent of
EC might deny that whether an an utterance of ‘S knows
that p’ expresses a truth admits of any acontextual
answer. But Sosa's complaint concerns a question we wonder about in
philosophical contexts, and it does not seem to require any kind of
acontextual answer, whether or not context affects the content of the
question.

Several proponents of EC have offered replies to the charge that EC
does not fairly characterize and/or engage with skepticism. While
allowing that the complaint may apply to other forms of EC, Neta
claims that, on his version, the skeptic “is not making the
uninteresting claim that we do not meet unusually stringent standards
of knowledge. Rather, she is claiming that we do not meet ordinary
standards for knowledge” (2003b, 2). In reply, however, the
objector may press that, as Neta says, and as we saw above, the
skeptic is able to do this on his view only because she
“disqualif[ies] certain mental states from counting as
evidence” (ibid.). And one might think that
that constitutes the imposition of unusually high epistemic
standards, even if they do not directly govern the proper use of
‘knows’ per se.

Responding to Sosa (2000), Cohen (1999, 79–80) writes that, by
his lights, what is troubling about skepticism is the claim that, in
saying things of the form, “S knows that
p”, we have all along been expressing falsehoods (cf.
DeRose 2004b, 37). The point of EC is not to show that we know, or
even that our ordinary knowledge claims express true propositions; it
is, rather, to reconcile the presumed truth of such claims with the
apparent truth of the premises of SA (Cohen 2001, 95–96; DeRose
1995 characterizes the problem posed by SA in very similar terms). And
EC shows us how we might do so. But, Sosa counters, insofar as
non-skeptics wish to preserve and defend a “Moorean
stance”, the latter is not a metalinguistic claim to
the effect that folks in ordinary situations who claim to
“know” some matter of fact often express truths. Rather,
the latter “is a stance, adopted in a philosophical context,
about what one then knows and, by extension, what people ordinarily
know. At a minimum it is a stance about whether people are right in
their ordinary claims to know, which is not quite the same as whether
they are right in their ordinary utterances of the form ‘I know
that p’.” So “[o]nce we abandon the object
language and ascend to the metalanguage, as a proper understanding of
EC requires, we abandon thereby the Moorean stance” (Sosa 2004,
281).

This last claim of Sosa’s concerning skepticism, considered as a
position arising within a philosophical context, leads naturally to a
related, though distinct, worry about the contextualist’s
response thereto. There seems to be a good sense in which, when
epistemologists carefully consider and debate about the extent of our
knowledge, the cogency (or not) of various skeptical arguments, and so
on, they occupy a single, shared context (Conee 2005, 53). Within that
context, some deny that we know very much, while their anti-skeptical
counterparts insist that we do. But, the complaint runs, to hold, as
EC’s proffered handling of SA implies, that in this context it
is the skeptic’s claims that are true is not licensed
by EC itself: the propositions expressed by knowledge sentences may be
contextually variable in the way EC alleges, but that does
not tell us, concerning some particular context such as a
philosophical dispute, which specific such sentences are true, and
which false. (It is possible to read Dretske’s objection to EC,
mentioned in the previous Section, as intended to make essentially
this point.)

In response, the contextualist may deny that there is, in fact, a
single, shared context governing (or constituted by) serious
epistemological discussion. (DeRose’s 2004a, and Chapter 4 of
his 2009, are an extended discussion of just this topic; see too Cohen
2005, 59–60.) So too, she may grant—which, as noted above
(Section 3.3), some proponents of EC readily do—that
contextualists as such are not forced to any view as to whether and/or
under what circumstances the skeptic’s claims do express truths,
while still insisting that EC provides at least the basis for a
resolution of puzzles like SA—a resolution which, overall, is
preferable to competing accounts (Cohen 2005a, 58–60). Of
course, such moves may in turn give rise to further
worries—about the first, whether, for example, it would
generalize, threatening to dissolve all apparently substantive
disagreements among specialists; about the second, whether, in the
end, EC itself is even a necessary part of an adequate response to the
skeptic (cf. Brady and Pritchard 2005,
 165).[15]

Clearly, the effectiveness of EC in addressing and resolving skeptical
problems is far from settled. It would appear, however, that
one’s verdict on this matter—hence, one’s view as to
whether EC’s handling of the skeptical problem constitutes a
reason to accept EC—will depend in no small part upon just what
one takes the problem posed by skepticism to be, as well as upon facts
about particular contextualist views which go beyond an endorsement of
EC per se.
4.3 EC’s Error Theory

One of the major attractions of EC is said to be that it enables the
resolution of certain apparent conflicts among sets of individually
plausible claims without forcing us to reject any of the members
thereof as
 false.[16]
 As Crispin Wright puts it, a good part of the appeal of EC is that it
seems to enable a certain “‘no-fault’ view of
certain (potentially) intransigent disputes where we have to hand no
ready conception of a further fact which would make one party right at
the expense of the other” (2005, 240).

However, as we saw above, whether it is a skeptical argument or a
pedestrian case that is at issue, contextualists are committed to a
certain ‘error theory’. After all, that EC is correct is
supposed to be a quite recent discovery. Further, in those cases in
which speakers’ claims about who does/doesn’t know are
said by the contextualist not to conflict, among many there persists
the sense that they are cannot both be speaking truly. For
instance, our ordinary claims to know various things seem to
conflict with the skeptic’s denial that we know any such
things—that is why skepticism has seemed to pose a problem to
which contextualism is said to constitute a novel solution. The
contextualist seeks to explain why we might think this—more
generally, why we might think that what is said in a given ‘high
stakes’ case is in fact compatible with what is said in its
‘low stakes’ counterpart—by suggesting that we fail
to fully appreciate the contextualist semantics and/or to faithfully
track shifts in context (see, e.g.: Cohen 1999, 77; 2005a, 60; cf.
DeRose 1999, 194; 1995, 40–41; 2004b, 37).

According to another often-voiced objection to EC (in, e.g., Schiffer
1996, Hofweber 1999, Rysiew 2001, Hawthorne 2004, Conee 2005,
Williamson 2005a, Egan et al. 2005), its error theory is
problematic. As formulated by Stephen Schiffer, the objection is
simply that it is implausible that we would get “bamboozled by
our own words” (ibid., 329) in the way the
contextualist alleges, since “speakers would know what they were
saying if knowledge sentences were indexical in the way the
Contextualist requires” (ibid.: 328).

Is this a good objection? On the face of it, the complaint may seem
not to have any weight. With respect to SA above, for example, the two
premises are individually quite plausible, the argument appears valid,
yet the conclusion seems very implausible. So
“something plausible has to go” (DeRose 1995, 2;
emphasis added). Thus, that EC is not an entirely ‘no
fault’ view might mean that, as Timothy Williamson has argued
(2005b, Section II), considerations of charity per se do not
favor it; but why think that the contextualist’s error theory is
particularly problematic?

This is one of the ways in which Cohen has very lately responded to
concerns about contextualism’s error theory (2005a,
 70).[17]
 And DeRose (2006; 2009, Chapter 5; see too Montminy 2009) replies
along similar lines: if you present a group of subjects with SA, for
instance, and ask them whether the conclusion contradicts an ordinary
claim to know such a thing, some will say ‘yes’, and some
will say ‘no’. If contextualism turns out to be true, then
many are blind to that, and so on. So, whoever turns out to
be right, the contextualist or the ‘invariantist’, a
substantial portion of ordinary speakers are afflicted by
“semantic blindness” (Hawthorne 2004, 107).
‘Bamboozlement’ is something we are stuck with either
way.

In assessing this type of response to the objection under
consideration, it is useful to separate out two questions: First,
whether, considered on its own, the contextualist’s error theory
is plausible. Second, whether that theory raises any problems internal
to the contextualist view.

As to the first question, there are precedents for the type
of error that the contextualist says is going on with respect to at
least some of our knowledge attributions. For example, by implicitly
raising the standards—drawing attention to previously
disregarded bumps, etc.—you can get a competent speaker to take
seriousness ‘flatness skepticism’, the view that
nothing’s really flat (Cohen 1999, 78–9; 2005a, 60, 70;
2004, 193). But this can take place only because,

…although ascriptions of flatness are context-sensitive,
competent speakers can fail to realize this. And because they can fail
to realize this, they can mistakenly think that their reluctance to
ascribe flatness, in a context where the standards are at the extreme,
conflicts with their ascriptions of flatness in everyday contexts.
(Cohen 2001, 91; 1999, 79)


However, when an apparent incompatibility between certain uttered
sentences is actually due to their expressing different propositions
in different contexts, once we see that this is so, any appearance
that they are incompatible tends to go away. Thus, we might
‘disagree’ over whether Kansas is flat, but once it is
made clear that you mean relatively un-mountainous and I mean
devoid of any hills at all, we quickly agree that we were
both right all along. But for many, this does not happen when they are
presented with the proposed contextualist resolution to the problem
cases which motivate it (Conee 2005, 55, 66; Feldman 2001, 73,
77–78; Rysiew 2001, 484–485).

Acknowledging this difference in the readiness with which people
accept EC, as opposed to a corresponding view about ascriptions of
flatness, Cohen notes that we already know that there are
“varying degrees to which competent speakers are blind to the
context-sensitivity in the language” (2005a, 61). The
context-sensitivity of indexicals like ‘I’ and
‘now’ are easy to spot, that of ‘flat’
somewhat harder. And for ‘knows’, “it may be very
difficult even after some amount of reflection for competent speakers
to accept context-sensitivity. It may take subtle philosophical
considerations concerning the best way to resolve a paradox in order
to ‘see’ the context-sensitivity of
‘knows’” (ibid.).

Bolstering the latter suggestion are cases involving what Thomas
Hofweber (1999, 98ff.) calls ‘hidden relativity’. For
example, according to Hofweber, our claim that August is a summer
month presumes that we are in the Northern
 hemisphere.[18]
 A speaker may not be aware of this, though; and even those who
are aware of it do not feel compelled to make that parameter
explicit whenever they utter the relevant sort of sentence. So, when
Schiffer says, “no ordinary person would dream of telling you
that what he meant and was implicitly stating was that he knew that p
relative to such-and-such standard” (1996, 326ff.), that in
itself does not show that no such relativization is, in fact,
required or even in place. If you ask someone what they meant in
saying “August is a summer month,” they are liable simply
to repeat what they’ve just said!

It is not clear, however, whether such ‘hidden
relativities’ really do provide a model for our supposed
ignorance of the context-sensitivity of knowledge sentences. For,
while many competent speakers of English are unaware of the (supposed)
relativity of ‘summer month’, once they are made aware of
this relativity, they do not actively resist its being made
explicit. Whereas, when the alleged relativizations within knowledge
sentences are made explicit—“Smith doesn’t
knowS that the flight stops in Chicago,” etc. (Bach
2005, Section I)—they are often met with resistance and regarded
as highlighting the controversial character of
 EC.[19]

Further, as Hofweber says (1999, 101–2), with regard to
‘summer month’, say, there is a plausible explanation of
why the relativization in question can be ‘hidden’ for
many speakers and, even among those who are aware of it, rarely be
made explicit—namely, that most of the people with whom we
discuss such things are geographically close to us. Whereas, the
evidence for contextualism requires that there be some
interesting variation among the standards which determine a knowledge
sentence’s truth-conditions within this or that ‘language
community’, and it requires that we be guided in our
everyday knowledge-attributing behavior by an awareness of just this
fact.

This last point brings out the second question concerning the
contextualist’s error theory mentioned above—whether that
theory raises any problems internal to the contextualist view. For, to
the extent that the context-sensitivity of the relevant expression(s)
can remain deeply hidden, even after careful reflection, it becomes
less clear that in the cases of concern (SA, the airport example,
etc.) what is driving our judgments as to whether what speakers say is
‘true and proper’ is, as contextualist says, our awareness
of that context-sensitivity (Rysiew 2007, 653; 2012a, 137). The
contextualist must thus strike “a delicate balance” (Conee
2005, 54–55) between crediting us with a grasp of the
context-sensitivity of knowledge sentences, while at the same time
attributing to us a failure to fully grasp it. 

Finally, as Ram Neta observes, in Hofweber’s cases it is some
worldly fact about the phenomenon in question of which people are
ignorant. Whereas,

…the contextualist does not want to say that our semantic
ignorance about our knowledge attributions results from our ignorance
of the real nature of knowledge. Rather, it is supposed to result from
our ignorance about the way in which the content of those attributions
depends upon contextual factors. (2003, 404)


And, as we have seen, far from referring to our worldly situation and
the nature of various phenomena therein, ‘context’ is
generally said by contextualists to refer to such things as the
purposes, intentions, expectations, presuppositions, etc., of the
speakers who utter those sentences. (The same sorts of things,
plausibly, which are responsible for determining what is expressed by
attributions of flatness, say.)

According to some (e.g., Rysiew 2001, 485, 507), this last point of
dissimilarity between Hofweber’s ‘hidden
relativities’ and that which contextualists allege intensifies
concerns about the contextualist’s error theory. For it seems to
imply a quite specific deficit in “our powers of semantic
self-knowledge” (Neta 2003, 408): to say that we “conflate
contexts” (Cohen 2005a, 69) is to say that we are mixed up about
what our intentions, purposes, etc., are when we utter knowledge
sentences. Now, we do know that that sort of thing sometimes
happens. (Neta—ibid., 407–408—describes one
such case.) Still, and whether or not it does constitute a deficit in
our “semantic self-knowledge”, it would be good if we had
some explanation as to why many have such a hard time coming
to terms with the truth of contextualism, when the context-sensitivity
of other terms is fairly easily accepted, and when we are said to
grasp that truth implicitly. Cohen has tentatively suggested that
considerations of value might explain this:


….We value justification and knowledge. But contextualist
theories are deflationary. Contextualism about knowledge says that
most of our everyday utterances of the form ‘S knows P’
are true, even though the strength of epistemic position in those
instances does not meet our highest standards. In the same way,
contextualism about flatness says that most of our everyday utterances
of sentences of the form ‘X is flat’ are true, even though
X’s surface may fall short of perfect flatness.

In other words, contextualism is a ‘good news, bad news’
theory. The good news is that we have lots of knowledge and many
surfaces are flat; the bad news is that knowledge and flatness are not
all they were cracked up to be. We find this much easier to accept in
the case of flatness than knowledge, because ascriptions of flatness
do not have the normative force that ascriptions of
knowledge/justification do. (2005a, 61–2; cf. 2004, 193)


It is not clear whether this suggested explanation represents a step
forward. On the face of it, it would at most provide an explanation of
why we might be disappointed by what ‘knowledge’ typically
designates; it would not explain why we have difficulty recognizing
the alleged context-sensitivity in question. In any case, it should by
now be clear that we have moved beyond considerations of the
contextualist’s imputation of error to ordinary speakers per
se. While the issue of whether EC’s error theory is
problematic remains a topic of lively debate, one thing that has
emerged from the discussion here is that, in spite of how it is
sometimes presented, that debate seems not to concern semantic
‘blindness’ or ‘bamboozlement’ itself. Rather,
it has to do with what is, according to some, the unsatisfactory or
troubling nature of the contextualist’s appeal to such a theory
in particular.
4.4 Linguistic Issues

According to EC, ‘know(s)’ is a context-sensitive term.
Among proponents of EC, however, there has been relatively little
discussion, and little agreement, about just what linguistic model
best captures this fact. Thus, Cohen (1988, 97) speaks of
‘knowledge’ as “an
 indexical”,[20]
 Hambourger (1987, 262) likens it to “large”, Heller
(1999a, 206; 1999b, 121) says that it is a vague term, and DeRose,
while at one point (1992, 920–921) using an analogy with the
demonstrative “this” to illuminate the lack of
contradiction between certain utterances of knowledge sentences, tends
to be noncommittal as to the appropriate model for
‘know(s)’.

It has been objected, however, that regardless of exactly which model
is adopted, the linguistic data surrounding ‘know(s)’ is
not what one would expect were it a genuinely context-sensitive term.
For example, Jason Stanley (2004) argues that, unlike terms like
‘flat’ and ‘tall’, ‘knows’ is not
clearly gradable. Thus, it makes sense to describe someone as
“very tall”; but while I might say that someone knows
something “very well,” ‘very’ does not appear
here to be functioning as a degree modifier. And while ‘(is)
justified’ is obviously gradable, even if gradability were
sufficient for context-sensitivity, from the fact that knowledge
requires justification it would not follow that ‘knows’ is
context-sensitive as well (pace Cohen 1999, 60). Nor, Stanley
argues, does ‘know(s)’ behave like indexicals
(‘I’, ‘here’) or relational terms (such as
‘enemy’).

In a related argument—one that recalls some of the discussion of
the preceding Section—John Hawthorne points out that with
uncontroversially context-dependent terms, we find it very natural to
employ what he calls “the clarification technique”. An
example from the previous Section illustrates the point: I balk at
your claim that Kansas is flat, pointing out that there is a small
rise just ahead of us. Rather than admitting to a mistake
(‘concession’) or simply repeating your claim
(‘sticking to one’s guns’), you clarify:
“Well, what I meant was that there are very few
mountains.” Hawthorne’s point is that we have very few
techniques of clarification in the case of 
‘know(s)’; whereas, it “is through the clarification
technique that sensitivity to context-dependence is manifested”
(2004, 104-106).

Finally, Herman Capellen and Ernie Lepore (2003) argue that, according
to certain tests for the genuine context-sensitivity of a term,
‘know(s)’ just does not pass muster. (In their discussion,
examples like the one illustrating the “unpleasant
consequence” of EC mentioned in 4.1, above, loom large.)

Responses on behalf of EC to such arguments vary. Commenting on
Stanley, Barbara Partee (2004) agrees that ‘know(s)’ is
indeed unlike expressions such as ‘tall’, but that perhaps
better models are available. Nikola Kompa (2002) suggests that the
context-sensitivity of ‘know(s)’ is best understood as
deriving from a sui generis sort of
“unspecificity”. And Rob Stainton (2010), while quite
sympathetic to the claim that ‘know(s)’ is not itself a
context-sensitive term, nevertheless believes that the
“spirit” of EC can be saved: if there are pragmatic
determinants of what is stated/asserted/claimed, then what is stated
(/etc.) in different uses of “knowledge” sentences can
vary in truth conditions, even if ‘know(s)’ is not
context-sensitive. (Here, we see a connection between EC and its
philosophy-of-language namesake, which was mentioned in Section 2,
above; and a similar connection is evident in Charles Travis’
2005 paper.)

Ceding less ground, Peter Ludlow argues that questions about
gradability are too crude a standard by which to judge whether
‘know(s)’ is context-sensitive. Ludlow disagrees with
Hawthorne about the prevalence of clarificatory devices for
‘know(s)’ and argues that there is good reason to think
its semantics includes some placeholder(s) for the variable standards
of knowledge which EC posits. Like DeRose (2005), Ludlow casts EC as a
piece of ‘ordinary language’ philosophy, and in that
spirit he presents the results of Google searches in which clauses
like, “…by objective standards”, “…by
academic standards”, “…with some certainty”,
“…doggone well…”, and so on, accompany uses
of ‘know(s)’. The latter are more data to be mulled over
in considering possible linguistic bases for EC. In general, from the
fact that different standards are employed, even explicitly adverted
to, in making some evaluative judgments (whether x
is/isn’t F, whether S does/doesn’t
A) in different domains, it does not immediately follow that
a contextualistic semantics for the relevant terms
(‘F-ness’, ‘(to) A’) is
correct (Conee 2005, 50–51). Some standards that we employ in
making a statement, for example, are understood to be merely
guidelines or rule of thumb, not direct applications of the
statement’s truth conditions. Just as they were at the center of
debates about the merits of ordinary language philosophy decades ago,
methodological questions about the proper philosophical handling of
such data as Ludlow cites—whether to view them as semantically
revealing or grammatically misleading; whether, in the present case,
the relevant utterances involve the making-explicit of
context-variable standards for “knowledge”, or the
conveying of information over and above that encoded in
‘know(s)’ itself, etc.—arise as much here as with
the considerations initially used to motivate EC.
4.5 Further Issues—Epistemic Modals, Thought, Preservation and Transfer of Information, Practical Reasoning, Attitude Reports

Questions have been raised about EC’s ability to account for
certain other data. Andy Egan et al. (2005) argue that
‘relativism’, rather than EC, gets the semantics of
epistemic modals right. According to the relativist (see Section 6),
the truth values of knowledge sentences depend upon the standards in
play in the contexts in which they are assessed, as opposed to the
standards operative in either the subject’s or the
attributor’s context. Bach (2005, 66) and Feldman (2004, 27)
question whether the contextualist model might apply to one’s
thoughts about whether various knowledge sentences express
truths. Timothy Williamson (2005a, 100–101) and John Hawthorne
(2004, 109–110) raise related concerns about the preservation of
information in memory and testimony: storing (or conveying) the
information that ‘S knows that p (plus some
date index)’ may lead to problems, since subsequent uses of that
information may occur in contexts in which different standards are in
effect. In addition, Williamson (ibid., 102ff.) argues that
EC, because it privileges attributor over subject factors, does not
respect the autonomy of the agent (subject), qua agent, in
settling the contents of questions involved in practical decision
making. And Hawthorne (ibid., 98ff.) contends that EC has
implausible consequences for reports of propositional attitudes in
which ‘knows’ occurs — for instance, when someone
says, ‘Sam believes that Jane knows that p’. If
the standards governing ‘knows’ in the latter speaker's
context differ from those in play in the original context, they will
be misreporting the facts. This, according to Hawthorne, forces the
contextualist to reject one or another plausible principle governing
attitude reports.

Whether any of these criticisms are effective against EC is
controversial. (See DeRose 1995, 6–7 and Rieber 1998, 197, e.g.,
on the extension of EC to one’s thoughts; DeRose 2006, Section
4; 2009, 161-166; and Cohen 2005b, 201–206 reply to
Hawthorne’s arguments concerning belief reports.) However,
whatever we make of these further issues, not to mention the ones
earlier raised, they could give us reason to reject EC only if there
were some viable alternative explanation of the relevant data—in
particular, of the apparently inconsistent knowledge claims described
in Section 3. On the other hand, if we could explain those data
without introducing a novel view about the semantics of
‘know(s)’, that would considerably weaken the case for
EC.
4.6 Some Proposed (‘Classical’, ‘Insensitive’) Invariantist Treatments of the Data

Among critics of EC, at least three such purported explanations have
 emerged.[21]
 Since each is intended to preserve the thought that we do ordinarily
know many things, the granting of knowledge in the relevant ‘low
standards’ case is taken to express a truth. What needs
explaining, then, is why denying knowledge of the same subject can
seem correct once the standards are raised, even though nothing in the
subject’s situation changes. Though they are not obviously
competing, each attempt to explain this in non-contextualist terms
focuses on different factors. Framed in terms of the airport example
described in Section 3.4 above, and in broad outline only, these
sample non-contextualist proposals are as follows:
4.6.1 Pragmatic Factors

According to some (e.g., Blaauw 2003, Black, 2005, Brown 2006, Hazlitt
2007, Prades 2000, Pritchard 2010, Pynn 2015, Rysiew 2001, 2005,
 2007),[22]
 pragmatic factors explain the relevant knowledge-attributing
behavior. In the airport case, it is mutually obvious to John and Mary
that they want to ensure that their epistemic position with respect to
the flight plan is very strong—strong enough to rule
out the possibility of a misprint, e.g. Being in an epistemic position
of such strength may or may not be required for knowing. Either way,
however, ‘S knows that p’ entails that
S is in a good epistemic position—this is why granting
someone knowledge involves representing them as entitled to their
belief. But it would be odd of Mary and John to grant Smith such an
entitlement (by saying ‘he knows’) and represent him as
being in a good epistemic position if they thought that his evidence
wasn’t so good as to put their concerns to rest. Whereas, by
denying knowledge to Smith, they are able to express the thought,
which seems not just relevant but true, that his epistemic position is
not so good that they do not need to check further. And if they (we)
read what is conveyed by the relevant utterance onto the sentence
uttered, the knowledge denial will strike them (us) as expressing a
truth.
4.6.2 Psychological Presuppositions of Attributing Knowledge

Several philosophers have suggested an essentially psychological
explanation of why we would deny that the subject in the high
standards case knows. Here is one such proposal:

Mary does not say ‘Smith knows that the plane will stop in
Chicago’ and goes so far as to assert its negation because of
her own doxastic situation. Because she is not sure Smith’s
itinerary is reliable, she herself is not confident enough to believe
that the plane will stop in Chicago. So she cannot coherently
attribute knowledge of it to Smith, not if knowledge implies truth. In
general, you cannot coherently assert that someone knows that p if you
are not confident that p and think that it still needs to be
verified. That is why Mary cannot very well assert that Smith knows
that the plane will stop in Chicago. Not only that, she has to deny
that she knows it, since she thinks that it is not yet established.
And, since Smith has no evidence that she doesn’t have, she must
deny that he knows it [too]. (Bach 2005, 76–77)


In a similar spirit, Adler 2006b suggests that such cases are best
explained in terms of the subject’s diminished confidence as to
p, where the latter does not imply a lack of belief.
Meanwhile, Nagel notes that, when a person has much riding on some
matter, we normally expect them to engage in more, and more diligent,
evidence-seeking behavior before arriving at confident belief. For
this reason, we naturally attribute to the subject in the high
standards case either less confident belief or confident belief along
with a state of evidence assessment that precedes fixed belief (2008,
289). Further, even in cases where the subject does not share the
evaluator’s concerns about certain possibilities of error,
epistemic egocentrism — our natural tendency to overestimate the
extent to which others share our beliefs, attitudes, and interests
— can lead the evaluator to project those concerns onto the
subject. If the subject is not then engaging in the expected extra
evidence-seeking behavior, she will once again be judged hasty, and as
not knowing (2010a, 2010b).
4.6.3 Salience, Conflicting Arguments, and Focusing Effects

When we find people seeming to disagree about some matter, that is
often because there is a genuine conflict of evidence —
arguments and considerations on either side of the issue, none of
which can be easily dismissed. And which of these one focuses on can
affect one’s view as to the truth of the proposition in
question. So, for instance, if Mary and John focus on the various ways
in which Smith might be mistaken (e.g., because of a misprint in the
itinerary), this can get them thinking that he does not know what he
claims to know, especially if focusing on a possibility tends to make
one over-rate its probability. (See especially Feldman 2001,
74–78. For similar ideas, see Williamson 2005a, 112; 2005b, 226;
Hawthorne 2004, 164-165; Conee 2005, 63–66; and Rysiew 2001,
502–505.) A related suggestion is made by Gerken, whose
‘epistemic focal bias’ account includes the following
“principle of contextual salience”: 

Normally, for an agent, A, q is a contextually salient alternative to
S’s knowledge that p iff A processes q as an epistemically
relevant alternative to S’s knowledge that p. (2013, 50)


The operative notion of salience is distinguished from
‘availability’, such as Hawthorne and Williamson appeal
to, and the above principle is used to explain why we might naturally,
though mistakenly, deny knowledge of someone in a high standards case
(ibid., 54).

Still other psychological explanations of the data in question have
been offered. For example, Dinges (2015) argues that the cases in
question are underspecified, and that a plausible account of how their
details are filled in by those who consider them has the consequence
that those examples, and the intuitive reactions they elicit,
don’t actually support EC. (As Dinges notes — 2015, 4, n.
3 — DeRose employs a similar sort of strategy in accounting for
certain empirical results that appear to pose a problem for EC; see
DeRose 2011 and Rysiew 2011 for references and discussion.)
Unsurprisingly, even among opponents of EC, each of the proposals
described above, whether or not primarily psychological, is
contentious. (Nagel 2010a, for instance, criticizes appeals to the
availability heuristic.) And proponents of EC have raised specific
doubts about their viability. For instance, according to Cohen (1999,
80–82; 2001, 94) merely citing the existence conflicting
arguments does not really explain what needs explaining. And DeRose
(1999, 2002, 2009) and Cohen (1999) argue that the prospects for
explaining the relevant data via any kind of pragmatic or
‘warranted assertability’ manœuver are dim
(arguments to which both Brown 2006 and Rysiew 2001, 2005, 2007
respond).
5. Further Arguments for EC, with some Non-Contextualist Responses
5.1 Fallibilism and Concessive Knowledge Attributions

It is plausible to suppose that, if knowing requires believing on the
basis of evidence that entails what is believed, we have hardly any
knowledge at all. Hence the near-universal acceptance of fallibilism
in epistemology: denying that one can know on the basis of
non-entailing evidence is, it seems, not an option if we are to
preserve the very strong appearance that we do know many things (Cohen
1988, 91). Hence the significance of ‘concessive knowledge
attributions’ (CKAs) (Rysiew 2001)—i.e., sentences of the
form ‘S knows that p, but it is possible that
q’ (where q entails not-p). To many,
utterances of such sentences sound very odd indeed:

If you claim that S knows that P, and yet you grant
that S cannot eliminate a certain possibility in which
not-P, it certainly seems as if you have granted that
S does not after all know that P. To speak of
fallible knowledge, of knowledge despite uneliminated possibilities of
error, just sounds contradictory…. If you are a
contented fallibilist, I implore you to be honest, be näive, hear
it afresh. ‘He knows, yet he has not eliminated all
possibilities of error.’ Even if you’ve numbed your ears,
doesn’t this overt, explicit fallibilism still sound
wrong? (1996, 549, 550)


If Lewis is correct though in supposing that the relevant utterances
are merely “overt, explicit” statements of
fallibilism (ibid., 550), their seeming incoherence suggests
that, contrary to our everyday epistemic pretensions, “knowledge
must be by definition infallible” after all (ibid.,
549).

Lewis’ own attempt “to thread a course between the rock of
fallibilism and the whirlpool of skepticism” (Lewis 1996, 566)
involves embracing epistemic contextualism: We may say with the
infallibilist that S knows that p iff
S’s evidence eliminates “every” possibility
in which not-p (ibid., 551). But since
‘every’ is (Lewis claims) restricted to a particular
conversational domain (ibid., 553–554), and since
certain not-p possibilities will be “properly
ignored” in a given situation, we preserve our intuitive
non-skepticism. 

Jason Stanley (2005a) attempts to block Lewis’ move to EC and
defends fallibilism against the worry that overtly fallibilistic
speech is incoherent. According to Stanley, CKAs are not just
odd-sounding: in most cases, they are simply false. But this does not
impugn fallibilism. Insofar as the odd-sounding utterances Lewis cites
state the fallibilist idea, the latter portion thereof
(‘S cannot eliminate a certain possibility in which
not-p’, e.g.) expresses the idea that the
subject’s evidence does not entail what is said to be
known—hence, it does not entail that every proposition contrary
to p is not
 true.[23]
 According to Stanley, however, this is not the best reading of the
possibility clauses CKAs contain. On the correct account of such
statements of epistemic possibility, ‘It is possible [for
A] that p’ is true if and only if what
A knows does not, in a manner that is obvious to A,
entail not-p. (Cf. DeRose 1991, 1999; and Hawthorne 2004,
24–28.) So, while the sentences Lewis cites are
self-contradictory, they do not capture the fallibilist idea after
all.

Dougherty and Rysiew (2009) offer a different strategy for accounting
for CKAs’ oddity while both protecting fallibilism and avoiding
EC. While they grant that the latter portion of CKAs express epistemic
possibility, they recommend thinking of what is epistemically possible
for a subject in terms of those things which his evidence, rather than
what he knows, does not rule out. (Dougherty and Rysiew take a
person’s evidence, roughly, to be their basic data. While
wishing to stay neutral as to just what comprises this, they deny the
Williamsonian thesis (2000) that one’s evidence just is
one’s knowledge.) On this view, CKAs express, as Lewis assumes,
precisely the fallibilist idea. According to Dougherty and Rysiew,
however, their oddity poses no problem for fallibilism, and so does
not motivate the adoption of contextualism, as that oddity can be
explained pragmatically, in the same way that Moore-type sentences
(‘p, but I don’t believe it’) are generally
held to be.

Which (if either) of these responses to the problem Lewis sets is
correct is a matter of dispute. (Other important recent contributions
on CKAs include Dodd 2010, Littlejohn 2011, Dougherty and Rysiew 2011,
Hawthorne 2012, Worsnip 2015, and Colgrove and Dougherty 2016.) But
there are at least these two ways in which a non-contextualist could
counter Lewis’ argument.
5.2 Knowledge and Assertion

A number of
 philosophers[24]
 have found very plausible the idea that, in asserting that
p, one represents oneself as knowing that p. Here,
very quickly, is one route to this idea: If our talk is governed by
‘the Cooperative Principle’ (CP), then
‘saying’ itself presumes one’s striving to fulfill
certain credal-epistemic conditions: chief among the Gricean maxims is
that of Quality, ‘Try to make your contribution one that is
true,’ along with its two more specific sub-maxims:

‘Do not say what you believe to be false;’ and
‘Do not say that for which you lack adequate
evidence.’ (Grice 1989, 27)


Now notice that the properties addressed by Quality and its sub-maxims
closely approximate what are generally taken to be the central
conditions on knowing (so long, at least, as we are open-minded as to
how to read ii—such that, e.g., ‘justification’
could be substituted for ‘evidence’). So it seems that, if
one is striving to conform to CP, one shouldn’t
‘say’ something if one takes oneself not to know
it—hence, that if one does say that p, one
commits oneself to this condition’s not being
unfulfilled; i.e., to one’s actually being in the
knowing relation to p.

According to some, this same idea can be expressed by saying that
knowledge is “the norm of assertion”. Thus, Timothy
Williamson (2000, Chapter 11) defends at length what is come to be
known as ‘the knowledge account of assertion,’ whereby our
linguistic practices are governed by the rule: “One must: assert
p only if one knows p” (2000, 243)

Keith DeRose, taking the two ideas just expressed to be “just
two sides of the same coin” (2002, 180; 2009, 93), argues that,
if the knowledge account of assertion is correct, it furnishes a
different sort of argument for EC, which is summarized as follows:

If the standards for when one is in a position to warrantedly assert
that P are the same as those that constitute a truth
condition for ‘I know that P,’ then if the former
vary with context, so do the latter. In short: The knowledge account
of assertion together with the context sensitivity of
assertability… yields contextualism about knowledge. (2002,
187; see 2009, 106)


Several objections to this argument have been made. First, it is worth
considering whether one couldn’t accept the idea, for reasons
such as those outlined above, that in asserting that p one
represents oneself as knowing that p, while taking the rule
governing assertion to be, say, ‘Do not assert what you take
yourself not to know,’ or some such. According to Matt Weiner
(2005), for instance, the knowledge rule is too strong, and the cases
which motivate it can be handled assuming the rule that proper
assertions be true, along with conversational norms governing all
speech acts. (Other accounts on which proper assertion requires
something weaker than knowledge include Bach 2008, Douven 2006, Lackey
2007, and McKinnon 2015.) Second, Adam Leite (2007) argues that the
direct argument for contextualism from the knowledge account of
assertion rests on an equivocation on the notion of ‘warranted
assertability’. (See too Bach 2005, 73–4, who also
suggests that DeRose’s argument rests too heavily on
first-person knowledge claims). In a similar spirit, John
Turri’s “speech act contextualism” (2010) is
expressly designed to show how the knowledge account of assertion is
compatible with epistemic invariantism. Finally, Thomas Blackson
(2004) argues, as Williamson (2005a, 111, n. 20) suggests, that
DeRose’s argument does not favor EC over another recent view,
“subject-sensitive invariantism”, as it is sometimes
called (see Section 6). Quite independently of its relation to EC, the
relation between knowledge and assertion has been the focus of much
recent attention.
5.3 The Social Role(s) of Knowledge Ascriptions

Much of the debate surrounding EC has concerned particular uses of
‘know(s)’ in various contexts — specifically, their
intuitive truth or falsity. However the general role of
‘know(s)’, or of the corresponding concept, has been
relatively unexplored. It has been Edward Craig, more than anyone
else, who has urged that instead of focusing directing on
‘know(s)’ and its cognates, we should ask “what
knowledge does for us, what its role in our life might be,
and then ask what a concept having that role would be like”
(1990, 2, emphasis added). In large part thanks to Craig”s work,
the social role of knowledge ascriptions has recently come in for
focused investigation by a number philosophers. Because it has been so
influential, and because it has inspired new arguments for EC, it will
be helpful to briefly outline Craig”s own view. 

According to Craig, “the core of the concept of knowledge is an
outcome of certain very general facts about the human situation”
(1990, 10). The most conspicuous such general fact is that we must
rely on others as sources of information (1990, 11), which in turn
gives rise to the need for some way to pick out good
informants. Craig asks us to consider this question first “at
its most subjective”:

...I am seeking information as to whether or not p, and hence
want an informant who is satisfactory for my purposes, here and now,
with my present beliefs and capacities for receiving information. I am
concerned, in other words, that as well as [(0)] his having the right
answer to my question,


He should be accessible to me here and now.
He should be recognizable by me as someone likely to be right
about p.
He should be as likely to be right about p as my concerns
require.
Channels of communication between him and me should be open.
 (1990, 84-85)


So stated, this is a highly ‘subjectivized’ notion of the
good informant, and there is a consequent mismatch between it and our
conception of knowledge. For surely there can be knowers neither
accessible to (1) nor recognizable by (2) me, with whom I’m
unable to communicate (4), and so on. Importantly, for Craig, the high
degree of purpose-relativity of the fledgling concept of knowledge
before us — Fricker (2008) and Kusch (2009) call it
‘proto-knowledge’ —makes it ill-suited to play an
effective inter-personal role. According to Craig, for there to be
useful sharing of information there needs to be some means by which
individuals can come to share a common point of view concerning the
character and presence of good informants. Hence the pressure to form
an ‘objectivized’ concept — one that retains the
‘common core’ of the notion without tying it to the needs,
abilities, and circumstances of specific individuals, “and so
varying with them” (1990, 88). Among other things, this process
of objectivization involves pegging the reliability of the good
informant (hence, the knower) to the interests and purposes of 
the most demanding potential consumer of the information in
question. Thus, for Craig, our concept of the knower is the highly
objectivized notion of a good informant, where the latter is
“someone with a very high degree of reliability” (1990,
 91).[25]


One important issue on which subsequent discussion has focused is the
plausibility of Craig’s own hypothesis as to the role of the
concept ‘knowledge’, and/or of knowledge attributions. As
against Craig, a number of competing suggestions have been made, often
with the accompanying caveat that knowledge attributions, or
the concept of knowledge, may well serve more than one role (see,
e.g., Kappel 2010, Kelp 2011, Beebe 2012, Lackey 2012, Rysiew 2012,
Gerken 2013, Lawlor 2013).

More importantly for present purposes, a number of writers have
suggested that broadly Craigian reflections on the social role or
function of ‘know(s)’, and/or of attributions thereof,
provide a novel line of support for EC. Thus, while Craig’s own
process of objectivization was intended to minimize the
context-relativity and -variability of judgments as to a potential
informant’s reliability, Greco (2008, 432-435; 2010, 119-122),
for example, thinks that we should acknowledge and embrace the latter
and allow, as a result, that the question of whether someone
“knows” “be tied to the interests and purposes that
are relevant to the practical reasoner at issue” (2008, 433)
— a seemingly EC-friendly result. (Similar views have been
presented and defended by Hannon 2013 and McKenna 2013, 2014.)

David Henderson (2009, 2011) has also argued that by reflecting on
“the point or purpose of the concept of
knowledge” contextualism “gets a kind of
principled motivation” (2009, 125). Henderson also claims,
however, that his ‘gate-keeping contextualism’ has the
virtue of respecting the attractions and motivations of invariantism
as well. Like Craig and Greco, Henderson takes a central function of
knowledge ascriptions to be the certification of agents as good
sources of information. Those agents might belong to applied
practical or general-purpose source communities. In the
former type of community, where “the attributor is engaged in
gate keeping for a group focused on some practical project”,
s/he “should be contextually invested in such interests”
(2009, 126). And here, Henderson argues, we find a new rationale for
EC. However, when an attributor is gate keeping for a general-source
community, where the information may potentially be very widely shared
and there is likely to be no “simple decisive understanding of
just what counts as actionable information”, we get the much
more Craigian recommendation that

to qualify as knowing that p (in a general purpose source
community) an agent must be situated with respect to p so as to
be able to distinguish p’s obtaining from all the
alternatives that would be relevant across all the communities that
might draw on it, including those for which the stakes are high.
(2009, 127)


This yields “something like” (2009, 127) familiar
invariantism, albeit only within certain contexts:

The invariantist pull is honored by treating the invariantist’s
favored semantic standard for knowledge [or, for the correct
application of “knowledge”] as being just one, among
various, kinds of semantic standards. Each standard is, in context,
motivated by gatekeeping purposes. (Henderson and Horgan 2015, 99)


As Henderson notes (2009, 130-131), the envisaged combination of
contexualist and invariantist ideas might prove unstable: actual
attributors are members of multiple, overlapping communities;
information is constantly being shared bilaterally and multilaterally;
etc. Factors such as these are among the considerations cited by
Rysiew (2012) in arguing that its having a traditional invariantist
semantics would make ‘know(s)’ better suited to fulfilling
its (presumed) central social role(s). (For a reply, see Hannon 2015.)
Such claims take us back to considerations of whether contextualism
sits well with the transfer and storage of information (see Section
4.5). More generally, they serve to show that the bearing of certain
data upon the semantics of ‘know(s)’ is just as
controversial when we’re considering the term’s (or
concept’s) social role or function, as when we are considering
particular uses of the term or concept.
6. Other Views

We have seen that EC has forced non-contextualist epistemologists to
give more attention to such matters as the psychology and pragmatics
of knowledge attributions, and various other features of our actual
knowledge-attributing practices. EC has also been instrumental in the
development of other competing theories. These are said by their
proponents to do a better job of accommodating the sort of data, both
ordinary and extraordinary, which inspire EC. These views are:

Contrastivism, of which Jonathan Shaffer (e.g., 2004) is the
leading proponent (but see too Karjalainen and Morton 2003).
What is variously called ‘interest relative
invariantism’, ‘sensitive moderate invariantism’,
or, most often perhaps, ‘subject sensitive
invariantism’—defended, in various forms, by Jeremy Fantl
and Matt McGrath (2002, 2007, 2009), John Hawthorne (2004), and Jason
Stanley (2005b).
Relativism, of the sort defended by John MacFarlane (2005; 2014,
Chapter 8).


According to the first of these views, as Schaffer discusses it, while
EC holds that ‘knows’ expresses different two-term
relations (between subjects and propositions) in different contexts,
according to contrastivism, ‘knows’ denotes a three-place
relation, with a contrast variable over sets of propositions being
included among the relata. The identity of the contrasted propositions
may be ‘shifty’, when it is not explicitly provided. Thus,
in the same way that ‘Jane prefers vanilla’ may express a
true proposition when the contextually-provided contrast is strawberry
but a false proposition when the contrast is chocolate, ‘Jane
knows that she has hands’ may be true when the contrast is her
having lost her hands in an accident, but false when the contrast is
her being a handless BIV. (Some claim that contrastivism in a species
of EC; for Schaffer on the differences between contrastivism and
canonical versions of EC, see his 2004.)

According to subject sensitive invariantism, whether a subject
knows—though not what is expressed by the relevant knowledge
sentences themselves—depends upon facts about his/her practical
interests (or, depending on the view, what the subject believes about
such), especially the degree of practical importance to the subject of
getting the matter correct. As a rule, on this view, the more
that’s at stake, the more it takes to know.

According to relativism about knowledge, the truth values of knowledge
sentences depend upon the standards in play in the contexts in which
they are assessed, as opposed to the standards operative in either the
context in which they are uttered or the context of the subject. (In
certain cases, of course—e.g., when subject, speaker and
assessor occupy a single context—these standards may
coincide.)

The various strengths and weakness of each of these views —
considered both on their own, and as compared with each other, with
EC, and with traditional (insensitive) invariantism—is the
subject of much recent discussion. Unsurprisingly, no clear consensus
has emerged.