Smiles, walks, dances, weddings, explosions, hiccups, hand-waves,
arrivals and departures, births and deaths, thunder and lightning: the
variety of the world seems to lie not only in the assortment of its
ordinary citizens—animals and physical objects, and perhaps
minds, sets, abstract particulars—but also in the sort of things
that happen to or are performed by them. In the last few decades, this
view has been a focus of considerable debate in philosophy, with
implications reaching far into the concern of other disciplines as
well, above all linguistics and the cognitive sciences. Indeed, there
is little question that human perception, action, language, and
thought manifest at least a prima facie commitment to
entities of this sort:

Pre-linguistic infants appear to be able to discriminate and
“count” events, and the content of adult perception,
especially in the auditory realm, endorses the discrimination and
recognition as events of some aspects of the perceived
scene.
Humans (and, arguably, other animals) appear to form the intention
to plan and execute actions, and to bring about changes in the
world.
Dedicated linguistic devices (such as verb tenses and aspects,
nominalization of some verbs, certain proper names) are tuned to events
and event structures, as opposed to entities and structures of other
sorts.
Thinking about the temporal and causal aspects of the
world seems to require parsing those aspects in terms of events and
their descriptions.



It is, however, unclear to what extent such prima facie
commitments add up to an integrated phenomenon, as opposed to
separate, independent dispositions. Moreover, even among those who
favor a realist attitude towards the ontological status of events
there is significant disagreement concerning the precise nature of
such entities. (Their broad characterization as ‘things that
happen’, though commonly found in dictionaries, merely shifts
the burden to the task of clarifying the meaning of
‘happen’.) One useful approach is to set them against
entities belonging to other, philosophically more familiar,
metaphysical categories. In the following we review the main contrasts
between events and those categories that have in the literature been
put forward explicitly as their ontological competitors, or at least
as categories exhibiting significant differences with the category of
events. Along the way, we shall also review the main conceptual tools
that metaphysicians and other philosophers have adopted in their
attempts to deal with events, either from a realist or from a
non-realist perspective.
 
1. Events and Other Categories
1.1 Events vs. Objects


Although not undisputed, some standard differences between events and
physical objects are commonplace in the philosophical literature.
First, there is a difference in mode of being: material objects such
as stones and chairs are said to exist; events are said to
occur or happen or take place [Hacker
1982a; Cresswell 1986]. Second, there are differences in the way
objects and events relate to space and time. Ordinary objects are
supposed to have relatively crisp spatial boundaries and vague
temporal boundaries; events, by contrast, would have relatively vague
spatial boundaries and crisp temporal boundaries.  Objects are said to
be invidiously located in space—they occupy their
spatial location; events tolerate co-location much more easily
[Quinton 1979; Hacker 1982b]. Objects can move; events cannot [Dretske
1967]. Finally, objects are standardly construed as
continuants—they are in time and persist through time
by being wholly present at every time at which they exist; events are
occurrents—they take up time and persist by having
different parts (or “stages”) at different times [Johnson
1921; Mellor 1980; Simons 2000].


The last distinction is especially controversial, as there are
philosophers—from Russell [1927] and Whitehead [1929] to Quine
[1950], Lewis [1986c], Heller [1990], Sider [2001] and many
others—who conceive of objects as four-dimensional entities that
extend across time just as they extend across space. Some such
philosophers would accordingly draw no metaphysically significant
distinction between objects and events, treating both as entities of
the same kind: an object would simply be a “monotonous”
event; an event would be an “unstable” object [Goodman
1951]. More generally, the relevant distinction would be one of
degree, and while ‘event’ is standardly applied to things
that develop and change fast in time, ‘object’ would apply
to those things that strike us as “firm and internally
coherent” [Quine 1970]. On the othe hand, there are also
philosophers who reject the distinction on the side of events, by
construing at least some such entities—e.g., processes—as
continuants: what is happening at any moment when an apple is decaying
or a person is walking down the street is the whole process, not just
part of it [Stout 1997; Galton 2006].


If a metaphysical distinction between objects and events is granted,
then a question arises as to the relation between entities in the two
categories. Objects are prime actors in events; objectless events are
uncommon. But so are eventless objects; events make up the lives of
objects. In a radical mood, however, one can think of the entities in
one category as being metaphysically dependent on entities in the
other. For instance, it has been claimed that events supervene on
their participants [Lombard 1986], or that objects depend on the
events in which they partake [Parsons 1991]. In a more moderate way,
one can grant objects and events an equal ontological status but
maintain that either objects or events are primary in the order of
thought. Thus, it has been argued that a pure event-based ontology
would not be sufficient for the success of our re-identifying
practices, which require a stable frame of reference of the sort that
is adequately provided only by objects [Strawson 1959]. A similar
asymmetry between objects and events seems to be endorsed by natural
language, which has expressions such as ‘the fall of the
apple’ but not ‘the pomification of the
fall’. However, these asymmetries may be attenuated to the
extent that objects, too, may and sometimes must be identified via
reference to events. For example, if we track down the father of
Sebastian or the author of Waverley, it is by identifying
certain events in the first place—of fathering and of writing,
respectively [Moravcsik 1965; Davidson 1969; Lycan 1970; Tiles
1981].
1.2 Events vs. Facts


No matter what their relationships, events are naturally contrasted
with objects insofar as both are conceived of as individuals.
Both appear to be concrete, temporally and spatially located entities
organized into part-whole hierarchies. Both can be counted, compared,
quantified over, referred to, and variously described and re-described.
(It has been argued that our conceptions of these two categories are so
closely tied as to be structurally complementary, in that any
characterization of the concept event that only mentions
spatial and temporal features yields a characterization of the concept
object by a simple replacement of temporal with spatial
predicates, and vice versa [Mayo 1961].) From this point of view,
events are to be distinguished from facts, which are characterized by
features of abstractness and a-temporality: the event of Caesar's death
took place in Rome in 44 B.C., but that Caesar died is a fact here as
in Rome, today as in 44 B.C. [Ramsey 1927]. One could indeed speculate
that for every event there is a companion fact (the fact that the event
took place), but the two would still be categorially distinct [Bennett
1988]. 


According to some authors, this categorial distinction is actually
reflected in the different sorts of expressions through which facts
and events are referred to in ordinary language. In the terminology of
Vendler [1967], ‘Caesar's death’ is a perfect nominal: the
process of nominalization is complete and the expression can only be
modified by adjectival phrases (‘Caesar's violent
death’). By contrast, a that-clause such as ‘that
Caesar died’, or a gerundive such as ‘Ceasar's
dying’, are imperfect nominals that still have “a verb
alive and kicking inside them”: they can therefore tolerate
auxiliaries and tenses (‘That Caesar could die’,
‘Caesar's having died’), adverbs (‘Ceasar's dying
violently’), negation (‘Ceasar's not dying’),
etc. With some qualifications [McCann 1979], the metaphysical
hypothesis would be that, as a norm, perfect nominals stand for
events, whereas facts or states of affairs are the referents of
imperfect nominals.


Some philosophers, however, have conceived of the link between events
and facts as being much closer than this—close enough to justify
assimilating the two categories [Wilson 1974; Tegtmeier 2000] or at
least treating both as species of the same “state of
affairs” genus [Chisholm 1970]. This has two main
consequences. On the one hand, because facts corresponding to
non-equivalent propositions are distinct, events conceived of as facts
are fine-grained entities that cannot be freely re-described or
re-identified under different conceptualizations: the fact that Caesar
died violently is different from the fact that he died, hence the
death of Caesar and his violent death would be two different events
[Chisholm 1970, 1971], as opposed to one and the same event under
different descriptions [Davidson 1969]. On the other hand, because
linguistic expressions of facts are semantically transparent, a
Fregean line of argument could be concocted to show instead that
events construed as facts are too coarse-grained, to the point of
melting into a single “big” entity [Davidson 1967a]. (The
argument is known as the “slingshot argument”
[Barwise & Perry 1981].)


Other philosophers have insisted on distinguishing events from facts but
have given accounts that effectively amount to such an assimilation.
This is true especially of those theories that construe events as property
exemplifications, i.e., exemplifications of properties
by objects at times [Kim 1966; Martin 1969; Goldman
1970; Taylor 1985]. On such theories, events are individual entities.
But because they have a structure, a difference in any constituent is
sufficient to yield a different event. In particular, a difference in
the relevant constitutive property is sufficient to distinguish events
such as Caesar's death, construed as Caesar's exemplification of the
property of dying, and Caesar's violent death, construed as his
exemplification of the property of dying violently [Kim 1976]. Again, this
makes events virtually as fine-grained as facts. It bears emphasis,
however, that this consequence is not intrinsic to the theory of events
as property exemplifications. Both Caesar's death and his violent death
could be construed as Caesar's exemplification of one and the same
property P, describable both as a type of dying and—with
greater accuracy—as a type of dying violently. Thus, even if
construed as a structured complex, an event can be coarsely referred to
insofar as its names need not be sensitive to this structure [Bennett
1988]. In this way the distinction between events and facts can be
reinstated in terms of a firm distinction between semantic and
metaphysical aspects of the theory of event-descriptions.


Similar considerations apply to those theories that treat events as
situations, in the sense familiar from situation semantics [Barwise
& Perry 1983]. On such theories, events are construed as sets of
functions from spatiotemporal locations to “situation
types” defined as sequences of objects standing or failing to
stand in a certain relation. But while the formal machinery delivers a
fine-grained account, the algorithm for applying the machinery to
natural language sentences leaves room for flexibility.
1.3 Events vs. Properties


A third major metaphysical category with which events have sometimes
been contrasted is that of properties. If events are individuals, then
they are not properties, for properties are normally construed as
universals. Individuals exist or occur whereas universals
recur. However, some philosophers have taken very seriously the
intuition that in some cases events may be said to recur, as when we
say that the sun rises every morning [Chisholm 1970; Brandl 1997]. If
so, then it is natural to think of events as being more similar to
properties than to individuals, similar enough to justify treating
them as a kind of property—e.g., as properties of
moments or intervals of time [Montague 1969], properties of
cross-world classes of individuals [Lewis 1986a], or properties of
sets of world segments [von Kutschera 1993]. For instance, on the
first of these accounts, the event of the sun's rising is the property
of being an interval during which the sun rises. As a characterization
of event types, this would be uncontroversial and would allow one to
construe particular events as tokens of the corresponding type. (One
such construal would correspond to the above-mentioned conception of
events as property exemplifications.) But to conceive of events as
universal properties is to go beyond this uncontroversial fact and to
reject the existence of event tokens altogether, even when it comes to
“particular” events such as the unique rising of the sun
that we witnessed this morning. Rather than an instance of the
universal sun rising, such an event would be a universal in
its own right, albeit a universal of such a restricted sort and of
such a degree of singularity as to be instantiated only once.


One possible view about properties is that they are not universals
but rather particulars of a special sort—viz. abstract particulars
[Stout 1923] or tropes [Williams 1953]. According to this
view, the redness of this apple is different from the redness of
anything else, not because of its extreme singularity (other things
could agree with the apple colorwise) but because it is the redness of
this apple. It exists here and now, where and while the apple
exists. Likewise, this morning's rising of the sun would be
numerically different from (though qualitatively similar to) any other
morning's rising of the sun. If so, then the view that events are
properties becomes compatible with the view that they are
spatiotemporally located. An event would just be a particularized
property located at some region of space-time [Bennett 1996]. (Once
again, this conception is closely related to the conception of events
as property exemplifications, although the term
‘exemplification’ suggests a construal of properties as
universals. Some authors actually identify the two conceptions
[Bennett 1988]; others reject the identification on account of the
difference between property instances and property exemplifications
[Macdonald 1989].)


A variant of the trope conception construes events as trope sequences
[Campbell 1981]. However, since tropes are particulars, a sequence of
tropes at a place is itself a trope, hence this variant is
best regarded as a specification of what sort of tropes events
are. Similar remarks may apply to those theories that construe events
as relational tropes [Mertz 1996], or even as higher-order tropes
[Moltmann 2013]. 
1.4 Events vs. Times


The intuition that events are properties of times can also be
fleshed out in terms of thinner metaphysical commitments, by construing
events simply as times cum description, i.e., as temporal instants or
intervals during which certain statements hold [van Benthem 1983]. On
this view, for example, this morning's rising of the sun is identified
by an ordered pair <i,φ> where i is the
relevant time period (corresponding to the descriptor ‘this
morning’) and φ is the sentence ‘The sun rises’.
Of course, this treatment does not do justice to some of the intuitions
underlying the prima facie commitments to events—for
instance, events can be perceived but times cannot [Gibson 1975]. But
because of the availability of fully developed theories of intervals
along with fully developed interval-based semantics [Cresswell 1979;
Dowty 1979], and because of equally well worked out traditional
theories of instants and instant-based semantics [Prior 1967], such
accounts are especially attractive from a reductionist perspective. (A
more general account would construe events as spatiotemporal
regions cum description, distinguishing e.g between this morning's
rising of the sun in London and its rising in Paris.)


The link between events and times has, however, been explored also in the
opposite direction. If events are assumed as a primitive
ontological category, then one can dispense with temporal instants or
intervals and construe them as derived entities. The most classical
treatment of this sort proceeds by construing temporal instants as
maximal sets of pairwise simultaneous (or partially simultaneous)
events [Russell 1914; Whitehead 1929; Walker 1947], but other
treatments are possible. For example, it has been suggested that the
mathematical connection between the way events are perceived to be
ordered and the underlying temporal dimension is essentially that of a
free construction (in the category-theoretic sense) of linear orderings
from event orderings, induced by the binary relation x wholly
precedes y [Thomason 1989]. Treatments such as these provide a
reduction of time in terms of relations among events and are therefore
especially germane to a relational conception of time (and, more
generally, of space-time). Modal variants [Forbes 1993] as well as
mereological variants [Pianesi & Varzi 1996] of such views are also
available.
2. Types of Events
2.1 Activities, Accomplishments, Achievements, and States


Philosophers who agree with a conception of events as particulars
typically distinguish different sorts of such particulars. A classic
typology distinguishes four sorts: activities, accomplishments,
achievements, and states [Ryle 1949; Vendler 1957]. An
activity, such as John's walking uphill, is a homogeneous
event: its sub-events satisfy the same description as the activity
itself and has no natural finishing point or culmination. An
accomplishment, such as John's climbing the mountain, may have
a culmination, but is never homogeneous. An achievement, such
as John's reaching the top, is a culminating event (and is
therefore always instantaneous). And a state, such as John's
knowing the shortest way, is homogeneous and may extend over time, but
it makes no sense to ask how long it took or whether it culminated.
Sometimes accomplishments and achievements are grouped together into a
single category of performances [Kenny 1963]. Sometimes
achievements have also been called events tout court and all
other events have been grouped together into a broadly understood
category of temporally extended entities, called processes
[Ingarden 1935]; the word ‘eventuality’ may then
be used as a label covering both categories [Bach 1986].


Some authors introduce aspectual considerations into the taxonomy,
drawing on Aristotle's distinction between Energeia and
Kinêsis [Ackrill 1965]. The idea is that different
verbs describe different types of events: verbs with no continuous
form (‘know’) correspond to states; verbs with continuous
form for which the present continuous entails the past perfect
(‘John is walking uphill’ entails ‘John walked
uphill’) correspond to activities; and verbs for which the
present continuous entails the negation of the past perfect
(‘John is climbing the mountain’ entails ‘John has
not (yet) climbed the mountain’, at least in the relevant
context) correspond to performances [Mourelatos 1978]. Several authors
have followed in these footsteps to develop linguistically
sophisticated theories [Taylor 1977; Dowty 1979; Freed 1979; Bach
1981; Galton 1984; Verkuyl 1989; Smith 1991; Kühl 2008], but the
legitimacy of drawing ontological categorizations from such linguistic
distinctions has been questioned [Gill 1993].
2.2 Static and Dynamic Events


One may also want to distinguish between dynamic events, such
as John's walk, and static events, such as John's rest under
a tree. According to some authors, the latter are not events proper
because they do not involve any change [Ducasse 1926]. In the most
abstract construal, a change is an ordered pair of facts: the fact
that obtains prior to the change and the fact that obtains after the
change took place [von Wright 1963]. More substantial accounts of
events as changes describe them as the exemplifications of dynamic
properties, i.e., properties that an object has by virtue of a
“movement” in some quality space [Quinton 1979; Lombard
1979, 1986]. However, the question of whether all events should be or
involve changes of some sort is controversial [Montmarquet 1980;
Steward 1997; Mellor 1998; Simons 2003] and it may be argued that it
is ultimately a matter of stipulation—hence of little
metaphysical import [Casati & Varzi 2008].


If static events are admitted, the question arises of whether they
should be kept distinct from states [Parsons 1989]. One plausible
assumption is that the distinction between the static and the dynamic
aspects of the world is skew to the distinction between states and
activities. As there may be static activities, so there may be dynamic
states. Walking is a state of John's that is dynamic, as opposed to his
state of resting, which is static. The walk itself is an activity of
John's that is dynamic, as opposed to the rest John takes, which can be
considered a static activity.
2.3 Actions and Bodily Movements

Prima facie, actions are naturally categorized as a subclass
of events, namely, animate events. Like all events, actions are said
to occur or take place, not to exist, and their relation to time and
space is event-like as well: they have relatively clear beginnings and
endings but unclear spatial boundaries, they appear to tolerate
co-location, and they cannot be said to move from one place to another
or to endure from one time to another, but rather extend in space and
time by having spatial as well as temporal parts [Thomson 1977].
Actions and events appear to be homogeneous in causal explanations,
too: actions can be causes of which events are effects [Davidson
1967b]. Some authors, however, prefer to draw a distinction here and
to treat actions as relations between agents and events,
namely as instances of the relation of ‘bringing about’
that may hold between an agent and an event [von Wright 1963; Chisholm
1964; Bach 1980; Bishop 1983; Segerberg 1989], or perhaps the relation
‘seeing to it that’ [Belnap et al. 2001]. On such
views, actions are not individuals unless relations are themselves
construed as tropes.


Whether or not actions are treated as events, one might be tempted
to distinguish between actions proper (such as John's raising of
his arm) and bodily movements (such as John's arm rising), or
between intentional actions (John's walk) and
unintentional ones (John's falling into a hole). For some
authors this is necessary in order to explain important facts of human
behavior [Montmarquet 1978; Searle 1983; Brand 1984; Mele
1997]. However, it has been argued that such a distinction does not
pertain to metaphysics but rather to the conceptual apparatus by means
of which we describe the realm of things that happen. On this view, an
arm raising is just an arm's rising under a mentalistic description
[Anscombe 1957, 1979; Sher 1973].
2.4 Mental and Physical Events


A similar story applies to the distinction between mental
events (John's decision to wear boots) and physical or
physiological events (such and such neurons firing). One may
think that this distinction is real insofar as the latter events are
expected to fall naturally into the nomological net of physical
theories whereas the former seem to escape it. But one may also want
to resist this line of thought and maintain that the distinction
between the mental and the physical concerns exclusively the
vocabulary with which we describe what goes on. These options have
important ramifications for various issues philosophy of
mind—e.g., issues of mental causation [Heil & Mele 1993]. If
the distinction between mental and physical events is ontologically
significant, then the question arises of how these two sorts of event
causally interact with each other, leading to various forms of
anomalous or nomological dualism [Foster 1991]. By contrast, the claim
that the distinction is purely semantic is congenial to a monist
position, whether nomological (e.g., reductive materialism) or
anomalous [Macdonald 1989]. Anomalous monism has been popular
especially among philosophers who accept a particularist conception of
events as widely redescribable entities, for such a conception allows
one to accept the materialist claim that all events are physical
(regardless of whether one describes them in mentalistic terms) while
rejecting the seeming consequence that mental goings-on can be given
purely physical explanations (precisely because only a physicalistic
vocabulary is suited to such explanations) [Nagel 1965; Davidson 1970,
1993]. Some authors, however, have argued that this line of argument
falls prey to the charge of epiphenomenalism, to the effect that
mental events would lack causal or explanatory powers altogether
[Honderich 1982; Robinson 1982; Kim 1993; Campbell 1998, 2005] and on
such matters the debate is still open.
2.5 Negative Events


Events are things that happen. In some cases, however, the same sort
of prima facie evidence that suggests a realist attitude
towards such things might suggest a similar attitude towards things
that do not actually happen, including “negative actions”
of various sorts [Danto 1966; Ryle 1973]. We speak of John's walk with
the same easiness with which we speak of the talk he did not deliver,
the nap he did not take, the party he failed to organize; we seem to
quantify over such things, and we normally engage in causal talk that
seems to refer explicitly to negative causes, as when we reason that
John's failure to turn off the gas caused an explosion, or that his
omitting the cutlery from the wedding list made Mary angry. Some
authors take such evidence at face value, drawing a distinction at the
ontological level: a good inventory of the world ought to include
“negative” events and actions along with ordinary,
“positive” ones [Lee 1978; Vermazen 1985; De Swart 1996;
Przepiórkowski 1999; Higginbotham 2000; Mossel 2009]. Others
dissent: we often speak as though there were such things, but
deep down we want our words to be interpreted in such a way as to
avoid ontological commitment. Thus, either we are just engaging in
mere counterfactual speculations, or else the putative negative events
are just ordinary, positive events under a negative description:
‘John's omitting the cutlery from the wedding list’, for
example, would refer to his drawing up a wedding list that contains no
cutlery, ‘Ann's not moving’ would describe Ann's working
hard to master urges to move, etc. [Mele 2005; Varzi 2008]. 


The case of negative causation is especially challenging, not last
because of the link between causation and such ethical and legal
matters as passive killing [Bennett 1966; Green 1980; Foot 1984], good
Samaritanism [Kleinig 1976] and, more generally, moral responsibility
[Weinryb 1980; Walton 1980; Williams 1995; Fischer 1997; Clarke
2014]. Here it is also customary to introduce finer-grained
discriminations, distinguishing e.g. several ways in which an agent
may fail to do something: (trying and) not
succeeding, refraining, omitting,
and allowing [Brand 1971; Milanich 1984; Hall 1984; Bach
2010]. At least with regard to some such ways, it is very tempting to
endorse a realist ontology. If so, the difficulty naturally arises of
how and where to draw the line. For example, the realist about
omissions will have to find a principled way of refraining from
treating all omissions, including non salient ones, as causes
[Lewis 1986b, 2004; Thomson 2003; Menzies 2004; McGrath 2005; Sartorio
2010; Bernstein 2014]. On the other hand, the antirealist will have to explain how one
can account for such causal talk while holding on to the view that
every causal situation develops from “positive factors
alone” [Armstrong 1999]. Some would insist that every alleged
case of negative causation can be described in terms of positive
causation [Laliberté 2013]. Others—the
majority—would resist ontological commitment by recasting the
logical structure of the relevant causal claims in suitable ways,
e.g. as causal statements about events that are counterfactually
described [Hunt 2005], or as “quasi-causal” claims about
what would have been a cause if the omitted event had happened [Dowe
2001], or as mere causal explanations in which the explanans does not
stand to the explanandum as cause to effect [Beebee 2004; Varzi
2007].
3. Existence, Identity, and Indeterminacy


As mentioned in the Introduction, one finds a prima facie
commitment to events in various aspects of human perception, action,
language, and thought. The main line of argument offered to back this
commitment up, however, comes from considerations of logical form. Not
only does ordinary talk involve explicit reference to and
quantification over events, as when one says that John's walk
was pleasant or that two explosions were heard last night.
Ordinary talk also seems to involve several ways of adverting to
events implicitly. Adverbial modification is a standard example
[Reichenbach 1947]. We say that Brutus stabbed Caesar with a knife. If
this statement is taken to assert that a certain three-place relation
obtains among Brutus, Caesar, and a knife, then it is hard to explain
why the statement entails that Brutus stabbed Caesar (a statement that
involves a different, two-place relation) [Kenny 1963]. By contrast,
if we take our statement to assert that a certain event occurred
(namely, a stabbing of Caesar by Brutus)
and that it had a certain property (namely, of being done
with a knife), then the entailment is straightforward [Davidson
1967a].  These reasons do not constitute a proof that there are such
entities as events. But they are telling insofar as one is interested
in an account of how it is that certain statements mean what they
mean, where the meaning of a statement is at least in part determined
by its logical relations to other statements. For another example, it
has been argued that singular causal statements cannot be analyzed in
terms of a causal connective (essentially for reasons having to do
with the above-mentioned slingshot argument) but rather require that
causation be treated as a binary relation holding between individual
events [Davidson 1967b]. A third example involves the semantics of
perceptual reports with naked infinitive complements, as in
‘John saw Mary cry’, which is analyzed as ‘John saw
an event which was a crying by Mary’ [Higginbotham 1983; Vlach
1983; Gisborne 2010]. Still a fourth example involves the logical form
of statements with plural subjects, such as ‘John and Mary
lifted the piano (together)’, which is analyzed as reporting,
not the exploits of a “plural object”, but rather an event
involving more than one agent [Higginbotham & Schein 1986; Schein
1993; Lasersohn 1995; Landman 1996, 2000]. Many more such arguments
have been offered, also by authors working within different programs
in linguistics [Parsons 1990; Rothstein 1998; Link 1998;
Higginbotham et al. 2000; Tenny & Pustejovsky 2000;
Pietroski 2005; van Lambalgen & Hamm 2005; Robering 2014].


On the other hand, some philosophers have been dissatisfied with this
sort of “existential proof” and have argued instead that
all talk that seems to involve explicit or implicit reference to or
quantification over events can be paraphrased so as to avoid the
commitment. For example, it has been argued that a term such as
‘John's walk’ goes proxy for the corresponding statement
‘John walked’ [Geach 1965], so to say that John's walk was
pleasant is just to say that John walked pleasantly. Similar
paraphrases have been offered to deal with the case of explicit
quantifier-phrases such as ‘two explosions’ as well as
with the implicit event quantification that lies behind
adverb-dropping inferences [Clark 1970; Fulton 1979], singular causal
statements [Horgan 1978, 1982; Wilson 1985, Needham 1988, 1994, Mellor
1991, 1995], and so on. On the face of it, it appears that questions
of logical form leave the existential issue undecided, at least
insofar as an event-committing analysis automatically turns into an
eliminativist paraphrase when read in the opposite direction (and vice
versa).


Another issue that appears to be undecided is that of so-called
identity criteria, which has been the focus of an intense debate
[Bradie 1983; Pfeifer 1989; Mackie 1997].  Is John's walk the same
event as his pleasant walk? Was Brutus's stabbing of Caesar the same
event as his killing of Caesar? Was it the same as the violent
assassination of Caesar? Some philosophers take these to be
metaphysical questions—questions whose answers call for adequate
identity criteria, which must be provided before we are allowed to
take our event talk seriously. In this sense, different conceptions of
events tend to suggest different answers, and widely varying ones. At
one extreme we find the radical “unifiers” (who take
events to be as coarse-grained as ordinary objects [Quine 1985; Lemmon
1967]), at the other the radical “multipliers” (who take
events to be as fine-grained as facts [Kim 1966]), and in between
several moderate variants [Davidson 1969; Thalberg 1971; Thomson 1971;
Brand 1977; Cleland 1991]. Other philosophers, however, regard
questions of identity to be first and foremost semantic
questions—questions about the way we talk and about what we
say. No metaphysical theory, it is said, can settle the semantics of
ordinary event talk, hence there is no way of determining the truth or
falsity of an event identity statement exclusively on the basis of
one's metaphysical views. Which events a statement speaks of depends
heavily (more heavily than with ordinary material objects) on local
context and unprincipled intuitions [Bennett 1988]. If so, then the
whole identity issue is undecidable, since one is demanding
metaphysical answers to questions that are in large part
semantical.