Many of our mental states such as beliefs and desires are
intentional mental states, or mental states with content.
Externalism with regard to mental content says that in order
to have certain types of intentional mental states (e.g. beliefs), it
is necessary to be related to the environment in the right way.
Internalism (or individualism) denies this, and it
affirms that having those intentional mental states depends solely on
our intrinsic properties. This debate has important consequences with
regard to philosophical and empirical theories of the mind, and the
role of social institutions and the physical environment in
constituting the mind. It also raises other interesting questions
concerning such matters as the explanatory relevance of content and the
possibility of a priori self-knowledge.
 
Introduction


In its most general formulation, externalism with regard to
a property K is a thesis about how K is individuated.
It says that whether a creature has K or not depends in part
on facts about how the creature is related to its external environment.
In other words, it is metaphysically possible that there are two
intrinsically indistinguishable creatures, only one of which has
property K, as a result of them being situated in different
environments. To give a trivial example, externalism is true of mosquito
bites since having them requires having been bitten by a mosquito. A
mark on the skin created by careful micro-surgery is not a mosquito
bite, even if it is intrinsically indistinguishable from a real
one.

Individualism or internalism with respect to a
property K says that whether a creature has K or not
supervenes on its intrinsic properties only. It follows that facts
about the environment play no role in determining whether or not the
creature has property K. Notice that internalism does not deny
that the environment can causally affect whether something has
K. For example, external factors such as exposure to radiation
can cause cancer in an individual, but having cancer is still an
internal physical state.


This article reviews the externalism vs. internalism debate about
mental content. An intentional mental state is a mental state of a
particular psychological type with some particular mental content. For
example, believing that it is raining and hoping that it is raining are
intentional mental states with the same content but of distinct
psychological types. Whereas believing that it is raining and believing
that it is sunny are states with distinct contents but of the same
psychological type.


For the purpose of discussion, knowledge will not count as a
psychological type. Externalism is clearly true of knowledge of the
environment, since one can know that it is raining outside only if it
is indeed raining outside. But this kind of externalism is not too
interesting. Externalism is true here only in part because knowledge
requires veridical contents. What is controversial is whether
externalism extends to mental states belonging to psychological types
which do not have such a requirement, e.g. intentions, beliefs and
desires. This is what the externalism debate on mental content is
about. If having a mental state of psychological type T and content C
supervenes purely on the intrinsic properties of a subject, then
internalism is true of that mental state, and its mental content is
said to be “narrow”. Otherwise,
externalism is true of that mental state and its content is said to be
“wide” or
“broad”.


Among intentional mental states, a distinction is sometimes drawn
between those that are de dicto (of the dictum or
proposition) and those that are de re (of the
thing). De re mental states, usually ascribed in
English with an of or about locution (e.g.
‘Smith believes of (about) the
water in his glass that it is thirst-quenching.’)
are, like states of knowing, fairly straightforwardly externalist,
since believing of x that it has some property
apparently requires x’s existence, and
x will often be some object or kind in the
creature’s external environment. Externalism about
de dicto intentional mental states, those ascribed in English
with ‘that-clauses,’ (e.g.
‘Smith believes that the water in his glass
is thirst-quenching.’) is the controversial variety.
(See the entry on propositional attitude reports and its supplement on
the de re/de dicto distinction.)


There is an interesting question concerning how to understand the
crucial distinction between a creature’s external
properties and those that are intrinsic or internal. Many contributors
to the debate over externalism take internal properties to be
physical properties of a creature that do not depend for their
instantiation on any property instantiated outside the boundary of the
creature’s body and brain, and this is how the
distinction will be understood here. However, a difficulty with this
understanding of the distinction, pointed out by Farkas (2003), is that
it appears to rule out the possibility of antiphysicalist internalists.
This is ironic, given that Descartes is often held up as a paradigmatic
example of an internalist about mental content.
Williamson (2000) suggests that internalism can be understood as
the doctrine that mental content supervenes on
environmentally-independent phenomenal states, and Farkas (2003, 2008)
makes a similar proposal. More recently, however, Gertler (2012) has
argued that there is no understanding of the distinction between
internal and external properties (including the understanding adopted
here) that will correctly categorize the views we take to be clearly
externalist or internalist. She therefore maintains that there is no
genuine dispute over the truth of externalism, and recommends that
philosophers drop the issue in favor of more well-defined
questions.
2. The Classic Arguments for Externalism


The most well-known arguments for externalism typically make use of
thought-experiments in which physically identical individuals are embedded
in different social or physical environments. It is then argued that
some beliefs and thoughts are possessed by one of these individuals but not the
other. This shows that some mental contents fail to supervene on
intrinsic facts, and hence that externalism is true.


Many of these thought experiments were inspired by the related
discussion of semantic externalism, the thesis that the
meaning and reference of some of the words we use is not solely
determined by the ideas we associate with them or by our internal
physical state. In Kripke (1972), it is argued that the reference of
proper names and natural kind terms is determined in part by external causal
and historical factors. In the famous “Twin
Earth” thought experiment in Putnam (1975), we are asked to
imagine that in 1750, there was a remote planet, Twin Earth, which was
exactly like Earth except that instead of water (H2O), it
has a different substance, twin-water, composed of a different chemical compound
XYZ. The macro properties of XYZ are supposed to be just like water :
it looks and tastes like water, can be found in the rivers and
oceans on Twin Earth, and so on. However, back in 1750 nobody on Earth
or Twin Earth could distinguish between water and XYZ. Still, according
to Putnam, an individual on Earth in 1750 who used the word
“water” would have been referring to
H2O and not XYZ. Of course, this person did not know that
water is H2O. But according to the externalist, this should
not have prevented him from referring to H2O when he used
the term “water”. If he had pointed to a
sample of XYZ and said “That's water,”
he would have said something false. Similarly, when an individual on
Twin Earth in 1750 used the word
“water”, he would have been referring to
XYZ and not H2O.


Although this thought experiment was designed to establish
semantic externalism, it can be extended to mental contents as well
(see McGinn(1977)). Thus, consider an individual on Earth who sincerely
utters “water quenches thirst” before
1750. Such an individual would be expressing his belief that water
quenches thirst, a belief that is true if and only if H2O
quenches thirst. The externalist then asks us to consider a physically
identical counterpart of this individual on Twin Earth. Being a
resident on Twin Earth, this counterpart has only encountered
twin-water, and has never encountered samples of water or heard about
water from other people. According to the externalist, our intuition
tells us that this individual on Twin Earth does not believe that water
quenches thirst. When he utters “water quenches
thirst”, he is instead expressing the belief that
twin-water quenches thirst, a belief with different truth-conditions.
In short, these two individuals have different beliefs despite being
intrinsically identical (ignoring the fact that the human body is about
60% water). It follows that some beliefs do not supervene on intrinsic
facts, and therefore that externalism is true.


The argument just discussed aims to show that some beliefs involving
natural kind concepts depend on the identity of certain physical
substances in our environment. Call this version of externalism
natural kind externalism. A different version of externalism,
social externalism, is defended by Tyler Burge (especially
Burge(1979) and Burge(1986)). Burge makes use of similar arguments to
show that social institutions also play a role in determining the
contents of some beliefs and thoughts, including those that do not
involve natural kind concepts.


In one such argument, we are to imagine an English-speaking
individual, say Jane, who suspects she has arthritis as a result of
having an ailment in her thigh. This individual, not being a doctor,
does not know that arthritis is a condition of the joints only, and so
when she sincerely utters “I have arthritis in my
thigh” she is expressing a false belief. Burge then asks us
to consider a counterfactual situation where Jane has the same internal
state and history, except that she grew up in a community where the
word “arthritis” is used to apply to a
different disease, say tharthritis, which includes rheumatoid ailments
of not just the joints but also the thighs. According to Burge, in this
counterfactual situation, Jane lacks the belief that she has arthritis
in her thigh, or any other beliefs about arthritis, as no-one in her
linguistic community possesses the concept of arthritis. When she
sincerely utters “I have arthritis in my
thigh”, she is instead expressing the true belief that she
has tharthritis in her thigh. Since the intrinsic facts about the
individual are the same, but the beliefs are different, this is taken
to show that externalism is correct. Furthermore, because the two
situations differ only in the linguistic usage of the community, it is
suggested that mental contents depend in part on communal linguistic
practice.
3. Responses to the Classic Arguments


The thought experiments above have generated a huge literature. Many
authors remain unconvinced that they support externalism; in fact,
although externalism, for decades, has been regarded as firm
orthodoxy, a recent (2009) poll by PhilPapers suggests that, these
days, only a thin majority (51.1%) of analytic philosophers
“accept” or “lean toward” externalism (20%
endorsed internalism while 29% gave one of the "other"
responses). 
The grounds for dissent are many and various. Some internalists
claim that there are Twin Earth thought experiments that
tell against, instead of in favor of, externalism. Boghossian
(1997), for example, discusses the case of “Dry Earth”, a
planet whose inhabitants (who are our intrinsic duplicates) are under
the illusion that there is a clear, colorless liquid flowing
out of the faucets and filling the lakes and oceans. According to
Boghossian, externalists are committed to implausible claims
concerning the content of Dry Earthlings’ thoughts about this
illusory liquid. (Segal (2000) endorses a variation on this argument
from Dry Earth; See Korman (2006) and Pryor (2007) for externalist
replies.)

Some philosophers reject the use of thought experiments in determining whether
content is wide or narrow. Cummins (1991) argues that empirical
research is needed to find out about the nature of belief, not thought
experiments. It might turn out that psychologists make use of belief
content in their best psychological theories in an internalist manner,
contrary to our folk intuitions. Similarly, Chomsky (1995) argues that
the intuitions elicited by the above thought-experiments at most
constitute data for ethnoscience, but “the study of
how people attain cognitive states, interact, and so on, will proceed
along its separate course.” He believes that the notion of
content in such thought experiments play no useful role in scientific
theorizing.


A somewhat different empirical challenge to the externalist thought
experiments may be brewing in the new “experimental
philosophy” movement. It is possible, as experimental
philosophers appear to have shown regarding intuitions about other
prominent philosophical thought experiments, that externalist
intuitions are a culturally local product. Weinberg et al. (2001)
report that the Gettier intuition tends not to be had by East Asian
subjects, and Machery et al. (2004) say that a majority of the East
Asian subjects they surveyed had intuitions that favor the
descriptivist theory of reference supposedly refuted by Kripke (1972).
Surely, there will soon be cross-cultural empirical data on externalist
intuitions. If it is found that only Westerners, for example, tend to
have externalist intuitions, that could form the basis of a new kind of
empirical critique of externalism.


A second line of criticism disagrees with the intuition that
different belief ascriptions are true of the physically identical
subjects in the two environments. Unger (1984) suggests that perhaps
XYZ is a kind of water, depending on how the details of Putnam's
thought experiment are spelt out. Crane (1991) argues that in Burge's
example, there is no reason for thinking that Jane has different
concepts in the two situations, as her dispositions remain exactly the
same. Crane thinks that in both situations, Jane lacks the concept of
arthritis, but possesses the concept of tharthritis. So Burge was
mistaken in attributing to Jane in the actual world the belief that she
has arthritis in her thigh. Instead, in both worlds, Jane has the
belief that she has tharthritis in her thigh. The only difference is
that when she utters “I have arthritis in my
thigh”, her utterance expresses her belief correctly only
in the counterfactual world, and not in the actual world. The contents
of her beliefs in both cases are exactly the same. Georgalis (1999)
takes a similar view, but unlike Crane, he thinks that Jane literally
believes that she has arthritis in her thigh in both worlds, and that
it is wrong to attribute to her the belief that she has tharthritis.
This is also the position taken by Wikforss (2001), though for reasons
very different from Georgalis’s. (See also Segal
(2000).)


A third line of criticism (Loar (1988), Patterson (1990)) concedes
that different belief ascriptions are true of the physically identical
subjects, but denies that this implies externalism. It is submitted that
there is a distinction between linguistic content and psychological
content. The former refers to the contents of the embedded that-clauses
in belief attributions, such as the content of
“arthritis is painful” in the statement
“Jane believes that arthritis is
painful.” Psychological content, on the other hand, refers
to the contents of intentional mental states that is invoked in
psychological explanations of behavior. On this view, the linguistic
contents of that-clauses in belief ascriptions do not accurately
capture the psychological contents of mental states. One example used
to argue for such a position is a variation of Burge's thought
experiment inspired by Kripke’s (1979) discussion of
different but related issues. Suppose Jane studys French and learns the
meaning of the French word “arthrite”,
namely a rheumatoid ailment that affects the joints only. However, she
fails to realize that “arthrite” and
“arthritis” refer to the same illness,
as she mistakenly believes that the latter is not restricted to the
joints. Suppose further that she describes her ailment in her thigh as
“arthritis”, and she also thinks that
she has an ailment in her knee joint to which the French term applies.
In such a situation, the claim “Jane believes that
she has arthritis” seems to be true twice over. But the
problem with this attribution is that it fails to distinguish between
the two distinct beliefs that Jane has about her ailments. When a
French doctor offers Jane a cure for arthritis, she would gladly accept
it but continue to look for a cure for the ailment in her thigh she
calls “arthritis”. On this line of
thought, this shows that Jane has two beliefs with distinct
psychological contents that ordinary belief attributions fail to
capture. What the externalist thought experiments show is that ordinary
belief ascriptions are sensitive to external facts, but it does not
follow that psychological contents are therefore wide. (But see
Stalnaker (1990) and Frances (1999), both of whom argue that
psychological contents so understood might still be wide.)


Another popular response to the classic arguments is again to draw a
distinction between two kinds of content. However, this time the
distinction is between two kinds of content that intentional mental
states possess. It is first of all conceded that beliefs and thoughts
have wide contents, as shown by the thought experiments. However, it is
suggested that intentional mental states also possess a kind of narrow
content that does not depend on the environment. For example, Fodor
(1987) agrees that physically identical individuals have different wide
contents when embedded in different contexts. However, Fodor suggests
that their beliefs still have the same narrow contents, which are
functions from contexts to wide contents. Narrow contents and contexts
are supposed to explain how identical individuals acquire wide
contents, and they are supposed to play a central role in psychological
explanation. (See the entry on
 narrow content,
 and further discussion below.)


Finally, some authors (e.g. Horowitz (2002, 2005)) deny that there
is any sense in which one’s external environment
determines the de dicto contents of one’s mental
states. In fact, Horowitz alleges that the various assumptions required
by the arguments for externalism are inconsistent (though see Brueckner
(2005) for a reply).


Among those who accept externalism, one important issue concerns the
implicit philosophical assumptions that ground the intuitions behind
the thought experiments. There are two main approaches here. The
causal-information theoretic approach explains content in terms of
counterfactual or informational dependencies that hold between internal
states and the environment in normal or ideal situations (Dretske
(1981), Stalnaker (1993)). The teleological approach, on the other
hand, says that the contents of internal states are fixed by their
design or evolutionary function (Millikan (1984), Papineau(1993)). If
these theories of content are correct, they explain why intentional
mental states have wide contents and provide a theoretical basis for
externalism. (See the entries on
 mental representation, and
 teleological theories of mental content.)
4. The Scope of Externalism


The evaluation of the classic arguments is still a matter of active
debate. But even if we accept Putnam's and Burge's thought experiments,
they show at most that some mental states have wide contents.
These are the states to which teleological or causal-informational
theories of content apply. But this is not enough to show that
all beliefs and thoughts have wide contents.


Burge (1986) believes that his arguments apply to any thought that
involves observational and theoretical notions, natural and
non-natural kind notions, or indeed “any notion that applies to
public types of objects, properties, or events that are typically
known by empirical means.” However, it has been suggested that
Burge's arguments apply only to deferential concepts that
involve conceptions of other speakers or a socially shared language
(see Loar (1990)). This raises the question of whether there are
non-deferential concepts to which externalism does not apply. For
example, it might be argued that some very basic logical notions are
indeed non-deferential. Consider a mono-lingual English speaker who
believes that something exists, or who believes that what will be,
will be. Unlike the previous examples, it is difficult to imagine a
world in which her physical duplicate does not have the same beliefs,
even if the duplicate's linguistic community uses words like
“exist”, “something”, “will be”,
etc. with somewhat different meanings. If this is correct, then the
classical arguments fail to show that all mental contents are
wide.


The thesis that all mental contents are wide is defended by Davidson
(1987) in his “swampman” thought
experiment. Davidson asks us to imagine him being reduced to ashes by
lightning in a swamp, while at the same time an exact physical replica
of him is produced by pure coincidence. This is unlikely to be sure,
but arguably nomologically possible. According to Davidson, the
swampman that is produced would have no intentional mental states
whatsoever, even though it would behave just like him and would appear
to other people as having thoughts of its own. Davidson does not
explain why this claim should be accepted. But he claims,
“what a person's words mean depends in the most
basic cases on the kinds of objects and events that have caused the
person to hold the words to be applicable; similarly for what the
person's thoughts are about.” Presumably, we should refrain
from attributing thoughts to the swampman because it lacks internal
states with the right kind of causal history. But it is not clear why
this causal requirement applies to all thoughts. Some philosophers take
the position that the contents of some of our thoughts are determined
by their conceptual or computational role, which might not depend on
the environment. If such theories are correct, swampman might possess
some thoughts despite its causal origin, and so some contents might be
narrow after all. (See the entry on causal theories of mental
content.)


In other work, and compatibly with his swampman example, Davidson
defends what Bridges (2006) describes as
“transcendental externalism,” a view
according to which the very possibility of thought depends on a
creature being involved in a complex causal
relationship—“triangulation”—involving
a second creature and a shared environment. Unlike the standard forms
of content externalism discussed so far, Davidson’s
transcendental externalism does not maintain that causal interaction
with specific external objects or natural kinds is necessary for
specific intentional mental states, but the view is still strongly
externalistic in that both social and external physical environments
are held to be metaphysically necessary for thought.


A different route to a kind of transcendental externalism can be
found in the so-called “skeptical
argument” attributed to Wittgenstein in Kripke (1982).
Roughly, the argument is that our usage of any linguistic expression
must be finite in that the term has only been applied to a finite range
of cases. But the meaning of a term prescribes its correct application
in infinitely many other novel situations that we have not encountered
before. A skeptic can therefore come up with different theories of what
we mean by the term, theories that accord with our past usage, but
whose prescriptions in the novel situations diverge from one another.
According to Kripke's Wittgenstein, all physical facts about our
limited linguistic dispositions or cognitive capacities are finite in
character. They are not sufficient to determine which of the skeptic's
theory gives the correct meaning of the term we use. This goes to show
that there are no intrinsic facts that determine the meaning we
associate with the term. If this argument is valid, the same is true of
the contents of our thoughts and concepts. According to Kripke, this
skeptical argument shows that we cannot “speak of a
single individual, considered by himself and in isolation, as ever
meaning anything.” Instead, it is argued that meaning and
content can only be justifiably ascribed to an individual when
considered as a member of some linguistic community.


Exactly how the skeptical argument is supposed to go and whether the
argument is sound is controversial (See the review in Boghossian
(1989b)). Some believe that the argument is too strong in that it seems
to establish meaning eliminativism rather than externalism. Another
criticism (e.g. McGinn (1984), Soames (1998)) is that the argument
makes the assumption that semantic facts about meaning and content are
reducible to non-semantic ones, an assumption which many philosophers
reject. For these and other reasons the skeptical argument is not
widely accepted.


The discussion above concerns the content of cognitive states such
as beliefs and thoughts, of which a subject might or might not be
conscious. In perhaps the most interesting and controversial proposal
concerning the reach of externalism, it has recently been argued that
externalism is also true of all conscious mental states.
Conscious mental states are mental states with phenomenal characters,
states for which there is something it is like to have them. According
to some authors, such as Tye (1995, 2000), Dretske (1995), Lycan (1987,
1996), and Thau (2002), all conscious mental states have wide contents.
Furthermore, though this is a logically separable thesis known as
representationalism or intentionalism, the phenomenal
characters of these conscious states are supposed by these and other
authors to supervene on their contents. For example, Tye (1996)
suggests that the content of a perceptual state is the state of affairs
that the state causally correlates with under optimal conditions. On
such a view, if two intrinsically identical individuals are embedded in
appropriately different environments, their perceptual states will
correlate with different external conditions and so acquire distinct
wide contents. Given representationalism, the perceptual experiences of
these individuals will then be phenomenally different, despite their
sameness of intrinsic properties. However, some (e.g. Block (1990,
1995), Deutsch (2005, 2012)) believe that phenomenal character does not
supervene on mental content. Others ( e.g. Carruthers (2000), Rey
(1998), Chalmers (2005)) argue that experiences have narrow content,
and that phenomenal character reduces to narrow and not wide content.
Representationalists assert that phenomenal character depends on
content. However, Horgan and Tienson (2002) claim that content and
character are mutually dependent. They then use this mutual
dependence to argue that, since, as they also believe, phenomenal
character is narrow, there are severe liabilities with a wholly
externalist account of the mind. See the entry on
 consciousness and intentionality
 and 
 representational theories of consciousness,
 for further discussion.

5. Externalism and Mind-Body Theories


Externalism has important consequences for a number of different
mind-body theories. Burge(1979) believes that externalism refutes
individualistic theories of intentional mental states. These are
theories that define or explain what it is for a person to have an
intentional mental state purely in terms of intrinsic facts about that
person without reference to the environment. Examples of such theories
include the identity theory, and
 functionalism
 in its traditional guise. Though externalism
may be incompatible with these internalist forms of physicalism, this
should not be taken to imply that externalism is itself an
antiphysicalist doctrine, for one might hold that although mental
contents do not supervene on narrow physical properties, they do
supervene on wide physical properties. There is no obvious reason for
physicalism about the mind to require a creature’s
mental properties to supervene on its narrow physical properties. (For
discussion of the requirements on physicalism, see the entry on
physicalism.)


McGinn (1989) and Burge (1986,1993) both argue that externalism
refutes the token-identity theory (and hence type-identity theory as
well). Token-identity says that each particular mental state token is
identical to a physical brain state token. McGinn and Burge rely on a
modal argument : the brain states of a subject would remain the same if
the environment were to be different, as long as her intrinsic
properties did not change. But her intentional mental states could have
been different. So by Leibniz's law, mental states are distinct from
brain states. However, Davidson (1987) rejects this argument. He points
out that it is plausible to take a particular sunburn as identical to a
certain state of the body, even if the very same bodily state could
have been caused by something other than exposure to sunlight, and so
would not have been a sunburn. The modal argument is also criticized in
Gibbons (1993), who claims that a belief state token can remain
identical to a brain state token, even if its content had been
different, as long as we reject the assumption that mental state tokens
have their contents essentially. A similar position, though argued in
much greater detail, is taken by Frances (2007). (See also MacDonald
(1990) and Rowlands (1992).)

As for functionalism, one way to deal with externalism is to adopt a
divide-and-conquer strategy. One might try to explain what it is to be
a particular kind of mental state (e.g. belief) individualistically,
while adopting an externalist theory of content. For example, a
functionalist might adopt the position that an internal state is a
belief state in virtue of having the right kind of internal functional
role. The content of such an internal state, however, can depend on
its relationship with the external environment. (See Chapter 3 of
Fodor (1987).) A different approach is to concede that beliefs with
wide contents are not functional states. Nonetheless, one might insist
that narrow functional states do succeed in defining a kind of mental
states with narrow intentional contents. See the entry
on narrow mental content.

An alternative strategy for functionalism is to extend the theory so
that it becomes compatible with externalism. Functionalism says that a
mental state is defined by its functional role, which includes the
relations that the state bears to inputs, outputs and other mental
states. In typical formulations of functionalism, the inputs and
outputs are usually taken to be objects or states that stop at the
body boundary, and do not belong to the external environment. Block
(1990), Harman (1987) and Kitcher (1991) have suggested a “long
arm” functionalism that drops this requirement in order to
accommodate externalism. The functional roles so characterized will
then include external substances that causally interacts with the
subject, such as water in the environment. The physical duplicates on
Earth and Twin Earth can then be in different functional states
corresponding to different belief contents.
6. Externalism and Self-knowledge


Externalism is also connected with issues surrounding our
introspective knowledge of our own mental states. Such knowledge
appears to be a priori, or at least privileged, in that it is
acquired without relying on empirical evidence or observations. On the
face of it, externalism threatens the existence of such privileged
knowledge. If the contents of our thoughts are determined in part by
our relations to the environment, then one might think that external
observations are needed in order to know what we think. But
self-knowledge does not come about through empirical investigations. So
either contrary to appearance we do not really know the contents of our
own thoughts, or if we do, externalism is false.


One way to resist this conclusion is to reject the implicit
assumption that to know one's own thoughts one must know the
environmental conditions that make such thoughts possible. Burge (1988)
draws an analogy with perception, pointing out that unless one embraces
skepticism, perceptual knowledge does not require knowledge of its
enabling condition. However, even if this is sufficient to disarm the
argument that externalism is incompatible with privileged
self-knowledge, this still falls short of identifying the mechanisms
that make such knowledge possible. Burge's proposal is that privileged
self-knowledge has a reflexive, self-referential character. In basic
cases such as thinking that “I am thinking that
p”, one not only has the first-order thought that
p but also thinks about it as one's own. Since the object of
the second-order judgment is none other than the first-order content it
is logically impossible to misjudge the content of the first-order
thought, even if this content depends in part on external
conditions.


A number of authors remain unconvinced that externalism is
compatible with privileged self-knowledge. Arguments for
incompatibility are usually of two kinds. One type of argument,
introduced in Boghossian (1989a), uses slow switching cases where a
subject travels between two different physical environment or
linguistic communities, say between Earth and Twin Earth. The subject,
however, is unable to discriminate between the two places. According to
many externalist theories of content, which concepts are possessed by
the subject will depend on factors such as the time he has spent on
each of the two planets. When the subject is having an occurrent
thought which he expresses by saying “there is water
around”, he might be thinking about water if he has been
living on Earth, or he might be thinking about twin-water if he has
already moved to Twin-Earth and have lived there for a long time. It is
then argued that since the subject is unable to distinguish between the
two places, he will not be able to know by introspection alone whether
he is having water or twin-water thoughts. This is taken to show that
externalism is incompatible with privileged self-knowledge. Falvey and
Owens (1994) object that, although externalism does entail that, in
slow switching cases, an agent might not be able to introspectively
distinguish her water thoughts from her twin-water thoughts, this is
not a bar to a noncomparitive type of priviledged self-knowledge. A
different strategy against the slow-switching argument, pursued by
Brown (2004), Sawyer (1999), and Warfield (1992, 1997), is to argue
that, although introspective indistinguishability does undermine
self-knowledge in the slow switching cases, since such cases are merely
hypothetical, they pose no real threat to any actual
person’s self-knowledge. However, Ludlow (1995)
takes the slow switching cases a step further by suggesting that they
are sometimes actual, not just hypothetical. He claims that this
happens all the time when we move in and out of linguistic communities,
as in the case of a person who travels between the US and England,
without knowing that “chickory” has
different meaning in British and American English. (But see Warfield
(1997) for a reply.)


Another type of incompatibility argument (McKinsey (1991), Brown
(1995), Boghossian (1998)) aims to show that externalism leads to some
implausible conclusions about what can be known a priori.
According to this line of argument, if social or natural kind
externalism is correct, having thoughts with wide contents depends on
the presence of certain substances or communal practice in the
environment. So if we have privileged knowledge of our own thoughts, we
can infer a priori that one's external environment contains
some natural kind, or there exists apart from oneself a community of
speakers. But it is implausible that we can gain empirical knowledge of
the external world this way, relying only on introspection and armchair
reflection on externalism. So either externalism is false, or we do not
have privileged access to the contents of our thoughts. These arguments
differ with regard to what it is that can be inferred a priori
given that we know we have a certain thought. Boghossian (1998) argues
that knowing that one has thoughts about water allows one to infer that
one has been in causal contact with water. But according to McLaughlin
and Tye (1998), this is true only if one also knows that the concept of
water is an atomic concept that succeeds in denoting a natural kind.
But since we do not know a priori whether a concept succeeds
in referring to anything at all, no information about the external
world can be derived solely on the basis of externalism and knowledge
of our thoughts. (See also Gallois and
O’Leary-Hawthorne (1996).) Davies (1998) and Wright
(2000) offer a different reply to this second type of incompatibility
argument. Both argue that, while a subject might be a priori justified
in believing that she has a certain thought, and also a priori
justified in thinking that the having of that thought depends on the
presence of certain substances or communal practice in the environment,
this a priori justification does not transmit to belief in the
existence of those external substances or practices. For criticisms of
this reply, see McLaughlin (2003) and Brown (2004).


Some externalists (e.g. Sawyer (1998)) seem willing to bite the
bullet and say that, since externalism is true (and we know it) and we
have priviledged access to our thoughts, we also have a kind of a
priori access to our external environment. Sawyer does not take this to
imply that externalism combined with self-knowledge is an antidote to
skepticism about the external world, though since Putnam (1982) there
has been interest in the extent to which externalist considerations may
be used in arguing against skepticism. See the entry on Brains in a vat
for more on the topic of externalism and skepticism.


Some recent work on the relationship between content externalism and
self-knowledge has explored the extent to which content externalism
requires either a wholesale or partial abandonment of
an internalist epistemology. (See the entry on internalist
vs. externalist conceptions of epistemic justification.) For example,
on some versions of epistemic internalism, to be justified in
believing p, one must have reflective access to that in virtue of
which one is justified in believing p. If content externalism is
incompatible with privileged self-knowledge, then it seems a rather
immediate consequence that one does not generally have reflective
access to that in virtue of which one is justified in holding
one’s beliefs, since it is precisely the contents of
one’s beliefs that stand in justificatory relations to one
another. Even if content externalism is not a bar to privileged
self-knowledge generally speaking, as of course many content
externalists maintain, there may be specific kinds of self-knowledge
(for example, comparative knowledge of sameness of content of the kind
discussed above in connection with slow-switching) that pose problems
for forms of epistemic internalism. (See Brown (2006) for a
discussion, as well as Chase (2001), Brueckner (2002), and Pritchard
& Kallestrup (2004) for more on the (in)compatibility of content
externalism and epistemic internalism. Boghossian (1989) and Bonjour
(1992) are important precursors to this discussion.)
Related work has investigated the extent to which content
externalism conflicts with plausible seeming theses concerning the
metaphysics and epistemology of inference. Building on a line
of thought due originally to Boghossian (1992), David Sosa (2007)
argues that content externalism is incompatible with conjunction of
the thesis that intrinsic duplicates make the same inferences and the
thesis that the logical relations between our thoughts (whether one
validly follows from another, e.g.) are knowable a priori. In a series
of papers, Sandy Goldberg (2007a and 2007b) has argued, by contrast,
that the proper moral to draw may instead be that the theses endorsed
by Sosa are artifacts of an internalist epistemology that content
externalism should make us question. According to Goldberg, in light
of arguments for content externalism, we may have to abandon the view
that logically competent subjects are able to know a priori that their
inferences are valid. (Also see Burge (1996) and Schiffer (1992) for
denials of the claim, which both Sosa and Goldberg accept, that
content externalism conflicts with a priori knowledge of logical
relations.)
The issue of the compatibility of externalism and self-knowledge is
a central concern for philosophers of mind and the literature on the
topic is now vast. For more detailed discussion of the incompatibility
arguments, see the papers in Ludlow and Martin (1998), Wright, Smith
and MacDonald (1998), and Nuccetelli (2003). For the connections
between the incompatibility arguments and other epistemic issues, see
the papers collected in Goldberg (2007). See also the entry on
 externalism and self-knowledge.
7. Externalism and Mental Causation


Another debate that arises out of externalism concerns the legitimacy
of wide contents in causal explanations. Most philosophers agree with
Davidson (1980) that beliefs and desires play an important role in the
causal explanation of actions. However, it is not clear how this can
be reconciled with externalism. The problem comes up because it has
been suggested that causal explanations of behavior should appeal only
to the intrinsic properties of our bodies, properties that describe
what is happening here and now within us (Stich (1983)). But
externalism says that mental contents are determined by causal, social
or historical factors, factors which extend spatially and temporally
beyond the body. So this seems to imply that wide mental contents
cannot be causally relevant because of their relational nature.


There are two main strategies to show that wide mental contents can
legitimately enter into causal explanations. The first strategy is to
argue that the causal efficacy of a mental state with wide content
derives from the causal efficacy of a corresponding internal state. To
use a non-mental example, we often say that a mosquito bite causes
swelling, even though being a mosquito bite is a relational
property. Nonetheless, one might try to justify the causal claim on
the basis that the mosquito bite corresponds to the presence of
certain chemicals that lead to the swelling. Similarly, one might
argue that mental states with wide contents are causally relevant
because it is possible to carve off some internal component that
causes behavior. However, one worry with this approach is why it
doesn't show that wide contents are not causally relevant after all,
because it is the internal component that is doing all the causal
work. A different objection from Williamson (2000) is that states with
wide contents are “prime” and cannot be factored into an
external and internal component.
A different way to defend the explanatory relevance of wide content
is to identify its distinctive explanatory role without them being
parasitic upon the causal efficacy of intrinsic properties. For
example, according to Dretske (1988), when my intention to drink water
causes me to raise my glass, the behavior that is the object of the
causal explanation is not a single event, but a complex process where
an internal state causes some bodily movement. Dretske argues that the
wide contents of my intention plays a causal role because it provides
a structural explanation of how the internal brain state comes to be
recruited to cause the bodily movement. Williamson (2000) offers a
different account of the explanatory role of wide contents. He thinks
they provide us with a better understanding of the connection between
the mental states of an agent and his actions in the non-immediate
future, because our actions typically involve complex interactions
with the environment. For further discussion, see Peacocke (1993),
Jackson (1996), Yablo (1997, 2003), and the entry on
 mental causation.
8. Externalism and Cognitive Science


Even if all mental contents of folk psychology turn out to be wide
contents, it does not follow that this is also true of the contents of
mental states and representations postulated by psychology and
cognitive science. Fodor (1987) agrees that the classic thought
experiments have indeed shown that many mental states have wide
contents, at least according to folk psychology. Nonetheless, he argues
that physically identical subjects are psychologically similar in an
important way. Their mental states have the same casual powers, and
science should capture this common aspect by postulating a shared
narrow content which is determined by our intrinsic
properties.


However, such arguments for narrow content are controversial,
resting on assumptions about causation or scientific methodology which
are not widely accepted. Furthermore, there has been no consensus as to
the nature of narrow content, or indeed whether narrow content is
something that is expressible. Fodor (1994) himself has changed his
mind and has decided that narrow content is probably not needed in
cognitive science after all. (For further discussion, see Burge (1986),
Peacocke (1994), and also the entry on
 narrow mental content.)
 In the absence of a
convincing general argument for narrow content in cognitive science, or
a general argument against wide content, it is useful to look at actual
cases of scientific theories and see if they invoke wide or narrow
contents. Here are a few pertinent examples :


1. It might be thought that representations involved in sensation and
perception are particularly good candidates for which externalism is
true, given their role in providing information about the
environment. For example, in discussing the nature of representations
that animals employ in navigation, the psychologist Gallistel (1990)
takes a representation in the brain as representing the environment
when “there is a functioning isomorphism between an aspect of
the environment and a brain process that adapts the animal’s
behavior to it.” Clearly, any content assigned according to such
a principle would be wide. One might look at other theories in
cognitive science and see whether they postulate wide contents or
not. Burge (1986) has argued that this is indeed the case with
Marr’s computational theory of vision. For rebuttals and further
discussion regarding externalism in theories of visual perception, see
Segal (1989), Davies (1991), Butler (1996), Chomsky (2000), and
Silverberg (2006). A more radical approach to visual perception can be
found in O’Regan and Noë (2001), and Noë (2004). They argue that
perception is a kind of skillful activity which essentially involves
the deployment of sensorimotor skills in exploring the
environment. This implies that our interactions with the environment
become constitutive of perception and that our visual experience
essentially extends beyond the brain. For more discussion and
objections to this sensorimotor or “enactive” approach to
perception, see Block (2005), Prinz (2006), and the entry on
 embodied cognition.


2. Another interesting issue to explore is the relationship between
innate knowledge and externalism. Some developmental psychologists,
such as Spelke (1994), have argued that human beings are innately
endowed with a number of systems of knowledge relating to such domains
as physics, language, psychology, number and geometry (see Elman
et. el (1996) for a dissenting view, and Griffiths (2001) and Shea
(2012) for a critique of the notion of innateness in cognitive
psychology.). For the internalist, the innate contents of these
systems are prime candidates for narrow content, perhaps narrowly
encoded in the genome through the process of evolution. It is less
clear, however, how innateness can be reconciled with externalism, and
Pitt (2000) argues that they are incompatible. On the other hand,
perhaps an externalist might argue that when we speak of innate
knowledge we should take such knowledge to supervene upon the
interaction between the genome and the normal environment of the
organism in question. See Cowie (1999) and Fodor (2001) for related
discussion.


3. The study of semantic knowledge is one area where externalism has
direct methodological consequences on cognitive science research.
Suppose semantic externalism is correct, that the meanings of words as
used by a speaker depends in part on his relations to the physical or
social environment. It then follows that externalism is correct with
regard to semantic knowledge. Yet many philosophers and linguists would
insist that the study of a speaker’s semantic knowledge is the study of
a purely internal psychological state. In Chomsky (1986), a distinction
is made between E-language and I-language. The conception of E-language
is that of a convention-based natural language, a social object,
whereas I-language is a biologically-endowed language faculty internal
to the brain. An individualist theory of semantic knowledge will then
be part of the theory of I-language, or some related system of a
similar status. For further discussion, see Larson and Segal (1995),
and Ludlow (1999, 2003), and Lassiter (2008).
9. Active Externalism


In all versions of externalism (semantic, natural kind, and social)
discussed earlier, the mental contents of a subject depend in part on
aspects of the environment which are clearly external to the
subject’s cognitive processes. For example, the twin-water in
Putnam’s thought-experiment or the relevant linguistic community
in Burge’s are not part of the subjects’ ongoing mental
processes. In contrast, active externalism asserts that the
environment can play an active role in constituting and driving
cognitive processes. Hutchins (1995) argues that the successful
completion of a typical commercial flight requires complex interaction
between the pilots and the instruments in the cockpit. He claims that
an adequate analysis of the task would need to treat the whole
distributed system as a cognitive system with memories,
representations, and cognitive processes that extend outside the
pilots’ heads. Clark and Chalmers (1998) is a widely-discussed
defense of active externalism. In one argument, they introduce a
thought experiment where someone with Alzheimer’s disease has to
rely on a notebook to retain information and find his way about. Clark
and Chalmers argue that because the notebook plays an active role in
the cognitive life of the patient, its contents actually constitute
some of that person’s non-occurrent beliefs, and so these belief
contents are “not in the head”;. See also Hurley (1998),
Wilson (1994), Haugeland (1995) and Noë (2005), and the entry on
 embodied cognition.


Whether we should regard the notebook as an extended part of that
person’s belief system is a controversial matter. The issue concerns
the conditions under which representational objects or states are
regarded as part of a cognitive system. Adams and Aizawa (2001) claim
that cognitive processes involve only representations with intrinsic
content, and so the notebook should not be regarded as part of the
subject’s cognitive process, because the notebook contains only symbols
with non-intrinsic contents derived from our linguistic intentions. But
Clark (2010) argues that this requirement is too strong.
Cognition might involve mental imagery using diagrams with derived
content, or biological routines that store bitmap images of printed
texts. For further discussion of related issues, see the papers
collected in Menary (2010).


In considering whether a process constitutes a mental process external
to a cognitive subject, an important background question is how the
subject is to be individuated. In particular, where lies the physical
boundary of the subject? One view is that perception marks the
boundary where the world and the body meet. In the case of the
Alzheimer’s patient, since the patient has to flip through the
pages of the notebook and read the entries, this shows that the
notebook as the object of perception and action should be regarded as
external to the mind. Chalmers himself expresses some sympathy to this
response in his preface to Clark (2008).


On the other hand, suppose we agree that the notebook is part of the
patient’s belief system, and so mental contents can extend beyond the
brain. However, it might then be argued that in so doing we are in
effect extending the physical boundary of that person beyond his brain.
The notebook has now become a spatially scattered part of his extended
self. If this is right, then it has not been shown that the patient’s
mental contents are determined in part by factors external to the
subject. But it might still show that the physical boundary of
a subject can be extended through the use of artefacts in cognition. 


Enhancing our cognitive abilities with additional hardware might
become commonplace with the development of computer technology and
increasingly sophisticated brain-computer interfaces. For example, we
might implant micro-processors and radio transmitters into our brains
in order to access external databases, or to offload
computationally-intensive processing. Complicated issues are involved
in determining whether the external hardware is or is not part of the
extended mind. Imagine a scenario where our memory is connected to an
external computer database. When we ponder whether a factual
proposition P is true, and the information is not in our brain, a
remote search might then be triggered, and the result returns as an
occurrent belief. In such a scenario, we would all be accessing the
same database. So do our minds overlap because we share the same
cognitive resource? But if the database servers are actually owned by
a commercial company, legal considerations might mitigate against the
idea that the servers are part of our bodies or our minds. On the
other hand, if a user owns a database server and has exclusive access,
we might then be more inclined to say that the server is part of his
extended mind. So the exact boundary of the mind might turn out to
involve normative and legal considerations. This raises the question
of whether there is a coherent and unitary psychological conception of
what a mind really is.