The concept of folk psychology has played a significant role in
philosophy of mind and cognitive science over the last half century.
However, even a cursory examination of the literature reveals that
there are at least three distinct senses in which the term “folk
psychology” is used. (1) Sometimes “folk psychology”
is used to refer to a particular set of cognitive capacities which
include—but are not exhausted by—the capacities to predict
and explain behavior. (2) The term “folk psychology” is
also used to refer to a theory of behavior represented in the brain.
According to many philosophers and cognitive scientists, the set of
cognitive capacities identified above are underpinned by folk
psychology in this second sense. (3) The final sense of “folk
psychology” is closely associated with the work of David Lewis.
On this view, folk psychology is a psychological theory constituted by
the platitudes about the mind ordinary people are inclined to
endorse.

To reduce terminological ambiguity, throughout this entry the term
“mindreading” will be used to refer to that set of
cognitive capacities which include (but is not exhausted by) the
capacities to predict and explain behavior. “Folk
psychology” will be used only in the second and third senses
identified above. When separate names are required to avoid confusion,
the second sense of “folk psychology” will be called the
mindreading approach to folk psychology and the third sense
the platitude approach to folk psychology. This terminology
is due to Stich & Nichols 2003.

It’s not clear who introduced the term “folk
psychology” into the philosophy of mind. It gained wide usage
during the 1980s and is rarely used outside philosophy. The phrase
“commonsense psychology” is sometimes used by philosophers
synonymously with “folk psychology”, although the former
term seems to be dying out. Psychologists rarely use “folk
psychology”, preferring the phrase “theory of mind”
(or sometimes “naïve psychology”). Just as there is
ambiguity in the use of “folk psychology”, “theory
of mind” is used to refer both to mindreading and to the theory
hypothesized to underpin mindreading.
 
1. Mindreading

There’s an important set of human cognitive capacities first
noticed by social psychologists and philosophers in the middle of last
century (see for example Heider 1958 and Sellars 1956.) The members of
this set of cognitive capacities are almost always assumed to be
closely related, perhaps in virtue of their being produced by a single
underlying cognitive mechanism. To a first approximation the set
consists of—

The capacity to predict human behavior in a wide range of
circumstances.
The capacity to attribute mental states to humans.
The capacity to explain the behavior of humans in terms of their
possessing mental states.


(See for example Stich & Nichols 1992.) The second and third
capacities are clearly related: explaining the behavior of humans in
terms of their mental states involves attributing mental states to
them. But we should not assume without further investigation that all
mental state attributions take the form of explanations of
behavior.

The characterization of mindreading given above is too restrictive. In
addition to attributing mental states and predicting and explaining
behavior, there is a wide range of closely related activities. To
begin with, we not only seek to predict and explain people’s
behavior, we also seek to predict and explain their mental states. In
addition, we speculate about, discuss, recall and evaluate both
people’s mental states and their behavior. We also speculate
about, discuss, recall and evaluate people’s dispositions to
behave in certain ways and to have certain mental states; that is, we
consider their character traits. It may be that these additional
activities are grounded in the three capacities mentioned above, but
we cannot simply assume that they are. Throughout this entry the term
“mindreading” is used in a wide sense to include all of
these activities.

As characterized above, mindreading is a human capacity directed at
humans. But in two ways this is overly exclusive. First, we attribute
mental states to non-human animals and to non-animal systems such as
machines and the weather. It’s not uncommon to hear people say
that their dog wants a bone, or that the chess program is
thinking about its next move. We do not have to accept every
such attribution at face value; plausibly, some of this talk is
metaphorical. Nevertheless, there seem to exist plenty of examples of
non-metaphorical attributions of mental states to non-humans. (Notice
that insisting that mental state attributions to animals are not
metaphorical is compatible with such attributions being systematically
false.) Consequently, we must be careful not to characterize
mindreading in a way which makes it definitional that only
humans can be the objects of mindreading. The second way in which the
characterization of mindreading offered above is overly focused on
humans is that it remains an open question whether some non-human
primates can predict the behavior of their conspecifics. (See for
example Call & Tomasello 2008.) Consequently, we should avoid
characterizing the mindreading capacities in a way that makes it
analytic that non-human animals lack those capacities.

One way to avoid the risk of over-emphasizing human capacities when
characterizing mindreading is to begin with the human capacities and
then let the empirical chips fall where they may. For example, it may
turn out that some non-human primates can predict the behavior of
their conspecifics, and that there are significant similarities
(including neurological similarities) between the human capacity to
predict the behavior of others and that of the non-human primate. In
that case we should widen the characterization of mindreading given
above so that it is not exclusively focused on human capacities.
Similarly, it may turn out that precisely the same cognitive
mechanisms are engaged when humans attribute mental states to their
conspecifics and when they attribute mental states to animals and
machines. In that case we should widen the characterization of
mindreading to allow that animals and machines can be the objects of
mindreading. Defining the precise extension of
“mindreading” by stipulation from the armchair is not
likely to be fruitful.

A final comment on mindreading is in order. The characterization of
mindreading given here is compatible with the existence of first
person mindreading. But it may turn out that we deploy quite distinct
mechanisms when we predict or explain our own behavior, or attribute
mental states to ourselves, than when we predict or explain
other’s behavior, or attribute mental states to them. However,
this is not an issue which can be settled here. (See the entry on
 self-knowledge.)
2. The Mindreading Approach to Folk Psychology
2.1 The theory-theory

How is mindreading achieved? One popular theory, often called the
“theory-theory”, holds that when we mindread we access and
utilize a theory of human behavior represented in our brains. The
posited theory of human behavior is commonly called “folk
psychology”. On this view, mindreading is essentially an
exercise in theoretical reasoning. When we predict behavior, for
example, we utilize folk psychology to reason from representations of
the target’s past and present circumstances and behavior
(including verbal behavior), to representations of the target’s
future behavior. Chomsky’s claim that understanding and
producing grammatical sentences involves a representation of the
grammar of the relevant language is frequently offered as analogy.
(See for example Carruthers 1996a: 29.)

The claim that folk psychology is represented “in the
head” raises a range of important empirical questions. These
questions are extensively interrelated, with research in one area very
often having significant consequences for research in other areas.

We can ask about the way in which folk psychology is
represented in the brain. Is it represented in a
language-like medium (Fodor 1975) or is it represented in a
connectionist network (Churchland 1995, especially Ch.6)?
We can ask about the implementation of folk psychology in
the brain. A wide range of brain areas have been correlated with
mindreading. (For a summary see Goldman 2006: 140–2.)
We can ask about the content of folk psychology. What
states and properties does it quantify over, and what regularities
does in postulate (Von Eckardt 1994)?
We can ask questions about the structure of folk
psychology. Is it a “proto-scientific” theory with a
structure akin to that of scientific theories, or does it take some
other form? (See for example Gopnik & Meltzoff 1997; Hutto 2008.)
Is folk psychology a deductive normative theory or a model (Maibom
2003; Godfrey-Smith 2005)? 
We can ask about the status of folk psychology. Might it
be, as Paul Churchland (1981) famously proposed, radically false?
We can ask about the development of folk psychology in
young children. Does it exhibit a characteristic developmental
pattern? (See for example Wellman 1990.)
We can ask about the natural history of folk psychology,
and about its existence in our evolutionary relatives. (See especially
Sterelny 2003: Ch. 11.)
Closely related to questions F and G is the issue of
universality. We can ask about the extent to which the
development of folk psychology, and the mature competence, vary from
culture to culture. (See for example the papers by Lillard and Vinden
in the reference list See also Nisbett 2003.)
We can ask if the mechanism which deploys folk psychology is
modular in something close to Fodor’s (1983) sense of
the term. (See especially Sterelny 2003: Ch. 10.)
And we can ask about pathologies of folk psychology. What
happens when folk psychology fails to mature normally? (See for
example the papers in Carruthers & Smith (eds.) 1996, Part
III.)


In addition to the issues just outlined, there is a further empirical
question with which theory-theorists have been engaged. Is it the case
that mindreading is in fact underpinned by a theory of human
psychology? Is mindreading really a theoretical activity? A variety of
philosophers and psychologists have argued that it is not, or have at
least argued that there is more to mindreading than theorizing.
According to simulation theory, mindreading involves a kind of mental
projection in which we temporarily adopt the target’s
perspective (Gordon 1986; Goldman 1989; Goldman 2006). (See the entry
on
 folk psychology: as mental simulation.)
 According to the Narrative Practice Hypothesis, mindreading involves
not theoretical reasoning but the construction of a certain kind of
narrative (Hutto 2008). And according to intentional systems theory,
mindreading is achieved by adopting a particular stance towards a
system such as another human being (Dennett 1971; 1987). Important
though these alternatives are, they will not be assessed in this
entry.

The remainder of this section is in three parts. Part 2.2 briefly
surveys some of the important issues surrounding the development of
mindreading in children and its evolution in our lineage. Part 2.3
provides a quick overview of work in social psychology aimed at
exploring mindreading. And Part 3 introduces the idea that folk
psychology is more like a scientific model than a deductive-normative
theory.
2.2 The development and evolution of mindreading

There exists a very substantial body of research on the development of
mindreading in young children. In an early paper, Heinz Wimmer and
Joseph Perner (1983) describe what is now usually called the
“false belief test”. In the original version of the test,
the participants are introduced to a puppet, Maxi. Maxi shows the
participants that he has a piece of chocolate, and then hides his
chocolate in the “cupboard”—a cardboard box. He then
announces that he is going out to play and leaves the scene. A second
puppet now enters and is introduced as Maxi’s Mom. Mom finds the
chocolate in the cupboard and moves it to a second box, the
“refrigerator”. Mom leaves and Maxi returns, saying that
he is going to retrieve his chocolate. The action stops and the
subjects are asked some control questions to check that they
understand what has happened. They are then asked in which box Maxi
will look for his chocolate, the cupboard or the refrigerator?
Strikingly, children up to about four years of age typically reply
that Maxi will look in the refrigerator, while children older than
five typically say that Maxi will look in the cupboard. The standard
interpretation of this experiment is that children younger than four
typically lack the concept of belief, or at best have only a poor
grasp of the concept of belief. In particular, they don’t
appreciate that beliefs can misrepresent reality. (Not everyone
accepts that the false belief task reveals a conceptual deficit:
various authors have argued that the task reveals a deficit of
performance rather competence. For a judicious
review of some of this literature see Goldman 2006, Section 4.3.) The
Maxi experiment set off an avalanche of research aimed at discovering
exactly how and when mindreading develops in young children. (Useful
references for this literature are Astington, Harris & Olson 1988;
Wellman 1990; and Baron-Cohen, Tager-Flusberg & Cohen 2000.) A
debate between empiricists and nativists quickly emerged, strongly
reminiscent of the empiricism versus nativism debate about the
development of grammar.

One of the most important defenders of empiricism about folk
psychology is the developmental psychologist Alison Gopnik (Gopnik
& Wellman 1994; Gopnik & Meltzoff 1997; Gopnik, Meltzoff &
Kuhl 1999). Gopnik and her co-workers begin with a bold empirical
conjecture—that the cognitive mechanisms which drive the
child’s development of folk psychology are exactly those
mechanisms which drive the adult scientist’s development of
scientific theories. This view has been dubbed the “child as
little scientist view”. In support of this conjecture, Gopnik
appeals to the history of science. Drawing on the work of Thomas Kuhn
(1962), she identifies a pattern in the way scientists respond to
anomalous observations. Gopnik argues that when scientists are
confronted by an anomaly they are initially inclined to dismiss it as
noise or some other form of aberration. If the anomaly cannot easily
be handled in this fashion, ad hoc conjectures are added to the
original theory to deal with it. If counterevidence continues to
accumulate, new theories are developed which are unencumbered by the
growing excrescence of ad hoc conjectures. Very often, though, the new
theory is applied only to the more recalcitrant anomalies. Finally,
the new theory is applied across the domain and becomes very widely
accepted. (See Gopnik & Meltzoff 1997: 39–41. See the entry
on
 Thomas Kuhn.)

Gopnik argues that the pattern of scientific progress just sketched is
recapitulated in the child’s acquisition of folk psychology,
thus supporting her claim that the mechanisms used by the child to
acquire folk psychology are the same as those used by the adult to
make scientific discoveries. (See Gopnik & Meltzoff 1997: Ch.5.)
Gopnik’s view is open to a number of objections. To begin with,
it is not at all clear that the pattern of scientific progress Gopnik
identifies is universal. For example, the history of geological
science seems to provide an example where two competing research
programs—vulcanism and neptunism—merged into a single,
widely accepted paradigm. If Gopnik’s historical claims are
mistaken then the pattern of conceptual development she observes in
young children does not support the claim that the child deploys the
same mechanisms as the adult scientist. Second, it has been argued
that Gopnik’s view is at odds with the apparent universality of
the development of folk psychology: the vast majority of children pass
through similar developmental stages to arrive at the same theory of
human psychology, and do so on a common developmental timetable.
Surely individual child-scientists beavering away in isolation would
pass through different developmental stages to arrive at divergent
theories of human psychology, and do so on distinct developmental
timetables (Carruthers 1996b: 23). The claim that there is a universal
developmental time table for the acquisition of folk psychology has
not gone unopposed. Some author’s have argued for the existence
of considerable cross-cultural variation in the development of
mindreading. See for example Lillard 1997; 1998; Nisbett 2003 and
Vinden 1996; 1999; 2002.

Nativists take the (purported) existence of a near-universal
competence arrived at via a near-universal developmental pathway as
evidence that the development of folk psychology is very strongly
influenced by the child’s genes: the species-wide developmental
pattern is explained by our species-wide genetic inheritance
(Carruthers 1996b: 23). They also offer a poverty of stimulus argument
to the same conclusion. Children as young five are highly competent
mindreaders and so must possess an extensive array of psychological
concepts and a rich body of information about human psychology. They
could not, though, have acquired those concepts and that information
from their environment—their environment simply does not provide
sufficient learning opportunities. Consequently, a considerable amount
of folk psychology must be innate. (See for example Scholl &
Leslie 1999.) A great deal of work is required, however, to sustain an
argument of this nature. The proponent of any poverty of stimulus
argument must demonstrate that the stimulus is impoverished relative
to the mature competence. That in turn requires measuring the
information content of the environment and comparing it with the
information demands of the competence. In the case of folk psychology,
we lack an accurate measure of the information demands of the
competence because crucial questions about the nature of mature
mindreading remain unresolved. For example, Daniel Hutto has suggested
that many cases of successful behavior prediction rely not on a
sophisticated theory of mind but on simple generalizations (Hutto
2008: 6). Consider a case where John predicts that Betty will stop at
a red traffic signal. Perhaps John arrived at his prediction by
reasoning as follows.


Betty believes that it is safest to stop at red traffic
signals.
Betty desires to be safe.
Ceteris paribus, people act so as to realize their desires in
light of their beliefs.


Therefore,

Betty will stop at the red traffic signal.



However, John might arrive at his prediction in quite a different way.
He might simply rely on the following generalization: most drivers
stop at red traffic signals. Hutto suspects that the latter
explanation is the right one (a similar observation is made in Goldman
1987). More generally, Hutto endorses a kind of deflationism about
mindreading: he thinks that philosophers and psychologists have
exaggerated the amount of folk psychologizing that occurs. If it could
be demonstrated that a great deal of mindreading rests not on folk
psychologizing but on the deployment of simple generalizations, then
we would have to reduce our estimate of the information demands of
mindreading. Such a reduction would in turn weaken the plausibility of
the poverty of stimulus argument. (See Hutto 2008: 181–6;
Sterelny 2003: 214–8.)

So far we have seen that we are not presently in a position to
accurately measure the information demands of the human mindreading
competence. In addition, we are only beginning to appreciate the
informational richness of the child’s learning environment. Kim
Sterelny (2003: Ch. 8) has placed great stress on what he calls
“epistemic niche construction”. Animals can modify their
environments to generate new information, make old information more
salient, and reduce cognitive demands. Sometimes these environmental
modifications endure long enough to enhance the fitness of the next
generation. In particular, parents may modify their child’s
environment in ways which facilitate their acquisition of folk
psychological concepts and information (Sterelny 2003: 221–5).
Hutto has suggested that one way in which this might occur is by story
telling (Hutto 2008). As Hutto observes, many stories make apparent
the links between the characters’ environment, mental states and
behavior, and so may facilitate the child’s understanding of
those links. If Sterelny and Hutto are right, the child’s
learning environment is richer than we might have supposed, and the
poverty of stimulus argument for folk psychology is correspondingly
weakened.
2.3 Social psychology and mindreading

Since the 1950s, social psychologists have explored the ways in which
humans think about and describe behavior and personality. Fritz Heider
(1958) marked an important distinction between intentional and
unintentional behavior, and argued that everyday explanations of
intentional behavior are importantly different from those of
unintentional behavior. In particular, explanations of an
agent’s intentional behavior very often appeal to the
agent’s reasons. Subsequent work in the field, however,
tended to draw a fundamental distinction between “person”
and “situation” causes of behavior. Person causes are
located within the agent; situation causes are located in the
agent’s environment. Bertram Malle has noted that the
person/situation distinction is importantly different from the
intentional/unintentional one (2004, especially Section 1.1). The
proximate causes of intentional behavior—the agent’s
reasons—are indeed internal to the agent; however, the proximate
causes of some unintentional behaviors are also internal to
the agent. For example, screaming in response to a terrifying stimulus
is unintentional and yet its proximate cause—fear—is
internal. So the distinction between behavior due to person causes and
that due to situation causes cuts across the distinction between
behavior caused by reasons and behavior caused by other factors.

We can see the person-situation distinction at work in Harold
Kelley’s theory of attribution (Kelley 1967). A theory of
attribution is a theory of how ordinary people assign causes to events
such as behaviors and mental states (understood broadly to include
character traits). For ease of expression, I shall focus on cases in
which the aim is to explain a person’s behavior. Kelley
elaborates the person-situation distinction by distinguishing between
two kinds of potential situational causes: the object towards which
the behavior is directed and the circumstances in which the behavior
occurs. Consider a case in which person PPP performs an action AAA
towards an object OOO in circumstance CCC: John kissed Betty at
the party. The causal attributions we make depend on our assessment of
the following three questions.

How often does John kiss Betty in other circumstances?
How often does John kiss people other than Betty?
How often do other people kiss Betty?


Kelley predicted that John’s behavior would be attribute to a
property of John, a property of Betty, or a property of the party
according to the following table:



Response to Q.1
Response to Q.2
Response to Q.3
Attribution 

often
rarely
rarely
John 

often
often
often
Betty 

rarely
often
rarely
party 



Kelley’s prediction has been experimentally confirmed by a range
of studies (see Von Eckardt 1997 for details).

Perhaps because the category of person causes fails to distinguish
between reasons and other internal causes, social psychologists in the
1960s and 1970s paid little attention to reasons. Rather, much of the
focus was on character traits. Research during this period explored
important correlations between judgments of appearance and judgments
of character trait, and between judgments of one character trait and
another. For example, participants who judge that a person is
attractive on the basis of a photo (appearance) are also likely to
judge that he or she is kindly (trait) (Berscheid & Walster 1974).
Again, if a person is judged to be talkative (trait), they are also
likely to be judged to be adventurous (trait) (Norman 1963). As
Barbara Von Eckardt has observed, these kinds of folk psychological
inferences have been almost entirely ignored in the philosophy of mind
(Von Eckardt 1994 and 1997).

Whilst the person-situation distinction has underpinned important
research in the social psychology of mindreading, it has not been
universally endorsed. Lee Ross (1977: 176) invites us to consider the
following pair of explanations:

Jack bought the house because it was secluded.
Jill bought the house because she wanted privacy.


The cause cited in explanation (1) would standardly be coded as
situational; that in explanation (2) as personal. However, most people
are inclined to say that Jack and Jill’s respective house
purchases were motivated by the same reason. This
strongly suggests that the linguistic structure of explanations is a
poor guide to the causal antecedents of behavior.

Over the last decade, Malle has urged a return to Heider’s
original insight, which marked an important distinction between
intentional and unintentional behavior (see especially Malle 2004).
Malle’s research strongly supports the claim that people
distinguish between intentional and unintentional behavior. For
example, Malle and Knobe (1997) gave subjects descriptions of 20
behaviors, and asked them to rate how intentional the behaviors were
on an eight point scale (0=(0=(0 = “not at all”; 7=7=7 =
“completely”). (Half the subjects were given a definition
of intentionality; the other half had to rely on their untutored
conception of intentionality.) There was considerable agreement
amongst all the subjects as to which of the described behaviors were
intentional and which were not.

Within the category of intentional behaviors, Malle has identified
three different modes (his term) of explanations.

Reason explanations locate the causes of an agent’s
behavior in his or her reasons for acting. (Sally bought some vitamin
C tablets because she believed taking vitamin C would prevent her
getting a cold.)
Causal history of reason explanations locate the causes
of an agent’s behavior in the background conditions which caused
the agent to have the reasons which in turn caused the behavior.
(Sally bought the vitamin C tablets because she had been convinced of
vitamin C’s efficacy by an article in a magazine.)
Enabling factor explanations identify the conditions
which enabled the agent to bring about her intentions. (Sally bought
the vitamin C tablets because she had some money left over after doing
the shopping.)


(See Malle 2004, Ch. 4.) Notice the centrality of reasons in all these
modes of explanation. Reason explanations and causal history of reason
explanations are obviously concerned with the agent’s reasons.
Enabling factor explanations also involve the agent’s reasons
since they concern the factors which render the agent’s reasons
efficacious. In contrast, explanations of unintentional behaviors
don’t appeal to the agent’s reasons. Unintentional
behaviors include overt behaviors over which the agent has no control
(slipping on an icy step) and emotional expressions such as blushing.
In these cases the explanations people offer resemble the kinds of
explanations they offer for the behavior of inanimate objects (Malle
2004: 111).

In addition to identifying a variety of explanatory modes people adopt
towards intentional behavior, Malle also identifies the features of
the explanatory situation which drive the selection of one explanatory
mode rather than another. Two examples of Malle’s work in this
area are as follows (Malle 2004, Section 5.2).

The action is difficult to perform v. the action is easy to
perform. Difficult actions (eg Jill’s riding a unicycle)
are usually explained by appealing to enabling factors (eg She
practiced a lot). In contrast, if the action is easy to produce (eg
Jill went for a walk), we tend to produce either reason explanations
(eg She wanted to keep fit) or causal history of reason explanations
(eg Her trainer told her that walking is an ideal way to keep
fit).
The explanation is produced by the agent v. the explanation is
produced by an observer. Actors tend to produce explanations of
their own behavior which stress their beliefs. For example, consider
Jack who wrote a letter to the mayor protesting against the
city’s housing policy. Jack explains his action by saying that
he thought the mayor would listen. In contrast, observers
tend to produce explanations which stress the agent’s desires.
Jill, who has observed Jack’s letter writing, explains
Jack’s action by saying that he wanted to change the
policy.


There is more to an explanation of intentional behavior than its mode.
Jill did not explain Jack’s letter writing by merely saying that
he had a desire; she said that he wanted to change the
policy. Reasons are propositional attitudes, and normally reason
explanations specify the propositions involved as well as the
attitudes. How do folk psychologists identify the propositions of an
agent’s attitudes when offering reason causes? Malle suggests a
number of cognitive processes which perform this task. One of his
central claims is that propositional contents are inferred from
specific or generic information about the agent (Malle 2004: 140).
Consider again Jill’s explanation of Jack’s writing to the
mayor: He wrote to the mayor because he wanted to change the
city’s housing policy. Jill might attribute this particular
desire to Jack because she has often heard Jack talk disparagingly
about the city’s current policy. However, there must be
inferential processes which enable Jill to (a) locate information
relevant to explaining Jack’s action and (b) pass from the
belief that Jack objects to the current policy to the conclusion that
Jack wrote the letter because he wanted to change the current policy.
According to the theory-theory, these inferential processes involve a
theory which maps the complex relations between stimuli, mental states
and behavior; that is, the inferences involve folk psychology. So the
account of propositional attitude attribution is incomplete until we
have a detailed—and empirically validated—account of folk
psychology. What is required here is a response to item C in the list
of empirical issues given in Part 2.1: What is the content of folk
psychology? What states and properties does it quantify over, and what
regularities does in postulate? (See Von Eckardt 1994.) It’s
fair to say that, at present, we lack detailed answers to these
questions.
3. Folk Psychology as a Model

As noted above, many proponents of the theory-theory take folk
psychology to be akin to a scientific theory. In addition, they
typically embrace the deductive-normative approach to scientific
explanation (Hempel and Oppenheim, 1948). On this view, explaining
phenomenon PPP requires deriving PPP from a set of sentences
SSS, where SSS includes a law. For example, let PPP be
“The ball accelerated at 5ms−2−2^{-2} second”. PPP can
be derived from Newton’s second law (Force = mass ××\times
acceleration) and the additional information that the ball’s
mass is 2kg and the force is 10N. That is, Newton’s second law,
together with the additional information, explain why the ball
accelerated at 5m per second per second.

Understood on deductive-nomological approach, folk psychological
explanations involve at least one folk psychological law plus
information specific to the situation. For example, Sally’s
avoiding the snake would be explained by attributing to Sally a fear
of snakes and appealing to the law “People avoid things they are
afraid of”. (See for example Churchland, 1970; 1981.)

There is, however, an alternative approach to scientific explanation
according to which at least some scientific theorising involves models
in a specific sense I will describe momentarily. If this is right,
theory-theorists who endorse the idea that mindreading is akin to
scientific explanation cannot assume that mindreading involves
deploying psychological laws. Mindreading might involve building and
utilising a model rather than theories as traditionally conceived
(Maibom, 2003 and Godfrey-Smith, 2005). I regard this approach as a
special case of the theory-theory.

A model in the relevant sense is a set of hypothetical structures that
are broadly similar to each other and that are constructed from a
common set of elements. For example, the one-locus model of natural
selection consists of a number of hypothetical structures composed of
elements such as fitness and genotype, all of which conform to a basic
general pattern (Godfrey-Smith 2005). Often the structures take the
form of equations, but this need not be the case.

Models serve various ends. At one extreme a scientist may construe the
model as nothing more than a predictive device; at the other she may
construe it as accurately describing the causal structure of the
target system. That is, models admit both instrumentalist and realist
construals.

Maibom (2003) and Godfrey-Smith (2005) propose that folk psychology is
a model; that is, a set of hypothetical structures built from a common
set of elements including beliefs, desires, actions, emotions and so
forth. Godfrey-Smith’s fundamental insight is that the folk
psychological model can be elaborated in various ways to serve
different purposes in different circumstances. In some circumstances
the model is treated as a prediction device: What will Fred do when he
discovers the cafe is closed? In others it might be used to arrive at
explanations of action: Why did Fred go to the cafe? In still others
the model is elaborated to yield explanations that appeal to both
proximate and distal causes of behavior.

As noted above, models can be construed both instrumentally and
realistically, and folk psychology is no exception. The folk
psychological model allows multiple construals, ranging from
instrumentalism through to “industrial strength realism”.
(The latter expression is Dennett’s (1991).) The model also
admits other kinds of elaborations. For example, degrees of belief and
desire can be allowed, and rationality constraints imposed. These
recondite theories of human action are hypothetical structures that
share the same basic structure, and involve the same set of elements,
as more commonplace structures of the folk psychological model.
3. The Platitude Sense of Folk Psychology

In a series of influential papers, David Lewis (1966, 1970, 1972,
1994) defended a particular approach to the semantics of theoretical
terms, applied that approach to the everyday psychological vocabulary
(eg “belief” and “desire”), and thereby obtain
a functionalist theory of mental states. Whilst Lewis does not give an
explicit definition of the term “folk psychology”, an
account of folk psychology naturally emerges from his approach.

On Lewis’s view, theoretical terms get their meaning from the
role they play in the theory in which they are used; they are, says
Lewis, “definable functionally, by reference to their causal
roles” (Lewis 1972: 204). Lewis begins with a theory, TTT,
which includes both new terms introduced by TTT and old terms
already understood before TTT emerged. The new terms are called
“theoretical terms” or “TTT-terms” for
short. The label “theoretical term” is merely intended to
indicate that the terms were introduced by TTT rather than by, say,
ostension or by some theory which pre-dates TTT. The old terms are
called “OOO-terms” for short. (Lewis stresses that the
OOO-terms are not necessarily observational terms, “whatever
those maybe” (1972: 205).) TTT can be expressed as a single
sentence—perhaps as a long conjunction: 

T[t1…tn],T[t1…tn],
T[t_1 \ldots t_n],


 where
“t1…tnt1…tnt_1 \ldots t_n” stands for all the TTT-terms in
TTT. (The OOO-terms have been suppressed to reduce clutter.) If we
systematically replace the TTT-terms with free variables, x1…xnx1…xnx_1
\ldots x_n, and prefix an existential quantifier binding the
nnn-tuple x1…xnx1…xnx_1 \ldots x_n, we obtain the Ramsey sentence
for TTT: 

∃(x1…xn)T(x1…xn).∃(x1…xn)T(x1…xn).
\exists(x_1 \ldots x_n)T(x_1 \ldots x_n).


The Ramsey sentence says that there exists an n-tuple of entities
which realizes TTT; that is, TTT has at least one realization.
Lewis is concerned to rule out the possibility of multiple
realizations of T. It is, he claims, implicit in the stating of a
theory that it has a unique realization; if a theory is multiply
realized then it is false and its TTT-terms fail to refer (Lewis
1972: 205). He therefore adopts the modified Ramsey sentence
∃!(x1…xn)T(x1…xn),∃!(x1…xn)T(x1…xn),
\exists !(x_1 \ldots x_n)T(x_1 \ldots x_n),


 which says that there exists a unique nnn-tuple of
entities that realizes TTT.


The Carnap sentence is a conditional with the Ramsey sentence
as antecedent and TTT as its consequent: 

∃(x1…xn)T(x1…xn)→T[t1…tn].∃(x1…xn)T(x1…xn)→T[t1…tn].
\exists(x_1 \ldots x_n)T(x_1 \ldots x_n) \rightarrow T[t_1 \ldots t_n].


The Carnap sentence says that if TTT is realized, the ttt-terms
name the corresponding entities of some realization of TTT. Given
Lewis’s aversion to multiple realization, he prefers the
modified Carnap sentence which is a conditional with the
modified Ramsey sentence as antecedent and TTT as the
consequent:
∃!(x1…xn)T(x1…xn)→T[t1…tn].∃!(x1…xn)T(x1…xn)→T[t1…tn].
\exists !(x_1 \ldots x_n)T(x_1 \ldots x_n) \rightarrow T[t_1 \ldots t_n].


The modified Carnap sentence says that if TTT is uniquely realized,
the ttt-terms name the corresponding entities of the unique
realization of TTT. To cover those cases in which TTT is not
uniquely realized, either because it is multiply realized or not
realized at all, Lewis adds an additional conditional:
∼∃!(x1…xn)T(x1…xn)→(t1=∗&…&tn=∗).∼∃!(x1…xn)T(x1…xn)→(t1=∗&…&tn=∗). 
{\sim}\exists !(x_1 \ldots x_n)T(x_1 \ldots x_n) \rightarrow(t_1 =
* \&amp; \ldots \&amp; t_n = *). 


This conditional says that, if TTT is not uniquely realized, then
t1…tnt1…tnt_1 \ldots t_n name nothing. Taken together, the last two
conditionals are equivalent to a series of sentences which define each
TTT-term strictly in OOO-terms:
T1Tn=∃!x1T[x1]⋮=∃!xnT[xn]T1=∃!x1T[x1]⋮Tn=∃!xnT[xn]
\begin{align*}
T_1 &amp;= \exists !x_1 T[x_1]\\
  &amp; \vdots\\
T_n &amp; = \exists !x_n T[x_n]\\
\end{align*}


We have now obtained an explicit definition for each TTT-term.
Moreover, says Lewis, the definitions are functional
definitions: “The ttt-terms have been defined as the occupants
of the causal roles specified by the theory TTT; as the entities,
whatever those maybe, that bear certain causal relations to one
another and to the referents of the OOO-terms” (Lewis 1972:
207). These definitions were implicit in the original theory TTT in
the sense that no additional content has been added to TTT in their
derivation. (Lewis observes that the definitions do in fact contain
additional content, for their derivation assumes that TTT is
uniquely realized. He claims, though, that the assumption of
uniqueness was made implicitly when TTT was stated. See the remarks
about uniqueness scattered through out Section I of Lewis 1972.)
Let’s now turn to the way Lewis applies his theory of
theoretical terms to the everyday psychological vocabulary.

Lewis begins by imagining the set of all the everyday, commonsense
platitudes about mental states. He treats this set of platitudes as a
term-introducing psychological theory, with the TTT-terms being the
names of the commonsense psychological states—beliefs, desires,
pains, hungers, etc—and the OOO-terms being terms drawn from
the non-psychological part of the everyday English vocabulary. The
formal method sketched above yields explicit definitions of the
TTT-terms. These definitions are functionalist in that they describe
the causal roles in which the named entities participate:
“pain” names the state which occupies so-and-so causal
role. (Lewis 1966 (fn 6) distinguishes between pain and the
attribute of having pain. Pain is the state which plays the
pain-role, and which state plays the pain-role may differ from world
to world. The attribute of having pain is the having of a
state—whatever state that might be—which plays the
pain-role.)

Clearly, we need an account of the platitudes. Which everyday claims
about mental states count as part of the term-introducing theory?
Here’s Lewis (1972: 207–8. See also Lewis 1966: 100):


Collect all the platitudes you can think of regarding the causal
relations of mental states, sensory stimuli, and motor responses.
Perhaps we can think of them as having the form:

When someone is in so-and-so combination of mental states and receives
sensory stimuli of so-and-so kind, he tends with so-and-so probability
to be caused thereby to go into so-and-so mental states and produce
so-and-so motor responses.

Also add all the platitudes to the effect that one mental state falls
under another—“toothache is a kind of pain” and the
like. Perhaps there are platitudes of other forms as well. Include
only platitudes which are common knowledge among us—everyone
knows them, everyone knows that everyone knows them, and so on.


Lewis uses the explicit functional definitions of the commonsense
psychological terms he has obtained as premises in an argument for
physicalism about mental states (Lewis 1972: 204):


 Mental state M=M=M = the occupant of causal role RRR.
 The occupant of causal role R=R=R = neural state NNN.


From (1) and (2) by transitivity we obtain:

 Mental state M=M=M = neural state NNN.



Premise (1) is a functional definition of MMM obtained by the
Ramsey-Carnap-Lewis method sketched above. Premise (2) is
overwhelmingly supported by physiology. (In Lewis 1966, the second
premise is more general: the occupant of the causal role is identified
with a physical state. Lewis then defends the second premise
by endorsing the explanatory adequacy of physics.) So Lewis argues
straightforwardly from functionalism to physicalism.

With this picture in place, it is worth asking what precisely folk
psychology is on Lewis’s approach. To my knowledge, Lewis never
explicitly defines the term. However, when giving the semantics of the
everyday psychological vocabulary, he treats the conjunction of
commonsense platitudes about mental states as a term-introducing
theory, so it is natural to identify folk psychology with that
conjunction. Alternatively, we could think of folk psychology as a
systematization of the set of platitudes.

It is important to stress that Lewis’s position has not been
without its detractors. In particular, many philosophers of language
have objected to Lewis’s semantic theory. In the 1960s and 1970s
an alternative approach to semantics was introduced by David Kaplan
(1968), Keith Donellan (1970), Hilary Putnam (1975) and Saul Kripke
(1980). This approach separates the meaning of a theoretical term from
the role it plays in the theories in which it is found; that is, it
separates meaning from use. These alternative conceptions of meaning
are broadly compatible with of Lewis’s metaphysical conclusions;
for example, they are compatible with Lewis’s physicalism.
However, they are incompatible with the way Lewis obtains his
conclusions.

Setting aside questions of semantics, note that Lewis is hostage to
empirical fortune in ways he does not acknowledge. Lewis’s
claims about the platitudes are empirical claims—they are claims
about what is commonly believed about mental states and as such can
only properly be investigated by careful scientific research. There is
no evidence that Lewis undertook the appropriate studies. Moreover, it
is very likely that Lewis’s own intuitions about mental states
were influenced by his theoretical stance, and consequently there is
little reason to think that Lewis’s own intuitions are a good
guide to what people typically believe about the mind.

Notice that Lewis only recognizes two kinds of platitudes: those that
express causal relations between mental states, stimuli and behavior,
and those that indicate when one type of mental state is contained by
another. He admits that there maybe “platitudes of other forms
as well” (Lewis 1972: 207–8), but this is disingenuous
because his overall functionalist conclusion requires that all
platitudes take one of the two forms he identifies. Thus the
functionalist conclusion could not be obtained if there were
platitudes expressing the view that mental states are substances which
have their causal powers non-essentially, or which lack causal powers
altogether. It may turn out, for example, that the folk conceive of
pain as an essentially experiential state with non-essential causal
connections to stimuli and behavior. Lewis is simply assuming that
commonsense is resolutely committed to the idea that mental states are
characterized by causal role; that is, the functionalist conclusion
drives the characterization of the platitudes. No doubt Lewis has
philosophical arguments for denying that mental states are substances
which have their causal powers non-essentially, or substances that
lack causal powers altogether. But that is beside the present point.
Lewis’s intention was to capture what the folk think about
mental states, not what the philosophical literati think
about mental states. Lewis also assumes that the platitudes form a
largely coherent set. He can handle minor inconsistencies because he
proposes to form not a grand conjunction of all the platitudes, but a
grand disjunction of conjunctions of most of the platitudes. However,
he is still assuming that consistent sets containing most of the
platitudes can be obtained. This may or may not be the case, and we
will only find out by doing the relevant empirical research.

There is some evidence that Lewis recognized these difficulties
himself. In his “Reduction of Mind” he remarks that
“Pace Lewis, 1972, p. 256, eliciting the general
principles of folk psychology is no mere matter of gathering
platitudes” (1994: 416). He also remarks that folk psychology
“is common knowledge among us; but it is tacit, as our
grammatical knowledge is” (1994: 416). These remakes are
consistent with his adopting some version of the mindreading sense of
folk psychology (see section 2 above); however, they are too cryptic
for us to establish exactly what Lewis’s final position was.
4. Consequences for Eliminativism

Eliminativists have argued that there are no beliefs and no desires
(see for example Churchland 1981; Stich 1983). One prominent argument
for eliminativism begins with folk psychology:


Beliefs and desires are the posits of folk psychology.
Folk psychology is false.
The posits of false theories do not exist.

Therefore,

Beliefs and desires do not exist.



It is not immediately obvious that this argument is valid, for we may
have a range of reasons for accepting the existence of beliefs and
desires—reasons unaffected by the truth or falsity of folk
psychology (see Kitcher 1984; Von Eckardt 1994). Moreover, in light of
the proceeding discussion it is clear that the first two premises are
ambiguous. As we have seen, the term “folk psychology” is
used in at least two different ways in the philosophical and
psychological literatures. Consequently, the argument just sketched
has at least two interpretations, and may be sound on one but not on
the other (Stich & Ravenscroft 1992). Similar remarks apply to an
anti-eliminativist argument advanced by early simulation theorists
such as Robert Gordon (1986) and Alvin Goldman (1989). On their view,
mindreading does not involve a representation of folk psychology in
the mindreader’s brain, and consequently we have no reason to
think that folk psychology exists. They then argue that, since there
is no such thing as folk psychology, the question of the existence or
otherwise of its posits simply does not arise. However, the first
premise of this argument needs to be stated more carefully. If
simulation theory (as conceived by its early proponents) is true, then
there is no such thing as folk psychology on the mindreading sense
of that term. But that is entirely compatible with the existence
of folk psychology on the platitude sense of the term. (For
useful discussions of eliminativism see Kitcher 1984; Horgan &
Woodward 1985; Von Eckardt 1994; and the entry on
 eliminative materialism.)

Further reading. Recent and valuable monographs which
discuss folk psychology include Nichols & Stich 2003; Sterelny
2003; Goldman 2006; and Hutto 2008.