Friedrich Hayek was born in Vienna in 1899 into a family steeped in
academic life and scientific research. He worked as a
statistician from 1927–31, became a Lecturer in Economics at the
University of Vienna in 1929, then moved to the University of London in
1931, the University of Chicago in 1950, and the University of Freiburg
in 1962, retiring in 1967. He continued writing into the late 1980s,
dying in 1992.


Hayek worked in the areas of philosophy of science, political
philosophy, the free will problem, and epistemology. For all
that, Hayek was more hedgehog than fox. His life’s work,
for which he won a Nobel Prize in 1974, illuminated the nature and
significance of spontaneous order. The concept seems simple, yet Hayek
spent six decades refining his idea, evidently finding elusive the goal
of being as clear about it as he aspired to be.


This essay concentrates on this enduring theme of Hayek’s work,
and a question: why would the scholar who did more than anyone in the
twentieth century to advance our understanding of price signals and the
emergence of spontaneous orders also be driven to claim that social
justice is a mirage?
 
1. Price Signals and  Spontaneous Order
1.1 Order Can Be Undesigned


Over hundreds of millions of years, order emerged in the natural
world. How? It is only human to wonder. “Design
arguments” come to mind, but like most philosophers, Hayek
considers such arguments fallacious as arguments that we need to posit
a designer to explain the emergence of order in nature. (See the
entry on
 teleological arguments for God’s existence.)
 Hayek, however, was frustrated to find the same
fallacy in arguments that we need to posit a designer to explain the
emergence of order in society (Hayek 1960, 59).


Just as no one had to invent natural selection, no one had to invent
the process by which natural languages evolve. A language is a
massively path-dependent process of unending mutual adjustment.
Language evolves spontaneously. It would make no sense to call any
language optimally efficient, but it does make sense to see languages
as highly refined and effective adaptations to the evolving
communication needs of particular populations (Hayek 1945, 528).



It would be no exaggeration to say that social theory begins
with—and has an object only because of—the discovery that
there exist orderly structures which are the product of the action of
many men but are not the result of human design. In some fields this is
now universally accepted. Although there was a time when men believed
that even language and morals had been invented by some genius of the
past, everybody recognizes now that they are the outcome of a process
of evolution whose results nobody foresaw or designed (Hayek 1973,
37).

1.1 Order Can Be Unpredictable


Natural selection operates on mutations, making the path of natural
selection unpredictable, regardless of how well we understand the
underlying principles. To Hayek, social and cultural evolution are much
the same: driven by innovation, fashion, and various shocks that
“mutate” people’s plans in unpredictable ways with
unpredictable results. The system may be more or less logical. Most
things seem in retrospect to have happened for a reason. Yet,
however logical the system may be, its logic does not render the system  deterministic.  
We can make predictions in the broadest sense, such as when we say that increasing the money supply causes prices to rise, other things equal, but we have no basis for predicting the fine details. The system is technically chaotic, to such a degree that
even something as straightforward as next week’s stock prices
will always remain a matter of guesswork even for experts. (See the
entry on chaos.)
1.3 Order Can Embody Essentially Decentralized Information


To Hayek, prices are like languages. How do we know what it will
take to get our product to whomever wants or needs it most?  Maybe
we take bids. As we (and our rivals) take bids for x,
x comes to have a price. As with language, prices enable
people to form mutual expectations. Free-floating prices help people
coordinate in intricate and mutually considerate ways as they
individually decide what to produce or consume. To think that an
authority needs to decide what the price of rice ought to be is like
thinking that an authority needs to decide what sound people should
make when they want to refer to rice.


It is a mundane yet intriguing fact that price signals induce people to
respond to information they do not possess: such as the changing cost
of drilling, or the discovery of a cheap substitute, or that political
unrest has made a key input harder to acquire. Having no inkling of
those variables, buyers nevertheless respond to them in a rational way,
because they know the one thing they need to know: namely, the price
(Hayek 1978a, 4).



Assume that somewhere in the world a new opportunity for the use of
some raw material, say, tin, has arisen, or that one of the sources of
supply of tin has been eliminated. It does not matter for our
purpose—and it is very significant that it does not
matter—which of these two causes has made tin more scarce. All
that the users of tin need to know is that some of the tin they used to
consume is now more profitably employed elsewhere and that, in
consequence, they must economize tin (Hayek 1945, 526).

1.4 Communities Tend To Be Spontaneous Orders


What emerges from the haggling is not only a deal, but something
larger: a community. There was no central decision about who
should produce tin, or whether anyone should; no central decision about
who should consume tin, or whether anyone should; no central decision
about what should be given in return for tin. All that happened
is that some people guessed that if they were to produce tin and bring
it to market, it would be worth something to customers—enough to
make the venture worthwhile. When some of these guesses prove correct
and trades are consummated, a market in tin emerges and becomes part of
what brings people together as partners in mutually beneficial
ventures.


Price signals thus economize on information. In the process,
they induce patterns of cooperation that involve multitudes.
Cooperation evolves among people who need not share a language, need
not be aware of each other’s existence, and need not be aware of
their mutual dependence. They are only vaguely aware of the thousands
of jobs that need doing so as to supply inputs that enable them to have
a finished product to sell. Particular agents seldom if ever have more
than a glimpse of the big picture, yet they manage to come together to
form a community, and almost all are vastly better off as a result.
2. Progress


Technological progress extends the frontiers of the possible. To
Hayek, it is the freedom of the few to do something novel that matters
most, not the freedom of the many to do something familiar.
Accordingly, the freedom I exercise myself often is not the freedom
that has the most bearing on my future (Hayek 1960, 32). Consider that
early adopters finance research that brings down production costs and
thus finances a dispersion of products and services at falling prices
that eventually bring late adopters like me to the market. I may never
trade with early adopters, yet even so I depend on them, for they help
to finance the invention and ongoing re-invention of products whose
marginal cost eventually falls to a point where I can afford them.


Often, technological progress consists of innovations that lower
transaction cost: steam boat, railroad, air travel, telegraph,
telephone, internet, bar code reader, “apps” that make possible such businesses as Uber and AirBnB, along with innovative organizational structures and business models such as Federal Express or container ships (which, after a ten-year legal battle with trade unions, reduced from days to minutes the time that a truck’s contents would spend at the dockyard before being transferred to a ship). In many cases, the cost of transacting
concerns the cost of information. As the frontier of knowledge expands,
the slice that a given individual can grasp inevitably becomes a
smaller part of the whole. Prices become an increasingly indispensable
window to a world of tacit knowledge.


In summary, technological innovation shocks economies. Once profitable investments become relics of a bygone age
and must be liquidated. Workers get laid off until they find some other
way to produce goods wanted by today’s customers. Transitions are
tough, miscalculations abound, but the upshot is that we grope toward
heights made possible by a given innovation. Innovative ways of
lowering transaction cost spread throughout a community, and failures
(including once-useful but now obsolete innovations) are discarded.
More precisely, failures are discarded if and when decision makers are
innovators on the ground, learning to avoid losing their own money on
ideas that fail to bear fruit in a given time and place.


Hayek denies that resources will ever be used at theoretical peak
efficiency (1945, 527). Humans being what they are, waste is
ubiquitous. Mistakes are ubiquitous. The “marvel” of markets is that people make mistakes, learn from mistakes, and avoid repeating them. By contrast, if decision makers are bureaucrats in large organizations, their focus is not on avoiding mistakes but on avoiding budget cuts. If bureaucrats acknowledge that their plan is failing, the consequences is not that they retrench and divert their own resources to better purposes but that higher administrators cut their budgets. Note: what cuts their budget is not the mistake so much as someone learning from the mistake. Bureaucratic structure makes new information a threat that needs suppressing (1944, 130).


Bureaucrats experience mistakes not as events from which they need to
learn but rather as events that they need to cover up. Their mistakes
are with other people’s money, so bureaucrats learn to say with a
straight face, when confronted, that their budget was not large enough,
or that things would have been worse without their
 policies.[1]
They may even believe what they are
saying, but they do not know and have every incentive to avoid
learning.
3. Planned Orders Are Inferior


If we understand the principles that drive the logic of the system,
we may be able to predict that a population of insects will evolve
resistance to a pesticide. We may be able to predict that a
society that declares war on drugs will lose. Beyond the question of
what we can predict, then, Hayek has a further and more precise target:
however much we can predict, there is a drastic limit to what we can
 simply decide.[2]
No one
can decide that people won’t respond in predictable ways to perverse incentives
unintentionally created by a central plan, in the same way that no one
can decide that insects will not become resistant to an
insecticide.


This point, as Adam Smith observed, is not obvious. There is a
class of technocrats who will not appreciate the difficulty. As Smith
famously observed, and as Hayek quotes approvingly, the “man of
system”



seems to imagine that he can arrange the different members of a
great society with as much ease as the hand arranges the different
pieces upon a chess-board. He does not consider that the pieces upon
the chess-board have no other principle of motion besides that which
the hand impresses upon them; but that, in the great chess-board of
human society, every single piece has a principle of motion of its own,
altogether different from that which the legislature might choose to
impress upon it. If those two principles coincide and act in the same
direction, the game of human society will go on easily and
harmoniously, and is very likely to be happy and successful. If they
are opposite or different, the game will go on miserably, and the
society must be at all times in the highest degree of disorder (Smith
1790, 234).



The system has a logic. Planners cannot change that logic. 
Their main decision is whether to work with that logic or against it
(which Smith regards as a choice between harmony and misery). Smith
holds that planners who disregard economic logic are deciding in effect
to sacrifice their “pawns,” something that a person of
true benevolence would not do.


When Hayek explains the obstacle to effective central planning, his
claim is not merely that information is widely dispersed and therefore
hard to acquire. Rather, it is impossible to acquire (Hayek 1973, 51).
When prices are set periodically by a central planner, rather than
instantaneously by consumers and producers who are the first and
typically the only people to have that information in reliable and timely
form, prices inevitably carry less reliable, less timely information.
As Hayek notes,


If we possess all the relevant information, if we can start out from a
given system of preferences, and if we command complete knowledge of
available means, the problem which remains is purely one of
logic. That is, the answer to the question of what is the best use of
our available means is implicit in our assumptions. This, however, is
emphatically not the economic problem which society faces. And the
economic calculus which we have developed to solve this logical
problem, though an important step toward the solution of the economic
problem of society, does not yet provide an answer to it. The reason
for this is that the “data” from which the economic
calculus starts are never for the whole society “given” to
a single mind which could work out the implications and can never be
so given (Hayek 1945, 519).



Soviet central planners made decisions by checking prices on
international markets, but suppose there were no information about
supply and demand to be had anywhere. Suppose you are a planner, but
all you know is that demands are coming in for wire and for
jewelry. How do you decide whether to direct factories to make
wire out of copper or platinum, or whether smiths should make jewelry
out of gold or silver?  How do you decide who should get silver
jewelry and who should get gold? How do you decide whether anyone at
all should get jewelry, as opposed to reserving all such metals for use
as wire?


When consumers are not paying for what they receive, their demand is
effectively infinite. Inevitably, a central planner’s task eventually becomes one of
cost containment. Worse yet, a planner with no measure of cost has only
a limited basis for deciding what to count as containing cost. If a
given ton of steel can make one car or ten refrigerators, which way of
using steel is economical? How does a planner decide whether to invest
in upgrading water supplies or nuclear reactors? If all you know as a
producer is that people are asking for infinitely more than you can
give, then eventually you turn a deaf ear, deliver your quota, and pay
no attention to whether preferences are being satisfied or needs are
being met.


Suppose that prices are set by planners. Hayek says with a thought more characteristic of neoclassical economists: “Only prices determined on the free market will bring it about that demand equals supply” (Hayek 1960, 63). Price
controls—floors and ceilings—make buyers and sellers less able to respond to the signals they would send each other if they could
raise their offer or lower their asking price. If price cannot rise,
then buyers cannot signal producers that demand has increased and that
producers would sell more if they were to increase supply. And if
producers do not increase supply, rising demand results in shortages
rather than economic
 growth. (See especially Zwolinski 2008 for further elaboration.)[3]


A
central planner could have the world’s most powerful computer,
beyond anything imagined when Hayek published “Use of
Knowledge” in 1945. No computer, however, could solve the problem
that Hayek was trying to articulate. The problem is not lack of
processing power so much as a lack of access to the information in the
first place. That much seems clear enough, but the problem has a deeper
level. The problem is not merely lack of access to
information; rather the information does not exist. There is no truth
about what prices should be, accessible or otherwise, except to the
extent that prices represent what customers are paying for a given service. That is the precise way in which prices are of service to a community (1944, 51–52).


For example, suppose that a manufacturer figures out how to make an “epipen” that can save the lives of consumers otherwise at risk of fatal allergic reaction to bee stings. Suppose the manufacturer can produce a limited supply of epipens for a little less than a hundred dollars each, and proceeds to offer them for sale for a hundred dollars.  Suppose that the manufacturer finds that buyers line up by the thousands wanting to buy the pens, and suppose that there emerges a group of “scalpers” willing to stand in line for weeks, who buy all the pens for a hundred dollars each, then resell the pens for two hundred dollars, then three hundred, then four hundred, and the demand is still strong.  Hayek would predict that if we let the price signals be the marvels that they are, then other producers will jump in and begin to manufacture pens for a hundred dollars each. Eventually the demand is met, and the scalpers go away.  Then other producers invent a new process that enables them to produce the pens for ninety dollars, then eighty, and again the price will fall, as competition leads the price signal to track the falling cost of production. Of course, if we issue a patent or a licensing scheme or some other way of preventing rival producers from entering the market, then this will not occur.  By the same token, if we impose a price ceiling of a hundred dollars, then no signal is sent to prospective rivals, unless scalpers send the signal to rivals willing to produce for the black market. Or if there is some other reason why it is impossible to increase the supply, then prices may drift up toward the limits of a customer’s willingness to pay. Barring this, there are many ways for kings, legislators, or other planners to interfere, but price signals work in a particular way if planners let it be: supply and demand tend to equilibrate, and to converge on a price in the neighborhood of the cost of production.  A product tends to end up in a consumer’s hands just in case that particular consumer wants the product enough to pay what it cost to produce it. 


Although computers cannot solve the problem, Hayek thought radically
dispersed decision making by buyers and sellers can and does solve the
problem, so far as it can be solved. Sellers who charge too much end up
without customers; they learn to be more efficient or else go out
of
 business.[4]
Buyers who want x but
consider it overpriced stay home for a while, waiting for the price to
fall, but when they see x flying off the shelves, some of them learn something about themselves: that they would rather have the product at that price than not have it at all. 
To Hayek, only a price mechanism can process changing information almost
instantaneously. Ironically, the most efficient thing a
central planner could possibly do would be to set a price right where it would
have been without the planner’s intervention.

3.1 Trucking, Bartering, Community, Esteem


Insofar as society is a cooperative venture for mutual advantage,
learning to survive—not just physically but as full members of a
community—will involve learning to cooperate. Learning to
cooperate involves learning to become a trading partner. In other
words, cooperation begins with having something to offer: a way of
making people better off.


Clearly in Smith, who inspired Hayek, but also in Hayek himself, one
infers that the driving motivation is not greed or even well-being so much as a
propensity to truck and barter. Neither is the objective for
buyers and sellers to coordinate on a price that a central planner
might stumble on, but to coordinate, period. Mutually
satisfying coordination, the ongoing equilibration of supply and demand, constantly evolving in response to changing conditions, is itself the achievement. There is no need
for that coordination to be tracking anything beyond itself. To Hayek,
the value that we hope to see realized in a marketplace is not so much
that the correct volume of goods gets exchanged at the correct price.
Rather, the genesis and point of the division of labor is not only a
prospect of realizing gains from trade but trade per se. The valued
result is buyers and sellers responding to each other, becoming more
attuned to what people around them want, and helping to create a
community in which their role in an important one. Thus, traders make a
living while at the same time becoming worthy of their own
esteem. Successful traders become esteemed and worthy of esteem
because they went to market with a vision of how to make people better
off. At the end of the day, they go home not only materially
enriched but vindicated (Schmidtz 2016a).


Such sensitivity is good, but there is little that central planners can do
to encourage it. Central planners replace what could be a complex,
decentralized network of interdependence and mutual responsibility with
something more like a society of spokes tethered to a central distributor
at the hub but otherwise dangling. It is no substitute for real
community.
3.2 Law As An Ecological Niche


In nature, for biological adaptation to culminate in better-adapted
populations over time, the niche to which a population is adapting must
be relatively stable. Likewise, under a rule of law, the aim of
government is not to win but to provide a stable ecological niche that
enables the game’s true players to evolve strategies apt for
success within that niche. An elaborate crystal structure cannot
form unless the medium in which crystals form is left undisturbed.
Hayek’s ideal is a legal “medium” of society,
liberal enough to permit creativity, stable enough to
reward creativity, and constraining enough (in the right ways) to steer
creativity away from zero-sum and negative-sum games and toward
positive-sum games: that is, wealth creation, not wealth capture.


Here, then, in a few sentences, is one way of understanding
Hayek’s point. Not everything that happens in an evolving
community is foreseen or intended. Actions have more than one
consequence, and more than the intended consequence. This is especially
so when there is more than one decision maker. No one follows a
planner’s plan simply because the planner intends that they do
so. “Pawns” adjust to the planner’s plan in whatever
fashion best fits their own plans, and the result is too chaotic to be
safely predictable. Further, the rule of law itself is an evolving
product of ongoing decision making, so it likewise takes a shape not
intended by any legislator. Does this mean that every order is
tautologically a spontaneous order?  The answer: it is a
universally true empirical generalization, not a tautology, that every
social organization, even a dictatorship, is partly an ongoing
product of ordering processes that are to some degree
spontaneous. However, while the degree to which outcomes are
unintended is a continuum, there remains a point in categorizing
communities as centrally planned as opposed to spontaneous. A central
plan is designed to yield an end-state. The plan aims to bring about
particular outcomes—what roles people will play, what they will
achieve in those roles, and what they will win by so achieving. By
contrast, in what we should call spontaneous order, government provides
a stable and known framework of rules (Hayek 1944, 113). Although this
ideal can never be fully achieved in practice, a government under rule
of law acts as referee and provider of the rule book (Hayek 1960, 114)
and operates as much as possible by an ideal of “letting the
players play.”


Is letting the players play good?  Necessarily good?  Adam
Smith might have said no, as might Hayek. A
praiseworthy rule of law facilitates mutually beneficial trade
by internalizing externalities, by minimizing transaction cost
(especially when it comes to acquiring information), by minimizing
opportunities to acquire people’s goods without their consent
(thereby encouraging people to trade on agreeable—thus typically
beneficial—terms), and by being extremely cautious about trying
to do more than that.


Hayek had no particular complaint about providing public education
or the minimal elements of a welfare state, but not because such
institutions are essential. Hayek would simply have said that
such institutions need not devolve into central planning and thus need
not be antithetical to a free society. Issuing vouchers, for example, to subsidize the purchase of epipens or education would to some extent distort markets in the subsidized products (having an inflationary impact on prices for those products) but it would not distort to the extent that price controls would.
4. Justice as Impartiality, Politics As Entrepreneurship Without Restraint


Hayek was a consequentialist of sorts, as was Adam Smith, and yet
Hayek’s defense of economic freedom, like Smith’s, hints at
a contractarian or deontological (and also, in Smith’s case,
virtue-theoretic) moral sensibility that regards the separateness of
persons as morally fundamental. Thus, for example, Hayek says,
“the test of the justice of a rule is usually (since Kant)
described as that of its universalizability” (Hayek 1969, 168).
As John Gray sees it, Hayek commended the laws of justice “as
being the indispensable condition for the promotion of the general
welfare” but Hayek held, at the same time, that “an
impartial concern for the general welfare is itself one of the demands
of universalizability” (Gray 1984, 65).


In service of the overall project of fostering the general welfare, the
point of law and legislation is to craft a framework such that a market
order is a history of pareto-improving
 trades.[5]
A primary role of law and (when necessary)
legislation is to narrow people’s options so as to limit
opportunities to get rich at other people’s
 expense.[6]
So long as the rule of law can
internalize external cost and thereby steer innovation in mutually
beneficial rather than parasitic directions, an evolving order will be
an order of rising prosperity.


By contrast, in a planned order, even astute and conscientious
decisions by men of system are damaging in a particular way. Namely, as
they become micro-managers, these men of system become players rather than umpires. If
bureaucrats start playing the game—responding to ephemeral events
with centralized fine tuning—then even if they play as cleverly
as bureaucrats could possibly play, the fact remains that in
consequence, the dispersed and tacit knowledge of ordinary buyers and
sellers ends up on the sidelines watching. People who would have been
job creators become mere spectators, hamstrung by uncertainty, waiting
to see what the plan is going to be. Until they know the plan,
they have no way of knowing, or even intelligently guessing, something
as simple as whether their staff is too small or too
large.


Government provides the framework for interaction. Ideally, as
mentioned, government operates only within a stable and known
framework of rules (Hayek 1944, 113). This is Hayek’s ideal of good
government. Is it realistic?  Could any government be expected to act
as an impartial umpire?  Hayek saw the rule of law as the market’s
exogenous ecological niche, and thought that this niche, the rule of
law, must be properly constructed if the process of spontaneous order
is be a good thing.  However, Hayek seemingly came to doubt there
could be any such thing as properly constructed rule of law, for the
following reason. Law-making is a process driven by processes more or
less indistinguishable from market process except that benefits to
legislators of their law-making are concentrated while costs are
widely dispersed and thus only dimly understood even after the
fact.[7] This is
not only a moral hazard but an information problem. A piece of
legislation may be thousands of pages. No one intends the
bill as a whole. Indeed, there is no overall point to the bill, known
or otherwise, because, prior to passage, literally no one has even
read more than a few pages of it, not even the hundreds of legislators
who each added a few pages of earmarks to it as the price of securing
their vote.


Common law, by contrast, is a body of practice and tradition that sometimes needs to be supplemented by legislation. Crucially, however, by virtue of passing the test of time as a device for settling disputes, common law cannot be seen as mere prejudice or superstition.  On the contrary, it will have a decided advantage over ongoing legislation, given that legislation is driven by untested ideas about how to respond to the crises of the day, and will be passed without anyone knowing the larger and lasting consequences. Hayek never doubted the need for legislation but lamented our propensity to be oblivious to its inevitable unintended consequences and to radically discount its inevitably unseen cost (Hayek 1973, 86). 
5. Hayek Against Justice


To Hayek, it matters far more that the law be a framework for coordination
than exactly what the coordination points are (Hayek 1960, 118). Hayek
realizes that many coordination points have distributive implications,
which leads Hayek to lament our tendency to evaluate distributions by
asking whether they are just. (Yet, Hayek concedes, at least in principle, the legitimacy of a minimum income or welfare safety net of some sort. See
Tebble 2015 for a sympathetic yet acute argument that this concession on Hayek’s part
is a “fatal ambivalence.” In fact, Tebble argues, Hayek’s repudiation of
social justice leaves no room for any such concession.) 


Hayek says, “one of my chief preoccupations for more than 10
years” has been coming to terms with the idea that social justice
is a mirage (Hayek 1978b,
 57).[8]
By social justice, Hayek seems to mean distributive justice,
and more specifically what Nozick called end-state principles of
distributive justice, which treat justice as a feature of outcomes
rather than of procedures.


Why would justice so conceived be a mirage? Hayek says, “there
can be no distributive justice where no one distributes” (Hayek
1978b, 58 or 1976, 68–69). In Hayek’s words,
“considerations of justice provide no justification for
‘correcting’ the results of the market” (1969, 175).
So long as traders are voluntarily making pareto-superior moves, there
is nothing else that can be said or needs to be said by way of
justification.


Why resist applying conceptions of justice and injustice to situations
where no one distributes?  What is haunting Hayek here is not the
idea that one person might be more deserving than another, but that a
“merit czar” might presume to correct markets that fail to
give people what they deserve. Fearing the potential for tyranny, Hayek
argues not that markets are just but that they are not the kind of
thing that can be just or unjust. Where no one distributes, there may
be something lamentable about the result, but the result will not be an
injustice in the way that engineering such a result would be.
Outcomes that would have been unjust  if deliberately imposed (such as
being born with a cleft palate) sometimes simply happen. As Rawls says,
“The natural distribution is neither just nor unjust; nor is it
unjust that persons are born into society at some particular position.
These are simply natural facts.” Hayek would agree.


Rawls, however, immediately adds what Hayek would call a non sequitur:
“What is just and unjust is the way that institutions deal with
these facts” (Rawls, 1971, 102). If Rawls is right to deem the natural
distribution neither just nor unjust, then when institutions
“deal with natural facts,” they are not undoing
wrongs. Hayek would never deny that cleft palates are bad or that
fixing them is good, but would insist that fixing what is not unjust
cannot count as rectifying injustice. If we feel called upon to invent
something to help children with cleft palates, it will be because
having a cleft palate is bad, not because having it is unjust. When we help,
we are not fixing an improper distribution of cleft plates. We
are simply fixing cleft palates (Schmidtz 2006, 219). The problem to which we are responding has nothing to do with envy, inequality, rights, or fair shares. The stand we take when we create a safety net is not against injustice but against suffering (Hayek 1976, 87).


If this is right, then it illuminates why Hayek’s real concern
cannot be simply that there can be no injustice in a market
where no one distributes. For example, suppose I accidentally destroy
your car. No one distributed the damage. The situation is neither just
nor unjust. Yet, if Rawls were to say that what is just or unjust is
how we respond to the damage, Hayek would have to agree. Somehow, the
situation is different when an accountable agent caused the damage.


Hayek seems to worry that our sense of justice can make it harder for
us to live together, and make progress together. To Hayek, if people
cannot claim that a starting point is unjust, then whatever we do must
be justified as an improvement, not as rectification. If there
is no injustice needing rectification, then the improvement we have a
right to strive for is pareto-improvement, or in any case, improvement
by mutually acceptable means. By contrast, if (contra Rawls) the
natural distribution were unjust, that would open the field to all of
the zero-sum and negative-sum moves that people feel warranted in
imposing on each other under the guise of being fair. The right to make
such moves with other people’s money becomes an overwhelmingly
lucrative political football, luring a society’s entrepreneurial
talent into politics, where instead of creating new social capital,
entrepreneurs spend their time inventing clever new ways of dividing
it. (Rawls could note that money being in the possession of others does not entail that the money is rightfully theirs, but Hayek is doing social science here. He would not deny the plain fact that people can and often do treat other people’s possessions as a political football, and sometimes even invent theories according to which they have a right to do so.  Hayek is talking about the empirical cost of treating other people’s possessions as a political football, not the theoretical possibility.) 


In Hayek’s mind, we should want from a system of justice what we
want from a system of traffic management: a framework that helps us
form mutual expectations about who has the right of way. An effective
system of traffic management allows us simply to coordinate on a set of
mutual expectations that we each find useful in helping us stay out of
each other’s way as we each set a course for our individually
chosen destinations. A traffic management system does not pick our
destination for us. Neither does it require us to justify our
destination to others. Indeed, a traffic system’s utility largely
lies in people not needing to justify themselves. If we operated by
end-state principles of justice (Nozick 1974), we would  need to
justify every move that bore on how goods would be distributed in the
evolving end-state, which is to say we would need to justify virtually
every trade we contemplate, which would gridlock us rather than
facilitate our inventing new ways of making ourselves more
valuable to the people around us.


Perhaps Hayek is overreacting here, but this (I believe) accounts for
his seemingly dogmatic dismissal of end-state principles of
justice. For reasons reminiscent of Nozick’s, Hayek finds
such principles unaffordable, and incompatible with autonomous agents
minding their own business in a free society. Indeed such principles
make it impossible to say what could count as minding one’s own
business. In that respect, in trying to carve out a coherent realm of
individual autonomy, Hayek is, as he often claimed, 
paradigmatically a liberal, not conservative.
5.1 Input, Output, and What It Means To Economize


Merit, as Hayek understands it, concerns the character of the action as opposed to the nature of the achievement (Hayek 1960, 94). In other words, to Hayek, merit-claims concern the inputs one brings to a process, not the output. In Hayek’s mind, nothing good can come of that. In a free society, to Hayek, we are rewarded for our output, not our input (Hayek 1960, 98).


Hayek has an important point. His core concern is the
“mirage” of thinking that justice requires rewarding people
for supplying inputs rather than for supplying outputs. Yet, if it is a
mirage that only inputs should be rewarded, surely it is equally a
mirage that justice is only about inputs. Admittedly, if we leave
customers to their own devices, output is what they will reward, which
is what Hayek wants. By the same token, when people left to their
own devices choose to reward us for our output, their
behavior will not be insensitive to merit. The tendency of market
rewards to track merit will be merely a tendency, but meritocracy being
merely a tendency is not the same as meritocracy being a mirage. A key
element of the success of a system in promoting prosperity will be that
in rewarding excellent output, it will be rewarding the hard work,
courage, alertness, and commitment that makes for excellence. It will
be rewarding luck too, to be sure, but typically not sheer
random
 fluke.[9]
Hayek speaks as if merit
has everything to do with trying hard, and nothing to do with excellent output, but saying it does not make it so, and there is no reason to believe it (Schmidtz 2008, 34).


Hayek says we want to economize on merit (Hayek 1960, 96). If merit were tied exclusively to supplying inputs, the Hayek would be right. But even if
Hayek were right, it it is hard to see why Hayek thinks this
is relevant. Consider that we economize on gold. Why?  Answer:
because gold is valuable. In fact, saying we economize on hard work is
another way of saying hard work is important. It is not evidence
that hard work is a mirage. It is not evidence that we are in the grip of a mirage when we imagine that we have reason to reward hard work that culminates in excellent output.


In sum, a merit theorist might concede to Hayek that rewards
ought to track actual performance, not inner merit. Customers can judge
your product’s merits without needing to know whether you were
lucky. The crucial point is that wherever it is more rewarding to work hard than not, more
rewarding to do excellent work than not, more rewarding to be alert to
customer needs than not, a system is tending to reward the right
things. In that system, output will tend to be increasingly excellent
over time. Products will tend to work. People will tend to prosper, and will tend to aim at being meritorious to boot.
5.2 The Right To Distribute


As noted, Hayek’s critique of social justice is more
specifically a critique of centrally planned distribution according to
merit. He thinks a merit czar would be intolerable. However, the
nightmarish aspect of this vision has everything to do with the idea of
central planning and nothing to do with the idea of merit. Anyone who
takes merit seriously agrees with Hayek that it is imperative to
decentralize evaluation. If Hayek is right that there is no place for a
merit czar in a good society, then, contra Hayek, the implication is not that merit does not matter but precisely that merit does matter (Hayek 1976, 64). The reason why we cannot tolerate a merit czar is that a merit czar would reward obsequiousness, not merit.


Hayek also seems to take for granted, as do many of his philosophical
opponents, that, in a merit-based system, if you cannot prove you
deserve G, that licenses merit czars to take it away. Or if I cannot prove that the person to whom I want to give G deserves it, then that licenses the merit czar to stop me from giving G to that person.
In any case, the crucial point is that before we get to the question of
whether I am giving G to the most deserving recipient, there is a prior
question about whether G is mine to give. Suppose I receive excellent
service at a restaurant and I judge that my server deserves $20. I
cannot justify taking $20 from a patron at a neighboring table merely
by explaining that my server has done something to deserve the $20.
Once the $20 is mine to give, then I can ask whether my server deserves
it. But the prior warrant for taking $20 from my fellow patron will be
a question not of what my server has done to deserve G but of
what I have done to be entitled to it. The point is crucial not because
it refutes Hayek but because it reveals the exact nature of Hayek’s real
concern. Hayek’s concern is not the mirage of
thinking merit does matter, but the mirage of thinking
 entitlement doesn’t.[10]
5.3 Fair Practices


Note the similarity between Hayek’s view and the view
expressed by John Rawls in “Two Concepts of Rules”
(1955). Hayek and Rawls both understood what is involved in a
practice having utility. To use Rawls’s example, the
practice of baseball is defined by procedural rules rather than by
end-state principles of distributive justice. One has to be
dogmatic (Hayek would say) about how many strikes a batter should get,
in order to have a practice at all.


Imagine changing the concept of the game so that the umpire’s job
is to make sure the good guys win. What would that do to the players?
What would become of their striving?  The result of the change
would not be baseball. If we end up with a game where the umpire is
making sure the favored side wins, then the players are sitting on the
sidelines watching, hoping to be favored. Hayek’s insight (and
Rawls’s insight at that stage of his career) is that genuine
fairness is not about making sure prizes are
equally
 distributed.[11]
It is not even
about making sure outcomes are not unduly influenced by morally
arbitrary factors such as how well the players played or how hard they
worked to develop their talent. True fairness is about being impartial,
nonpartisan—proverbially, “letting the players
play.”


One of Hayek’s problems with the kind of justice that amounts to
making sure the good guys win is that it tends to turn society’s
basic structure into a political football, which tends to squander
gains from trade. To Hayek, again, true justice is about letting the
players play, in the same way as pareto-improving economic coordination
is about letting the players
 play. (See also Gaus 2016.)[12]
5.4 Just Price


Whether we realize gains requires only that we trade, not that we
trade at any particular price. Thus, we don’t want to focus on
price when the wealth of nations has everything to do with gains from
trade and nothing to do with price.


Indeed, Hayek observes, being obsessed with just price would make
trading less likely, which would tend to squander some of the
cooperative surplus. Much of Hayek’s aversion to justice stems
from a sense that (for thousands of years) talk of justice has had a
way or turning into talk of just price (Hayek 1976, 73). This
makes prices appear morally important, which to Hayek is a 
mirage.[13]
Of Adam Smith’s butchers and bakers, Hayek says,

Precisely because they were interested only
in who would offer the best price for their products, they reached
persons wholly unknown to them, whose standard of life they thereby
enhanced much more than they could have that of their
neighbors… (Hayek 1978b, 60).


Hayek’s dismissal of social justice as a mirage is a
gratuitously tendentious way of packaging his actual view. However, the
motive for his dismissal is understandable: namely his dread of the
prospect of licensing a justice czar to intervene to make sure prices
are fair, thus derailing the wealth-creating spontaneous trading of a
free society within the rule of law. Paraphrasing Michael Munger (2013), the closest thing we have to an omniscient social planner are the twin forces of supply and demand, but those forces speak to people through prices. When the state makes it a crime to charge what the market will bear, the only voice that could give people reliable, timely advice is struck dumb.
For example,
If there is a shortage of refrigerants during a power failure, and if price-gougers are free to charge whatever the market will bear for ice, then people who want ice for no better reason than to chill warm beer are systematically outbid by buyers to whom the ice is worth a great deal more than that. This is a good thing. Customers who want ice to chill insulin or baby formula bid the price up to a level that secures their supply by shutting out the beer drinkers. In effect, beer-cooling two-dollar ice disappears from the market, while life-saving twelve-dollar ice remains in adequate supply. By contrast, if the price of ice is legally prevented from rising above $2, then two things happen, not one. First, as per the standard neoclassical model, ice supply falls because suppliers do not supply as much ice at a lower price. Second, there is a tragic distributive implication overlooked by the standard analysis. Namely, if prices are capped at $2, then buyers who want ice only to chill their beer are still in the market. Beer drinkers will consume some fraction of the scarce supply that a free-floating price would have reserved for insulin users who need it more. When we look at the deadweight loss triangle on the standard equilibrium model, we miss this second effect (Schmidtz 2016b offers graphical analysis as well). 

The standard neoclassical model assumes that it is the lowest value buyers who are shut out by the controlled price. However, it is a robustly replicable result of classroom auction experiments that the empirical scope of the tragedy of price controls is larger than that predicted by neoclassical theory. The difference has to to with, as Hayek might have said, knowledge that is effectively embodied only in prices. In capping the price of ice at $2, we ensured that rising prices would not signal low-value consumers that new special circumstances have given them special reason to defer to high-value consumers.  We intuitively endorse price controls on grounds of social justice, as if it would be unfair to let insulin users outbid beer drinkers for ice when supply runs short. But our intuition does not survive scrutiny. The canonical case for price controls applies when an economy is in some way under siege and supply is fixed (or in any case inelastic). In this strongest case for price controls, there is a distributive problem. In the abstract, we think that equal access, that is, beer drinkers ending up with an equal share of the ice, is in some way fair.  That appearance of fairness is a mirage. 

Hayek never doubts that we sometimes need legislation, but he thinks
the aim of legislation should be to make things better, not fairer; to
make things more productive, not more level; to channel innovative
thinking in the direction of wealth creation, not wealth capture. Hayek
in fact endorses norms of pure procedural justice, and would agree that
there is such a thing, after all, as fairness. True fairness, he would
say, is about letting players play on a more or less level playing
field, but he would insist that this is not about making sure everyone
wins their share. Hayek saw a free society as one where people are
evaluated on basis of how well they perform, not how hard they
try—what they produce, not what they intend.