Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) has always played a key role in any
history of science and, in many histories of philosophy, he is a, if
not the, central figure of the scientific revolution of the
17th Century. His work in physics or natural philosophy,
astronomy, and the methodology of science still evoke debate after
over 400 years.  His role in promoting the Copernican theory and his
travails and trials with the Roman Church are stories that still
require re-telling. This article attempts to provide an overview of
these aspects of Galileo’s life and work, but does so by focusing in a
new way on his arguments concerning the nature of matter. 
 
1. Brief Biography


Galileo was born on February 15, 1564 in Pisa. By the time he died on
January 8, 1642 (but see problems with the date, Machamer 1998, pp. 
24–5) he was as famous as any person in Europe. Moreover, when 
he was born there was no such thing as ‘science’, yet by 
the time he died science was well on its way to becoming a discipline
and its concepts and method a whole philosophical system.


Galileo and his family moved to Florence in 1572. He started to study
for the priesthood, but left and enrolled for a medical degree at the 
University of Pisa. He never completed this degree, but instead 
studied mathematics notably with Ostilio Ricci, the mathematician of 
the Tuscan court. Later he visited the mathematician Christopher 
Clavius in Rome and started a correspondence with Guildobaldo del 
Monte. He applied and was turned down for a position in Bologna, but 
a few years later in 1589, with the help of Clavius and del Monte, he
was appointed to the chair of mathematics in Pisa.


In 1592 he was appointed, at a much higher salary, to the position of
mathematician at the University of Padua. While in Padua he met 
Marina Gamba, and in 1600 their daughter Virginia was born. In 1601 
they had another daughter Livia, and in 1606 a son Vincenzo.


It was during his Paduan period that Galileo worked out much of his 
mechanics and began his work with the telescope. In 1610 he published
The Starry Messenger, and soon after accepted a position as
Mathematician,a non-teaching post at University of Pisa and
Philosopher to the Grand Duke of Tuscany.  A facsimile copy of The
Library of Congress’ manuscript of The Starry Messenger and a
symposium discussing details about the manuscript, may be found in
Hessler and DeSimone 2013. Galileo had lobbied hard for this position
at the Medici court and even named the moons of Jupiter, which he
discovered, after the Medici.  There were many reasons hewanted
move, but he says he did not like the wine in the Venice area and he
had to teach too many students. Late in 1610, the Collegio Romano in
Rome, where Clavius taught, certified the results of Galileo’s
telescopic observations. In 1611 he became a member of what is perhaps
the first scientific society, the Academia dei Lincei.


In 1612 Galileo published a Discourse on Floating Bodies, 
and in 1613, Letters on the Sunspots. In this latter work he
first expressed his position in favor of Copernicus. In 1614 both his
daughters entered the Franciscan convent of Saint Mathew, near 
Florence. Virginia became Sister Maria Celeste and Livia, Sister 
Arcangela. Marina Gamba, their mother, had been left behind in Padua 
when Galileo moved to Florence.


In 1613–4 Galileo entered into discussions of Copernicanism 
through his student Benedetto Castelli, and wrote a Letter to 
Castelli. In 1616 he transformed this into the Letter to the
Grand Duchess Christina. In February 1616, the Sacred 
Congregation of the Index condemned Copernicus’ book On the 
Revolution of the Heavenly Orbs, pending correction. Galileo 
then was called to an audience with Cardinal Robert Bellarmine and 
advised not to teach or defend Copernican theory.


In 1623 Galileo published The Assayer dealing with the 
comets and arguing they were sublunary phenomena. In this book, he 
made some of his most famous methodological pronouncements including 
the claim the book of nature is written in the language of 
mathematics.


The same year Maffeo Barberini, Galileo’s supporter and friend, was 
elected Pope Urban VIII. Galileo felt empowered to begin work on his 
Dialogues concerning the Two Great World Systems. It was 
published with an imprimatur from Florence (and not Rome) in 1632. 
Shortly afterwards the Inquisition banned its sale, and Galileo was 
ordered to Rome for trial. In 1633 he was condemned. There is more 
about these events and their implications in the final section of 
this article, 
 Galileo and the Church.
 


In 1634, while Galileo was under house arrest, his daughter, Maria 
Celeste died (cf. Sobel 1999). At this time he began work on his 
final book, Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations concerning
Two New Sciences. This book was smuggled out of Italy and 
published in Holland. Galileo died early in 1642. Due to his 
conviction, he was buried obscurely until 1737.


For detailed biographical material, the best and classic work dealing
with Galileo’s life and scientific achievements is Stillman
Drake’s Galileo at Work (1978). More recently, J.L. Heilbron
has written a magnificent biography, Galileo, that touches on
all the multiple facets of Galileo’s life (2010). A strange
popularization based somewhat on Heilbron’s book, by Adam Gopik,
appeared in The New Yorker in 2013.
2. Introduction and Background


For many people, in the Seventeenth Century as well as today,
Galileo was and is seen as the ‘hero’ of modern science.
Galileo discovered many things: with his telescope, he first saw the
moons of Jupiter and the mountains on the Moon; he determined the
parabolic path of projectiles and calculated the law of free fall on
the basis of experiment. He is known for defending and making popular
the Copernican system, using the telescope to examine the heavens,
inventing the microscope, dropping stones from towers and masts,
playing with pendula and clocks, being the first ‘real’
experimental scientist, advocating the relativity of motion, and
creating a mathematical physics. His major claim to fame probably
comes from his trial by the Catholic Inquisition and his purported
role as heroic rational, modern man in the subsequent history of the
‘warfare’ between science and religion. This is no small
set of accomplishments for one 17th-century Italian, who
was the son of a court musician and who left the University of Pisa
without a degree.


One of the good things about dealing with such momentous times and 
people is that they are full of interpretive fecundity. Galileo and 
his work provide one such occasion. Since his death in 1642, Galileo 
has been the subject of manifold interpretations and much 
controversy. The use of Galileo’s work and the invocations of his 
name make a fascinating history (Segre 1991, Palmerino and Thijssen 
2004,  Finocchiaro 2005), but this is not our topic here.


Philosophically, Galileo has been used to exemplify many different
themes, usually as a side bar to what the particular writer wished to
make the hallmark of the scientific revolution or the nature of good
science. Whatever was good about the new science or science in
general, it was Galileo who started it. One early 20th Century
tradition of Galileo scholarship used to divvy up Galileo’s work into
three or four parts: (1) his physics, (2) his astronomy, and (3) his
methodology, which could include his method of Biblical interpretation
and his thoughts about the nature of proof or demonstration. In this
tradition, typical treatments dealt with his physical and astronomical
discoveries and their background and/or who were Galileo’s
predecessors. More philosophically, many would ask how his mathematics
relates to his natural philosophy? How did he produce a telescope and
use his telescopic observations to provide evidence in favor of
Copernicanism (Reeves 2008)? Was he an experimentalist (Settle 1961,
196, 1983, 1992; Palmieri 2008), a mathematical Platonist
(Koyré 1939), an Aristotelian emphasizing experience (Geymonat
1954), precursor of modern positivist science (Drake 1978), or maybe
an Archimedean (Machamer 1998), who might have used a revised
Scholastic method of proof (Wallace 1992)? Or did he have no method
and just fly like an eagle in the way that geniuses do (Feyerabend
1975)? Behind each of these claims there was some attempt to place
Galileo in an intellectual context that brought out the background to
his achievements. Some emphasize his debt to the artisan/engineer
practical tradition (Rossi 1962), others his mathematics (Giusti1993,
Peterson 2011,, Feldhay 1998, Palmieri 2001, 2003, Renn 2002,
Palmerino 2015,), some his mixed (or subalternate) mathematics
(Machamer 1978, 1998, Lennox 1986, Wallace 1992), others his debt to
atomism (Shea 1972, Redondi 1983), and some his use of Hellenistic and
Medieval impetus theory (Duhem 1954, Claggett 1966, Shapere 1974) or
the idea that discoveries bring new data into science (Wootton
(2015).


Yet most everyone in this tradition seemed to think the three 
areas—physics, astronomy and methodology—were somewhat 
distinct and represented different Galilean endeavors. More recent 
historical research has followed contemporary intellectual fashion 
and shifted foci bringing new dimensions to our understanding of 
Galileo by studying his rhetoric (Moss 1993, Feldhay 1998, Spranzi 
2004), the power structures of his social milieu (Biagioli 1993, 
2006), his personal quest for acknowledgment (Shea and Artigas 2003) 
and more generally has emphasized the larger social and cultural 
history, specifically the court and papal culture, in which Galileo 
functioned (Redondi 1983, Biagioli 1993, 2006, Heilbron 2010).


In an intellectualist recidivist mode, this entry will outline his 
investigations in physics and astronomy and exhibit, in a new way, 
how these all cohered in a unified inquiry. In setting this path out 
I shall show why, at the end of his life, Galileo felt compelled (in 
some sense of necessity) to write the Discourses Concerning the 
Two New Sciences, which stands as a true completion of his 
overall project and is not just a reworking of his earlier research 
that he reverted to after his trial, when he was blind and under 
house arrest. Particularly, we shall try to show why both of the 
two new sciences, especially the first, were so important (a
topic not much treated except recently by Biener 2004 and Raphael
2011). In passing, we shall touch on his methodology and his
mathematics (and here refer you to some of the recent work by Palmieri
2001, 2003). At the end we shall have some words about Galileo, the
Catholic Church and his trial.
3. Galileo’s Scientific Story


The philosophical thread that runs through Galileo’s intellectual life
is a strong and increasing desire to find a new conception of what
constitutes natural philosophy and how natural philosophy ought to be
pursued. Galileo signals this goal clearly when he leaves Padua in
1611 to return to Florence and the court of the Medici and asks for
the title Philosopher as well as Mathematician.
This was not just a status-affirming request, but also a reflection of
his large-scale goal. What Galileo accomplished by the end of his life
in 1642 was a reasonably articulated replacement for the traditional
set of analytical concepts connected with the Aristotelian tradition
of natural philosophy. He offered, in place of the Aristotelian
categories, a set of mechanical concepts that were accepted by most
everyone who afterwards developed the ‘new sciences’, and
which, in some form or another, became the hallmark of the new
philosophy. His way of thinking became the way of the scientific
revolution (and yes, there was such a ‘revolution’ pace
Shapin 1996 and others, cf. selections in Lindberg 1990, Osler
2000.)


Some scholars might wish to describe what Galileo achieved in
psychological terms as an introduction of new mental models (Palmieri
2003) or a new model of intelligibility (Machamer 1998, Adams et
al. 2017). However phrased, Galileo’s main move was to de-throne
the Aristotelian physical categories of the one celestial (the aether
or fifth element) and four terrestrial elements (fire, air, water and
earth) and their differential directional natures of motion
(circular,  and up and down). In their place he left only one
element, corporeal matter, and a different way of describing the
properties and motions of matter in terms of the mathematics of the
equilibria of proportional relations (Palmieri 2001) that were
typified by the Archimedian simple machines—the balance, the
inclined plane, the lever, and, he includes, the pendulum (Machamer
1998, Machamer and Hepburn 2004, Palmieri 2008). In doing so Galileo
changed the acceptable way of talking about matter and its motion, and
so ushered in the mechanical tradition that characterizes so much of
modern science, even today. But this would take more explaining
(Dijksterhuis 1950, Machamer et al. 2000, Gaukroger 2009).


As a main focus underlying Galileo’s accomplishments, it is useful to
see him as being interested in finding a unified theory of matter, a 
mathematical theory of the material stuff that constitutes the whole 
of the cosmos. Perhaps he didn’t realize that this was his grand goal
until the time he actually wrote the Discourses on the Two New 
Sciences in 1638. Despite working on problems of the nature of 
matter from 1590 onwards, he could not have written his final work 
much earlier than 1638, certainly not before The Starry 
Messenger of 1610, and actually not before the 
Dialogues on the Two Chief World Systems of 1632.  Before
1632, he did not have the theory and evidence he needed to support his
claim about unified, singular matter. He had thought deeply about the
nature of matter before 1610 and had tried to work out how best to
describe matter, but the idea of unified matter theory had to
wait on the establishment of principles of matter’s motion on a moving
earth. And this he did not do until the
Dialogues.


Galileo began his critique of Aristotle in the 1590 manuscript, 
De Motu. The first part of this manuscript deals with 
terrestrial matter and argues that Aristotle’s theory has it wrong. 
For Aristotle, sublunary or terrestrial matter is of four kinds 
[earth, air, water, and fire] and has two forms, heavy and light, 
which by nature are different principles of (natural) motion, down 
and up. Galileo, using an Archimedian model of floating bodies and 
later the balance, argues that there is only one principle of motion,
the heavy (gravitas), and that lightness (or 
levitas) is to be explained by the heavy bodies moving so as
to displace or extrude other bits of matter in such a direction that
explains why the other bits rise. So on his view heaviness (or 
gravity) is the cause of all natural terrestrial motion. But
this left him with a problem as to the nature of the heavy, the 
nature of gravitas? In De Motu, he argued that the 
moving arms of a balance could be used as a model for treating all 
problems of motion. In this model heaviness is the proportionality of
weight of one object on one arm of a balance to that of the weight of
another body on the other arm of the balance. In the context of 
floating bodies, weight is the ‘weight’ of one body minus
weight of the medium.


Galileo realized quickly these characterizations were insufficient, 
and so began to explore how heaviness was relative to the different 
specific gravities of bodies having the same volume. He was trying to
figure out what is the concept of heaviness that is characteristic of
all matter. What he failed to work out, and this was probably the 
reason why he never published De Motu, was this positive 
characterization of heaviness. There seemed to be no way to find 
standard measures of heaviness that would work across different 
substances. So at this point he did not have useful replacement 
categories.


A while later, in his 1600 manuscript, Le Mecaniche (Galileo
1600/1960) he introduces the concept of momento, a 
quasi force concept that applies to a body at a moment and 
which is somehow proportional to weight or specific gravity (Galluzzi
1979). Still, he has no good way to measure or compare specific 
gravities of bodies of different kinds and his notebooks during this 
early 17th-century period reflect his trying again and 
again to find a way to bring all matter under a single proportional 
measuring scale. He tries to study acceleration along an inclined 
plane and to find a way to think of what changes acceleration brings.
In this regard and during this period he attempts to examine the 
properties of percussive effect of bodies of different specific 
gravities, or how they have differential impacts. Yet the details and
categories of how to properly treat weight and movement elude him.


One of Galileo’s problems was that the Archimedian simple machines
that he was using as his model of intelligibility, especially the
balance, are not easily conceived of in a dynamic way (but see
Machamer and Woody 1994).  Except for the inclined plane, time is not
a property of the action of simple machines that one would normally
attend to. In discussing a balance, one does not normally think about
how fast an arm of the balance descends nor how fast a body on the
opposite arm is rising (though Galileo in his Postils to
Rocco ca. 1634–45 does; see Palmieri 2005). The converse is
also true. It is difficult to model ‘dynamic’ phenomena
that deal with the rate of change of different bodies as problems of
balance arms moving upwards or downwards because of differential
weights. So it was that Galileo’s classic dynamic puzzle about how to
describe time and the force of percussion, or the force of body’s
impact, would remain unsolved, He could not, throughout his life find
systematic relations among specific gravities, height of fall and
percussive forces. In the Fifth Day of the Discouses, he
presciently explores the concept of the force of
percussion. This concept will become, after his death, one of the
most fecund ways to think about matter.


In 1603–9, Galileo worked long at doing experiments on inclined
planes and most importantly with pendula. The pendulum again 
exhibited to Galileo that acceleration and, therefore, time is a 
crucial variable. Moreover, isochrony—equal times for equal 
lengths of string, despite different weights—goes someway 
towards showing that time is a possible form for describing the 
equilibrium (or ratio) that needs to be made explicit in representing
motion. It also shows that in at least one case time can displace 
weight as a crucial variable. Work on the force of percussion and 
inclined planes also emphasized acceleration and time, and during 
this time (ca. 1608) he wrote a little treatise on acceleration that 
remained unpublished.


We see from this period that Galileo’s law of free fall arises out of
this struggle to find the proper categories for his new science of 
matter and motion. Galileo accepts, probably as early as the 1594 
draft of Le Mecaniche, that natural motions might be 
accelerated. But that accelerated motion is properly measured against
time is an idea enabled only later, chiefly through his failure to 
find any satisfactory dependence on place and specific gravity. 
Galileo must have observed that the speeds of bodies increase as they
move downwards and, perhaps, do so naturally, particularly in the 
cases of the pendulum, the inclined plane, in free fall, and during 
projectile motion. Also at this time he begins to think about 
percussive force, the force that a body acquires during its motion 
that shows upon impact. For many years he thinks that the correct 
science of these changes should describe how bodies change according 
to where they are on their paths. Specifically, it seems that height 
is crucial. Percussive force is directly related to height and the 
motion of the pendulum seems to involve essentially equilibrium with 
respect to the height of the bob (and time also, but isochrony did 
not lead directly to a recognition of time’s importance.)


The law of free fall, expressed as time squared, was discovered by 
Galileo through the inclined plane experiments (Drake 1999, v. 2), 
but he attempted to find an explanation of this relation, and the 
equivalent mean proportional relation, through a velocity-distance 
relation. His later and correct definition of natural acceleration as
dependent on time is an insight gained through recognizing the 
physical significance of the mean proportional relation (Machamer and
Hepburn 2004; for a different analysis of Galileo’s discovery of free
fall see Renn et al. 2004.) Yet Galileo would not publish anything 
making time central to motion until 1638, in Discourses on the 
Two New Sciences (Galileo 1638/1954.) But let us return to the 
main matter.


In 1609 Galileo begins his work with the telescope. Many interpreters
have taken this to be an interlude irrelevant to his physics. The
Starry Messenger, which describes his early telescopic
discoveries, was published in 1610. There are many ways to describe
Galileo’s findings but for present purposes they are remarkable as his
start at dismantling of the celestial/terrestrial distinction
(Feyerabend 1975). Perhaps the most unequivocal case of this is when
he analogizes the mountains on the moon to mountains in Bohemia. The
abandonment of the heaven/earth dichotomy implied that all matter is
of the same kind, whether celestial or terrestrial. Further, if there
is only one kind of matter there can be only one kind of natural
motion, one kind of motion that this matter has by nature. So it has
to be that one law of motion will hold for earth, fire and the
heavens. This is a far stronger claim than he had made back in 1590.
In addition, he described of his discovery of the four moons circling
Jupiter, which he called politically the Medicean stars (after the
ruling family in Florence, his patrons). In the Copernican system, the
earth having a moon revolve around it was unique and so seemingly
problematic. Jupiter’s having planets made the earth-moon system
non-unique and so again the earth became like the other planets. 
Some fascinating background and treatments of this period of Galileo’s
life and motivations have recently appeared (Biagoli 2006, Reeves
2008, and the essays in Hessler and De Simone 2013).


In 1611, at the request of Cardinal Robert Bellarmine, the professors
at the Collegio Romano confirmed Galileo’s telescopic observations,
with a slight dissent from Father Clavius, who felt that the moon’s
surface was probably not uneven. Later that year Clavius changed his
mind.


A few years later in his Letters on the Sunspots (1612),
Galileo enumerated more reasons for the breakdown of the
celestial/terrestrial distinction. Basically the ideas here were that
the sun has spots (maculae) and rotated in circular motion,
and, most importantly Venus had phases just like the moon, which was
the spatial key to physically locating Venus as being between the Sun
and the earth, and as revolving around the Sun. In these letters he
claimed that the new telescopic evidence supported the Copernican
theory. Certainly the phases of Venus contradicted the Ptolemaic
ordering of the planets.


Later in 1623, Galileo argued for a quite mistaken material thesis. 
In The Assayer, he tried to show that comets were sublunary 
phenomena and that their properties could be explained by optical 
refraction. While this work stands as a masterpiece of scientific 
rhetoric, it is somewhat strange that Galileo should have argued 
against the super-lunary nature of comets, which the great Danish 
astronomer Tycho Brahe had demonstrated earlier.


Yet even with all these changes, two things were missing. First, he 
needed to work out some general principles concerning the nature of 
motion for this new unified matter. Specifically, given his 
Copernicanism, he needed to work out, at least qualitatively, a way 
of thinking about the motions of matter on a moving earth. The change
here was not just the shift from a Ptolemaic, Earth-centered 
planetary system to a Sun-centered Copernican model. For Galileo, 
this shift was also from a mathematical planetary model to a 
physically realizable cosmography. It was necessary for him to 
describe the planets and the earth as real material bodies. In this 
respect Galileo differed dramatically from Ptolemy, Copernicus, or 
even Tycho Brahe, who had demolished the crystalline spheres by his 
comets-as-celestial argument and flirted with physical models 
(Westman 1976). So on the new Galilean scheme there is only one kind 
of matter, and it may have only one kind of motion natural to it. 
Therefore, he had to devise (or shall we say, discover) principles of
local motion that will fit a central sun, planets moving around that 
sun, and a daily whirling earth.


This he did by introducing two new principles. In Day One of his 
Dialogues on the Two Chief World Systems (1632), Galileo
argued that all natural motion is circular. Then, in Day Two, he
introduced his version of the famous principle of the relativity of
observed motion. This latter held that motions in common among bodies
could not be observed. Only those motions differing from a shared
common motion could be seen as moving. The joint effect of these two
principles was to say that all matter shares a common motion,
circular, and so only motions different from the common, say up and
down motion, could be directly observed. Of course, neither of the
principles originated with Galileo. They had predecessors. But no one
needed them for the reasons that he did, namely that they were
necessitated by a unified cosmological matter.


In Day Three, Galileo dramatically argues for the Copernican
system. Salviati, the persona of Galileo, has Simplicio, the ever
astounded Aristotelian, make use of astronomical observations,
especially the facts that Venus has phases and that Venus and Mercury
are never far from the Sun, to construct a diagram of the planetary
positions. The resulting diagram neatly corresponds to the Copernican
model. Earlier in Day One, he had repeated his claims from The
Starry Messenger, noting that the earth must be like the moon in
being spherical, dense and solid, and having rugged mountains.
Clearly the moon could not be a crystalline sphere as held by some
Aristotelians.


In the Dialogues, things are more complicated than we have
just sketched. Galileo, as noted, argues for a circular natural
motion, so that all things on the earth and in the atmosphere revolve
in a common motion with the earth so that the principle of the
relativity of observed motion will apply to phenomena such as balls
dropped from the masts of moving ships. Yet he also introduces at
places a straight-line natural motion. For example, in Day Three, he
gives a quasi account for a Coriolis-type effect for the winds
circulating about the earth by means of this straight-line motion
(Hooper 1998).  Further, in Day Four, when he is giving his proof of
the Copernican theory by sketching out how the three-way moving earth
mechanically moves the tides, he nuances his matter theory by
attributing to the element water the power of retaining an impetus for
motion such that it can provide a reciprocal movement once it is
sloshed against a side of a basin. This was not Galileo’s first
dealing with water. We saw it in De Motu in 1590, with
submerged bodies, but more importantly he learned much more while
working through his dispute over floating bodies (Discourse on
Floating Bodies, 1612).  In fact a large part of this debate
turned on the exact nature of water as matter, and what kind of
mathematical proportionality could be used to correctly describe it
and bodies moving in it (cf. Palmieri, 1998, 2004a).


The final chapter of Galileo’s scientific story comes in 1638 with 
the publication of Discourses of the Two New Sciences. The 
second science, discussed (so to speak) in the last two days, dealt 
with the principles of local motion. These have been much commented 
upon in the Galilean literature. Here is where he enunciates the law 
of free fall, the parabolic path for projectiles and his physical 
“discoveries” (Drake 1999, v. 2). But the first two days,
the first science, has been much misunderstood and little discussed. 
This first science, misleadingly, has been called the science of the 
strength of materials, and so seems to have found a place in history 
of engineering, since such a course is still taught today. However, 
this first science is not about the strength of materials per 
se. It is Galileo’s attempt to provide a mathematical science of
his unified matter. (See Machamer 1998, Machamer and Hepburn 2004, 
and the detailed work spelling this out by Biener 2004.) Galileo 
realizes that before he can work out a science of the motion of 
matter, he must have some way of showing that the nature of matter 
may be mathematically characterized. Both the mathematical nature of 
matter and the mathematical principles of motion he believes belong 
to the science of mechanics, which is the name he gives for this new 
way of philosophizing. Remember that specific gravities did not work.


So it is in Day One that he begins to discuss how to describe, 
mathematically (or geometrically), the causes of how beams break. He 
is searching for the mathematical description of the essential nature
of matter. He rules out certain questions that might use infinite 
atoms as basis for this discussion, and continues on giving reasons 
for various properties that matter has. Among these are questions of 
the constitution of matter, properties of matter due to its 
heaviness, the properties of the media within which bodies move and 
what is the cause of a body’s coherence as a single material body. 
The most famous of these discussions is his account of acceleration 
of falling bodies, that whatever their weight would fall equally fast
in a vacuum. The Second Day lays out the mathematical principles 
concerning how bodies break. He does this all by reducing the 
problems of matter to problems of how a lever and a balance function.
Something he had begun back in 1590, though this time he believes he 
is getting it right, showing mathematically how bits of matter 
solidify and stick together, and do so by showing how they break into
bits. The ultimate explanation of the “sticking” eluded 
him since he felt he would have to deal with infinitesimals to really
solve this problem.


The second science, Days Three and Four of Discorsi, dealt
with proper principles of local motion, but this was now motion for
all matter (not just sublunary stuff) and it took the categories of
time and acceleration as basic. Interestingly Galileo, here again,
revisited or felt the need to include some anti-Aristotelian points
about motion as he had done back in 1590. The most famous example of
his doing this, is his “beautiful thought experiment”,
whereby he compares two bodies of the same material of different sizes
and points out that according to Aristotle they fall at different
speeds, the heavier one faster. Then, he says, join the bodies
together. In this case the lightness of the small one ought to slow
down the faster larger one, and so they together fall as a speed less
than the heavy fell in the first instance. Then his punch line: but
one might also conceive of the two bodies joined as being one larger
body, in which case it would fall even more quickly. So there is a
contradiction in the Aristotelian position (Palmieri 2005). His
projected Fifth Day would have treated the grand principle of the
power of matter in motion due to impact. He calls it the force of
percussion, which deals with two bodies interacting. This problem he
does not solve, and it won’t be solved until René Descartes,
probably following Isaac Beeckman, turns the problem into finding the
equilibrium points for colliding bodies.


The sketch above provides the basis for understanding Galileo’s 
changes. He has a new science of matter, a new physical cosmography, 
and a new science of local motion. In all these he is using a 
mathematical mode of description based upon, though somewhat changed 
from, the proportional geometry of Euclid, Book VI and Archimedes 
(for details on the change see Palmieri 2002).


It is in this way that Galileo developed the new categories of the 
mechanical new science, the science of matter and motion. His new 
categories utilized some of the basic principles of traditional 
mechanics, to which he added the category of time and so emphasized 
acceleration. But throughout, he was working out the details about 
the nature of matter so that it could be understood as uniform and 
treated in a way that allowed for coherent discussion of the 
principles of motion. That a unified matter became accepted and its 
nature became one of the problems for the ‘new science’ 
that followed was due to Galileo. Thereafter, matter really mattered.
4. Galileo and the Church


No account of Galileo’s importance to philosophy can be complete if 
it does not discuss Galileo’s condemnation and the Galileo affair 
(Finocchiaro 1989). The end of the episode is simply stated. In late 
1632, after publishing Dialogues on the Two Chief World 
Systems, Galileo was ordered to go to Rome to be examined by the
Holy Office of the Inquisition. In January 1633, a very ill Galileo 
made an arduous journey to Rome. Finally, in April 1633 Galileo was 
called before the Holy Office. This was tantamount to a charge of 
heresy, and he was urged to repent (Shea and Artigas, 183f). 
Specifically, he had been charged with teaching and defending the 
Copernican doctrine that holds that the Sun is at the center of the 
universe and that the earth moves. This doctrine had been deemed 
heretical in 1616, and Copernicus’ book had been placed on the Index of 
Prohibited Books, pending correction.


Galileo was called four times for a hearing; the last was on June 21,
1633. The next day, 22 June, Galileo was taken to the church of Santa
Maria sopra Minerva, and ordered to kneel while his sentence was 
read. It was declared that he was “vehemently suspect of 
heresy”. Galileo was made to recite and sign a formal 
abjuration:


I have been judged vehemently suspect of heresy, that is, of having 
held and believed that the sun in the centre of the universe and 
immoveable, and that the earth is not at the center of same, and that
it does move. Wishing however, to remove from the minds of your 
Eminences and all faithful Christians this vehement suspicion 
reasonably conceived against me, I abjure with a sincere heart and 
unfeigned faith, I curse and detest the said errors and heresies, and
generally all and every error, heresy, and sect contrary to the Holy 
Catholic Church. (Quoted in Shea and Artigas 194)




Galileo was not imprisoned but had his sentence commuted to house 
arrest. In December 1633 he was allowed to retire to his villa in 
Arcetri, outside of Florence. During this time he finished his last 
book, Discourses on the Two New Sciences, which was 
published in 1638, in Holland, by Louis Elzivier. The book does not 
mention Copernicanism at all, and Galileo professed amazement at how 
it could have been published. He died on January 8, 1642.


There has been much controversy over the events leading up to 
Galileo’s trial, and it seems that each year we learn more about what
actually happened. There is also controversy over the legitimacy of 
the charges against Galileo, both in terms of their content and 
judicial procedure. The summary judgment about this latter point is 
that the Church most probably acted within its authority and on 
‘good’ grounds given the condemnation of Copernicus, and,
as we shall see, the fact that Galileo had been warned by Cardinal 
Bellarmine earlier in 1616 not to defend or teach Copernicanism. There 
were also a number of political factors given the Counter 
Reformation, the 30 Years War (Miller 2008), and the problems with 
the papacy of Urban VIII that served as further impetus to Galileo’s 
condemnation (McMullin, ed. 2005). It has even been argued (Redondi 
1983) that the charge of Copernicanism was a compromise plea bargain 
to avoid the truly heretical charge of atomism. Though this latter 
hypothesis has not found many willing supporters.


Legitimacy of the content, that is, of the condemnation of 
Copernicus, is much more problematic. Galileo had addressed this 
problem in 1615, when he wrote his Letter to Castelli (which
was transformed into the Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina).
In this letter he had argued that, of course, the Bible was an 
inspired text, yet two truths could not contradict one another. So in
cases where it was known that science had achieved a true result, the
Bible ought to be interpreted in such a way that makes it compatible 
with this truth. The Bible, he argued, was an historical document 
written for common people at an historical time, and it had to be 
written in language that would make sense to them and lead them 
towards the true religion.


Much philosophical controversy, before and after Galileo’s time,
revolves around this doctrine of the two truths and their seeming
incompatibility. Which of course, leads us right to such questions as:
“What is truth?” and “How is truth known or
shown?”


Cardinal Bellarmine was willing to countenance scientific truth if it
could be proven or demonstrated (McMullin 1998). But Bellarmine held 
that the planetary theories of Ptolemy and Copernicus (and presumably
Tycho Brahe) were only hypotheses and due to their mathematical, 
purely calculatory character were not susceptible to physical proof. 
This is a sort of instrumentalist, anti-realist position (Duhem 1985,
Machamer 1976). There are any number of ways to argue for some sort 
of instrumentalism. Duhem (1985) himself argued that science is not 
metaphysics, and so only deals with useful conjectures that enable us
to systematize the phenomena. Subtler versions, without an Aquinian 
metaphysical bias, of this position have been argued subsequently and
more fully by van Fraassen (1996) and others. Less sweepingly, it 
could reasonably be argued that both Ptolemy and Copernicus’ theories
were primarily mathematical, and that what Galileo was defending was 
not Copernicus’ theory per se, but a physical realization of it. In 
fact, it might be better to say the Copernican theory that Galileo 
was constructing was a physical realization of parts of Copernicus’ 
theory, which, by the way, dispensed with all the mathematical 
trappings (eccentrics, epicycles, Tusi couples and the like). Galileo
would be led to such a view by his concern with matter theory. Of 
course, put this way we are faced with the question of what 
constitutes identity conditions for a theory, or being the same 
theory. There is clearly a way in which Galileo’s Copernicus is not 
Copernicus and most certainly not Kepler.


The other aspect of all this which has been hotly debated is: what
constitutes proof or demonstration of a scientific claim? In 1616, the
same year that Copernicus’ book was placed on the Index of Prohibited
Books, Galileo was called before Cardinal Robert Bellarmine, head of
the Holy Office of the Inquisition and warned not to defend or teach
Copernicanism. During this year Galileo also completed a
manuscript, On the Ebb and Flow of the Tides. The argument of
this manuscript will turn up 17 years later as day Four of
Galileo’s Dialogues concerning the Two Chief World Systems.
This argument, about the tides, Galileo believed provided proof of the
truth of the Copernican theory. But insofar as it possibly does, it
provides an argument for the physical plausibility of Galileo’s
Copernican theory. Let’s look more closely at his argument.


Galileo argues that the motion of the earth (diurnal and axial) is 
the only conceivable (or maybe plausible) physical cause for the 
reciprocal regular motion of the tides. He restricts the possible 
class of causes to mechanical motions, and so rules out Kepler’s 
attribution of the moon as a cause. How could the moon without any 
connection to the seas cause the tides to ebb and flow? Such an 
explanation would be the invocation of magic or occult powers. So the
motion of the earth causes the waters in the basins of the seas to 
slosh back and forth, and since the earth’s diurnal and axial 
rotation is regular, so are the periods of the tides; the backward 
movement is due to the residual impetus built up in the water during 
its slosh. Differences in tidal flows are due to the differences in 
the physical conformations of the basins in which they flow (for 
background and more detail, see Palmieri 1998).


Albeit mistaken, Galileo’s commitment to mechanically intelligible
causation makes this is a plausible argument. One can see why Galileo
thinks he has some sort of proof for the motion of the earth, and
therefore for Copernicanism. Yet one can also see why Bellarmine and
the instrumentalists would not be impressed. First, they do not accept
Galileo’s restriction of possible causes to mechanically intelligible
causes. Second, the tidal argument does not directly deal with the
annual motion of the earth about the sun. And third, the argument does
not touch anything about the central position of the sun or about the
periods of the planets as calculated by Copernicus. So at its best,
Galileo’s argument is an inference to the best partial explanation of
one point in Copernicus’ theory. Yet when this argument is added to
the earlier telescopic observations that show the improbabilities of
the older celestial picture, to the fact that Venus has phases like
the moon and so must revolve around the sun, to the principle of the
relativity of perceived motion which neutralizes the physical motion
arguments against a moving earth, it was enough for Galileo to believe
that he had the necessary proof to convince the Copernican
doubters. Unfortunately, it was not until after Galileo’s death and
the acceptance of a unified material cosmology, utilizing the
presuppositions about matter and motion that were published in
the Discourses on the Two New Sciences, that people were
ready for such proofs. But this could occur only after Galileo had
changed the acceptable parameters for gaining knowledge and theorizing
about the world. 


To read many of the documents of Galileo’s trial see Finocchiaro 1989,
and Mayer 2012. To understand the long, tortuous, and fascinating
aftermath of the Galileo affair see Finocchiaro 2005, and for John
Paul II’s attempt see George Coyne’s article in McMullin 2005.