To most modern readers, it would stretch definitions to include
someone like Giovan Battista Della Porta (1535–1615) in an
encyclopedia of philosophy. In a typical assessment of
Porta’s Magia Naturalis, Wayne Shumaker writes:
 Occasionally [Porta] shows that he has actually
experimented, as in writing about the lodestone or burning-glasses. On
the whole, however, the treatise is backward-looking.  (1972: 120)


Yet philosophy in Porta’s time encompassed a far wider range of
topics than it does today, including cosmology, meteorology, and
physics; biology and human psychology; and moral philosophy and
politics. As a prolific writer on topics then associated with more or
less alternative currents to Aristotelian natural philosophy (Henry
2008), Porta became one of the most famous and popular figures in the
intellectual life of the second half of the sixteenth century and
beyond.[1] Porta
thus ranks amongst the many rather unorthodox praeternatural
philosophers in the traditional categories of the peripatetic
curriculum. In the rich intellectual ferment that eventually generated
the scientific revolution of the following century, Porta constitutes
a highly interesting transitional figure because he engaged with the
world of objects, craft and chemical substances. From this
“scientific underworld” occupied by the “professors
of secrets” emerged a naturalized concept of human beings and
innovative ideas about science (Smith 2009), which Porta amply (and
critically) reflects. His impressive number of texts are written in
very different literary genres, ranging from learned Latin treatises
to stage plays—mannerist comedies written in Italian, some of
which resonated widely and seem to have influenced Shakespeare (Clubb
1964, 2008). The wonders Porta produced onstage and in his laboratory
had a decidedly histrionic character, and perhaps this alignment of
theatre and nascent science provides one of the more coherent
perspectives on Porta’s many different intellectual endeavours
(Kodera 2012).


Verso of Frontispiece from G. B. Della Porta, De
Distillationibus libri IX. Argentorati: Zetzner 1609, courtesy
Universitätsbibliothek Wien.

The frontispiece to the De Distillationibus libri IX
(1609), with Porta’s portrait, gives a good impression of his
many divergent scientific interests, ranging from physiognomies,
astrology, ciphers, and the art of memory to distillation, optics,
magnetism, alchemy, cross-breeding and the embellishment of (mostly
female) bodies—as well as practical jokes.
 
1. Life and works
Born into a noble Neapolitan family in 1535, Porta published
his Magiae naturalis libri IIII in 1558. The immediate
success of this book firmly established Porta’s reputation as a
learned magus and professor of secrets in the European world. The book
saw sixteen Latin editions; six Italian, seven French and two Dutch
versions appeared by 1588 alone (Balbiani 2001), although in 1583 the
book ended up on the Madrid Index of Prohibited Books due to
Porta’s naturalistic approach to witchcraft. A second version in
1589 was enlarged to 20 books and purged of the infamous recipe for
witch’s unguent. Due to severe difficulties with ecclesiastical
censorship (the Roman Holy Office had begun legal proceedings against
Porta in the early 1570s), he remained under life-long surveillance by
the inquisition (Valente 1997).
Early in his life, Porta apparently founded an academy of secrets
dedicated to the study of natural phenomena. Its members could only be
appointed if they had discovered a hitherto unknown segreto
(Badaloni 1959/60). The meetings seem to have been held in
Porta’s Neapolitan palace. There also exists some intriguing
archaeological evidence for special subterranean meeting rooms under
Porta’s villa in Vico Equense, then a village just outside
Naples (Balbiani 2008). After 1558, Porta travelled widely, stopping
in Apulia, Calabria, Lombardy, Venice, and Paris. In Spain he seems to
have visited the court of Philip II, a renowned patron of alchemy who
sought miraculous medicines for himself and his family’s
ailments. The Magia Naturalis is, unsurprisingly, dedicated
to this important patron.  Porta presented Philip II with another book
on ciphers (De furtivis litterarum notis vulgo de ziferis libri
IV 1563), followed by L'arte del ricordare (1566), a
treatise on the art of memory (a Latin version appeared in 1602 under
the title Ars reminsicendi). In 1579 and during the following
years, Porta was repeatedly invited to Rome by Cardinal Luigi D'Este
(1538–1586), ostensibly to pursue his research into the secrets
of nature, but perhaps more importantly to enjoy some protection in
his household during his trial before the inquisition. 1580 found
Porta overseeing the construction of a parabolic mirror in Venice,
where he met Paolo Sarpi (1552–1623).
Having sold parts of his Neapolitan palazzo in the
preceding year, Porta returned to Naples in 1582 and began researching
the philosopher’s stone at the behest of Cardinal D'Este. In the
following two years he published two treaties on agriculture
(Pomarium 1583, Olivetum 1584) and his richly
illustrated Humana physiognomia (1584). In 1586 Porta was
probably again summoned before the Neapolitan Inquisition, perhaps
together with Luigi Tansillo (1510–1568), an influential poet
(and a close acquaintance of Giordano Bruno (1548–1600)). Porta
was instructed to abstain from publishing on divinatory and magical
arts and write comedies instead.  That same year Porta returned to
Rome under the protection of Cardinal D'Este, who died a couple of
years later. In 1588 and back in Naples, Porta published a
physiognomony of plants (Phytognomonica) and a translation of
the first book of Ptolemy’s Almagest. The following
year saw the publication of the second, much enlarged edition of
the Magia naturalis and the comedy Olimpia, which
may have been staged in the presence of viceroy Don Juan de
Zuñiga (1551–1608). In 1590, Porta met Tommaso Campanella
(1568–1639); in the next year he published
the tragicommedia Penelope, followed in 1592 by the
comedy Fantesca as well as Villae, an extensive
account of his travels through Europe. The Venetian Inquisition
prohibited the publication of the Italian version of the Human
Physiognomony. The ban was reinforced in 1593, when De
refractione, a treatise on optics, came out. In
1596 Trappolaria—another comedy—was printed. Now
famous across all Europe, in 1598 Porta dared to defy the
inquisitional ban and published Della fisionomia del’
huomo under the pseudonym Giovanni de Rosa. For the following
three years Porta seems to have kept a deliberately low profile; his
tragicomedies Fratelli rivali and Cintia came out
only in 1601. Porta then had the Latin version of his treatise on the
art of memory printed, as well as Penumaticorum libri tres
(on the vacuum and how to lift up liquids) and Curvilinearum
elementorum libri duo (on optics), two treatises that reappeared
in enlarged versions as I tre libri spiritali (1606)
and Elementorum curvilineorum libri tres (1608). In 1603
Porta outlined a naturalized form of divinatory astrology and
physiognomics in the Coelestis physiognomonia. Federico Cesi
(1585–1630), a young Roman nobleman with a passion for natural
philosophy who founded the famous Academia dei Lincei,
visited Porta in 1604. Sorella was published in the same
year. Between 1606 and 1607 the comedies Astrologo, Turca,
Carnbonaria and Moro were published. The short
treatise De destillatione (1608) became another of
Porta’s bestsellers, but this success was overshadowed by the
death of Gianvincenzo Porta, his brother and collaborator. De
munitione, a treatise on military fortifications and on firearms,
came out in 1608; in the following year two comedies (Furiosa
and Chiappinaria) were published. 1609 also marked the
beginning of Porta’s dispute with Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) (another famous member of the Academy of the Lynx)
over who had first invented the telescope. The Lincei
reopened in 1610, due to the death of Cesi’s father, who had
disapproved of Federico’s scientific endeavours; Porta’s
discovery of the telescope was acknowledged by the Academy, and he
became director of its Naples branch (which, however, never opened)
(Freedberg 2002). The Holy Office prohibited the publication of
Porta’s treatise on palmistry, De ea naturalis
physiognomoniae parte quae ad manuum lineas spectat. In 1611
Porta opened the academy of the Otiosi, an institution
dedicated to letters and to science; some of his plays may have been
staged there. Porta seems to have worked simultaneously on the
telescope and the philosopher’s stone.  These endeavours
resulted in the draft for his last and largely unfinished work on
(more or less) natural magic, the Criptologia and
the Thaumatologia, which was to be dedicated to Rudolf
II. (Needless to say, it was never to obtain an imprimatur by
the ecclesiastical authorities.) The tragedy Gregorio (1611)
and, in the following year, the comedy Tabernaria (1612) were
published; in 1613 Porta was honored by the Lincei with a
medal cast by Francesco Stelluti (1577–1653). Another
comedy, Fratelli simili, and the tragedy Ulisse were
published in 1614. In February 1615 Porta died in the house of his
daughter Cinzia: there are no records of Porta’s wife, whose
name is unknown (for Porta’s biography in general, see Romei
1989; Piccari 2007).
2. Works on Magic
A large part of Porta’s philosophical speculation is
contained in the two versions of his Magia naturalis (1558,
1589), crystallized in the persona of the natural magus. Porta seeks
to avoid all religious topics, as well as even the remotest hint of
ceremonial magic; other than in the third book of Heinrich Cornelius
Agrippa of Nettesheim’s (1486–1535) De occulta
Philosophia, for instance, there are no instructions for prayers,
fasting, or invocations (Klaassen 2013). Porta’s magic is thus
less a way to improve one’s own mind or to communicate with
divine forces, and more a means to manipulate objects and human beings
with crafty tricks.  Porta developed this secular approach to magic in
the face of ecclesiastical prosecution, for it seems that he was
condemned for exercising ceremonial magic (Zambelli
2007). Porta’s magus is a decidedly male figure who unites the
physical dexterity of the trickster, the experience of the alchemist,
the erudition of the humanist, the astrologer’s command of
mathematics, and the intuitive knowledge of the psychic medium in
order to embody a superhuman, ideal man capable of manipulating
everything and everybody. The magus must be talented, rich, educated,
and hard-working; magic is the most noble part of philosophy for Porta
(Magia 1558: bk. 1, ch. 2).  Instead of a priest or
metaphysician in quest of the divine—as in Pico della Mirandola
or John Dee—(Harkness 1999), Porta’s magus is thus
depicted as an artifex (a craftsman or mastermind) who knows
how to manipulate the natural and occult properties of certain
bodies. Here, the attractive power a magnet exercises on iron is taken
as a paradigm: the speculation is that all bodies have an
inherent property to attract certain other bodies (Copenhaver 1991,
2007). According to Porta, these qualities are occult because their
workings cannot be grasped by our intellect. Yet he infers that occult
properties derive from formal, not material causes—partly
because a very small quantity of matter often may have an enormous
effect (Magia 1558: bk. 1, ch. 8).
Magic is therefore a specific science of natural objects (animals,
herbs, stones), the servant or minister of nature; in Porta’s
characteristic definition of natural magic, just as a peasant prepares
the soil to help nature produce its marvelous effects, so the natural
magus prepares matter in a special way to allow its natural (but
nevertheless occult) properties to appear. Structurally, this magic is
a form of applied Platonist metaphysics—in Ernst
Cassirer’s words, an emanatist form of physics
(“emanatistische Form der Physik” Cassirer 2002
[1926]: 128). In reasoning highly reminiscent of Marsilio
Ficino’s (1433–1499) cosmology in the De via coelitus
comparanda and the De amore, Porta maintains that in the
strict hierarchical order of Creation the transcendent forms are
directly affiliated with God; they are projected into the world in
various manifestations, first into the Angels (or daemons),
subsequently into the soul, and ultimately into qualities
(qualitates) via the elements, again of celestial origin, as
their instruments shape matter (Magia 1558: bk. 1,
ch. 4).
Porta’s tacit refusal to acknowledge the Aristotelian border
between sub- and supralunar worlds in cosmology is a salient feature
in his account of the hierarchy of being. This erosion of boundaries
easily leads to the assumption that the seemingly erratic movements of
objects in the sublunar sphere are actually less random than they
might appear, because they are governed by secret, divine
principles. Conversely, the direct causal nexus between divine powers
and created forms accounts for those objects’ potential to
operate in seemingly miraculous, but actually natural, ways
(Magia 1558: bk. 1, ch. 5).  Centrally related are the
doctrine of universal animation and the belief that the superior
celestial influx is mirrored in material objects; these forces may be
channeled at will into inferior creatures on earth.
Knowledge of such procedures allows the magician to exercise
considerable power in ordering and disposing bodies to reveal new and
amazing features. Generally, an object’s visible traits, or
signatures, are indicative of its occult powers and those
powers’ relationship to other objects, both higher and lower in
the hierarchy of being. This idea is also central to Porta’s
doctrine of physiognomonics (discussed below) .
All things in the universal hierarchy of being are moved by the
(irrational) forces of attraction and repulsion they feel for one
another. Porta provides an impressive description of the macrocosmic
animal, the male and female aspects of which mingle in a harmonious
and well-coordinated way, which he expeditiously plagiarized
(Magia 1589: bk. 1, ch. 9; Ficino 1989 [1489]: lib. 3,
ch. 26).  At a deep level—and in a characteristic form of
circular reasoning—the cosmology of natural magic thus depends
on the workings of a decidedly erotic cosmology itself modeled on
human forms of sexuality (Kodera 2010).
Porta’s magic is parasitically dependent on manipulating the
affective structures of love and hatred that bind together the
universe. The principle of universal affective correlations formed the
backbone of Renaissance natural magic in general. Porta credits this
doctrine to Empedocles (Magia 1558: bk.1, ch. 9), who held a
reputation as a magus amongst Porta’s contemporaries (Kingsley
1995).  These ideas were not only embraced by many of the
preternatural philosophers, but were already found in the preface of
the De mirabilibus mundi ascribed to Albertus, one of
Porta’s favorite sources for many of his more
eccentric segreti (such as those mentioned in footnote 1
of this article). The postulation of an affective structure permeating
the whole of creation from top to bottom was vital to account for the
phenomenon of action at a distance (actio in distans), which
Aristotle had expressly ruled out in his Physics (7. 2,
244a14–245b5, see Henry 2008). A side effect of this universal
connectedness of all things is that the world as a whole becomes
animated (Hankins 2007). The magician capitalizes on the natural
forces of love, hate, attraction and repulsion inherent to the
universe to act as a matchmaker, and he produces marvelous offspring:
many of the magus’ activities are akin to husbandry.  (Again,
this is an idea also found in Ficino’s De vita).
Porta’s Magia 1589 (bk. 2 and 3) contains long chapters
on the production of monsters in the vegetable as well as animal
worlds.
A central topic for Porta is various technologies for attaining
vision of the miraculous. He supplies numerous recipes for drugs and
magical lamps designed to distort our perceptions, (Magia
1589: bk. 8, ch 2), some of which also have a strong theatrical
orientation, including his witches’ unguent, lenses, telescope
and camera obscura) (Reeves 2008). For the most part, Porta’s
mirrors were not subjects for speculation, as they had long been in
metaphysics, theology, magic and the divinatory arts. Neither were
they tools to produce “objective or scientific data”
(Daston and Galison 2007; Smith 2009). Porta’s experiments with
lenses and mirrors (such as the improved form of the camera
obscura) fit more coherently into the perspective described
above: these devices function as generators of marvels, with the
objective of stirring spectators’ imaginations (Dupré
2007; Thielemann 2009).  The resulting images take on a form of
existence that, like a phantasm, is halfway between “real”
and “imaginary” (Giglioni 2011).
In the next section, we see some of the more inconvenient aspects
of Porta’s theory of magic discussed here—its circular
reasoning and anthropomorphism—reappear in Porta’s ideas
on physiognomonics (Simon 1980; Védrine 1986).
3. Works on Physiognomonics
Physiognomonics, a proto- or pseudo-science on the rise in the
sixteenth century, sought to identify the visible affinities between
all physical things. Physiognomonists like Porta detected such
affinities everywhere, from plants and animals to the bodies and faces
of humans, and even further up the ontological scale to the appearance
of the planets. Porta’s physiognomonics provides cartographies
of the outward appearance of physical bodies aimed at predicting the
soul’s hidden inclinations or dispositions (past, present or
future). Porta’s massive effort to map the exterior appearances
of all animated bodies runs in tandem with the contemporary medical
approach towards cartographies of human bodies (as well as
landscapes), exemplified most notably by Andreas Vesalius
(1514–64) in his revolutionary anatomical studies.
Within its own historical context, physiognomonics was viewed as a
rational science as good as, or perhaps even better than, the new
anatomy, since it could be used for universal description and as a
means to identify character traits. In the circular reasoning
characteristic of his theory of magic, Porta’s physiognomonic
assessments are based on resemblances in external appearance: for
instance, men with a dark, Saturnine complexion evocative of dangerous
animals are rendered very likely to go to prison (De ea naturalis
physiognomoniae parte quae ad manuum lineas spectat ch. 12). This
example highlights the aesthetics structuring Porta’s
physiognomonics: beautiful bodies are also morally good. There is a
direct association between beauty, virtue, success and health, as
these traits all originate from a good temperament, that is, from a
harmonious mixture of the elements. A monstrous body, on the other
hand, indicates ill health, bad luck, and dubious moral
inclinations.
A truly universal science, physiognomonics provides its master not
only with a key for decoding the ciphers written into human faces (by
relating them to the shapes of animals) or a manual for reading the
lines engraved into the palms of our hands, but also (as Porta
suggests) with diagnostic methods for understanding all of creation,
from plants to stars. In this manner, physiognomonics may be described
as the art that establishes a metonymic relationship between inorganic
bodies and psychological qualities (Caputo 1990).
One important aspect of Porta’s physiognomonics is that it is
not merely descriptive: bodies may be mapped and their future
predicted, but they are nevertheless in a constant state of flux,
transition, or mutability. Their essences are not exclusively
determined by an invisible substantial form (soul) derived from
unchangeable forms—and, in the case of human beings,
immortal—as in previous traditions, but (more than ever) result
from external circumstances. These environmental influences are
decisive for the fate of individuals whose expressions and appearances
are unstably shaped. A characteristic quotation illustrates
Porta’s understanding of physiognomonics:


Through this art, we have helped many friends avoid dangers and ascend
to honours. Shortly before I wrote these things, I counselled a friend
of mine to avoid the company of a certain ugly and unlucky man, an
advice he did not want to hear, as his acquaintance had promised him
riches; at the end of the day, they were caught by the governor
producing counterfeit money in a hide-out and shortly afterwards both
ended on the gallows. (Coelestis physiognomonia, bk. 1, ch.
2)

It has often been noted that Porta opens perspectives on the
sinister tradition of eugenics, not uncommon currency in European
intellectual culture since its articulation in
Plato’s Timaeus (90), where a handsome body is
stipulated as the abode of a beautiful soul. Apart from the elemental
influences altering body and mind, which can be reduced to qualities
perceived through touch (such as hot/cold, dry/moist), Porta mentions
nutrition, climate, and age as determinants of an individual’s
mental and physical shape.  Disease may also alter an
individual’s mental disposition: as an example, Porta mentions
fevers—since they dry up the brain, they may cause the patient
to become more intelligent. Disease may even instill a capacity for
divination. Alterations in outward appearance bear significant
consequences for an individual’s behaviour and habits. (De
humana pysiognomonia bk. 6, ch.1)
From the perspective of religious orthodoxy, the crucial question
Porta addresses only with (well-advised) trepidation is whether a
change in exterior form can also cause alterations to the
soul—i.e., in the substantial and indelible form of humans
(De humana pysiognomonia bk. 1, ch. 20). Here, Porta takes
the position, more common to medical physiologists, that it is a
physician’s intervention rather than moral philosophy that cures
our bodies and minds. On this view, the body becomes a potential stage
for medical intervention into the mental realm (Kodera 2010:
ch. 8).
According to classical medicine, diseases are caused by an
imbalance between body fluids—the temperaments. The concept of
the temperaments or humoural mixtures in the human body was originally
developed to describe physiological body states:
 The four humours were real body fluids, to which
largely hypothetical origins, sites and functions were
ascribed. (Siraisi 1990: 105)


In late Antiquity and in the Middle Ages, the temperaments were
understood to fall under the reign of the stars, which influence the
generation and corruption of bodies in the sublunar sphere. In an
important conceptual step, Porta turns the tables, contending that
rather than being controlled by the stars, the medical humours are
actually universal descriptors structuring the entire cosmos. With
this move in a naturalistic direction, Porta strove to eclipse the
astrological elements of his theory. Even though in the Coelestis
physiognomonia he had declared astrology a vain discipline, Porta
added an important qualification to this dismissal: astrology is an
erroneous art, but only as long as divination from the stars is not
based on the perceptible features of heavenly bodies. Hence,
a fine physiognomonist will swiftly derive the relevant temperamental
features from the visible appearance of the planets. In this
way, all natural bodies remain substantiae signatae,
cosmically predisposed substances bearing inscriptions of universal
signs. The astrological system of categorization was restricted to the
medical temperaments, thus associating celestial bodies with a system
of signs that pertained to medicine and hence to a lower level in the
hierarchy of being. Instead of governing the lower bodies, the stars
become subject to the same laws as earthly bodies (Coelestis
physiognomonia, proemium). In following the Neoplatonic
cosmology outlined above, the attendant levelling of celestial
hierarchies constitutes a break with Peripatetic cosmologies.
Initially, Porta’s naturalized version of astrology was
probably a mere maneuver for detouring around the ecclesiastical
censorship on the divinatory arts; in the first edition of
the Magia (1558) Porta had fully embraced astrological
causation, as well as the decisive role of an auspicious astrological
moment for magical operations, especially the confection of talismans
as described by Ficino in the De vita. (Magia 1558:
bk. 1, chs. 15–17; Trabucco 2002, 2005). However, close
alignment of astrology with medical humours and physiognomonics is
well in accordance with Porta’s larger aim of naturalizing the
entire cosmos. In his circular reasoning, Porta’s cosmos becomes
more and more anthropomorphic, as universal signatures are imprinted
not only into human beings, but also share these physical traits with
the stars, animals, herbs and even stones (as explained in
Porta’s Phytognomonica).
4. The Book on Ciphers
Renaissance cryptographers in general had a penchant for mystery
and the preternatural, as evident from Johannes
Trithemius’ Steganography, for example. Trithemius, the
Abbot of Sponheim, got in trouble with his ecclesiastical censors
because he used a complex numerological series of demons’ names,
arranged on Lullian wheels, for encryption (Arnold 1991). With their
aura of mystery, ciphers qualified as a congenial topic for
Porta’s general outlook as a peddler of marvels. The art of
cryptography had the advantage of being perhaps less wicked than
necromancy, while still attracting the attention of powerful political
patrons. For someone aspiring to be the adviser and
protégé of one of the more powerful worldly rulers, it
was therefore a not unwise choice to write such a book.
Moreover, Porta considered himself a master physiognomonist endowed
with a special talent to read the universal language inscribed on all
bodies. When seen in the context of the doctrine of universal
signatures, it comes as no surprise that Porta also wrote a book on
ciphers: he also believed himself endowed with a special ingenuity for
decoding all forms of texts. De furtivis litterarum
notis is apparently the first text on this topic that not only
explained various ways to encrypt messages, but also gave detailed
instructions on how to decipher coded messages (Strasser 2008).
5. Art of Memory
In order to organize the memory, Porta recommends constructing a
mental picture gallery populated with striking images of persons or
groups of persons. He also mentions the important role of contemporary
paintings and sculptures by the foremost artists of his time,
including Titian, Rafael and Michelangelo. Porta maintains that
restoring the memory is like refreshing the colors of a faded
painting. Porta’s approach to the ancient art of memory is
markedly iconic (rather than architectural), as typical for many
medieval and early modern formulations of mnemonics (Bolzoni 2001). Especially in
the Italian Arte del ricordare, Porta recommends graphic
erotic fantasy, such as sodomitic intercourse, as the strongest memory
aid; to illustrate his point, he gives examples from
Ovid’s Metamorphoses and from Apuleius. In a manner
clearly reminiscent not only of his recipes with hallucinogenic drugs
but of his naturalist approach in general, Porta maintains that such
erotic images—phantasmata—are so potent that they may even
be able to destroy the memory.
6. Porta’s Place in the History of Philosophy
In most encyclopedias over the centuries, Giovan Battista Porta is
remembered for particular inventions—for instance, the telescope
(Reeves 2008; Saito 2011; Balbiani 2008). This tendency to
decontextualize Porta’s (vast) oeuvre by treating it as a quarry
of ideas actually dates back to his contemporaries: scholars and
theologians as varied in temperament and intellectual inclination as
Francis Bacon (1561–1626) and Athansius Kircher,
S.J. (1602–1680) knowingly plagiarized
Porta’s segreti, whether to show how to improve the
human condition through the systematic investigation of nature or to
demonstrate God’s wondrous omnipotence in nature (Vermeir 2012).
William Gilbert (1544–1603) felt it necessary to take issue with
the animistic theories that Porta used to explain magnetism (Kodera
2014), and Tommaso Campanella (at that time still a faithful disciple
of Bernardino Telesio(1508/9–1588)) had already deplored
Porta’s lack of method, which precluded the development of a new
metaphysics of nature (Eamon 1995). His many difficulties with the
inquisition—censors disapproved of his works on divinatory arts
such as physiognomonics, the art of predicting character traits from
the faces of humans—were compounded by the distrust of more
orthodox intellectuals such as Jean Bodin (1529/30–1596), who
would have loved to see Porta burn at the stake for naturalizing the
Witches’ Sabbath (like Girolamo Cardano (1501–1576), Porta
had divulged a recipe for the infamous witch’s unguent)
(Magia 1558: lib.2, ch. 26; Ernst 1991; Balbiani 2001). Porta
reacted to these challenges by attempting to abstain from metaphysical
speculation and theology; there is good reason to believe that
Porta’s naturalist stance was actually a consequence of
ecclesiastical persecution (Trabucco 2002, 2005). Accordingly, he
developed a strictly natural magic—natural in the sense that the
formal principles driving the movement of things in the cosmos were
taken as “occult”, with many causes of their often
marvelous properties per se unknowable to us. Porta’s
experiments thus prudently sought to eclipse all hint of religious
topics, including God, the soul, and demons.
By eliding discussion of the metaphysical and religious
implications of his experiments, Porta tends to direct attention to
the physical preconditions and occult, yet natural, qualities that
allow for spectacular manifestations of portentous qualities in
physical bodies, whether human, animal or
vegetable.[2] The
infamous recipe for an unguent employed by witches is a good example
of Porta’s approach: the nocturnal flights and orgiastic
encounters with demons and the devil that represent witchcraft’s
stock in trade are, according to Porta, in fact mere hallucinations
caused by belladonna—a material substance with occult, but
non-demonic properties (Balbiani 2001). This explanation rests on the
extent to which the human soul is affected by the occult properties of
natural substances. Like Pietro Pomponazzi (1462–1525), who with
his De incantationibus had sought to naturalize all
miracles, Porta seeks to bypass the question of “proper”
miracles produced by divine intercession. Yet and in contrast to
Pomponazzi, who sought to eliminate as much as he could of the
preternatural, Porta continued to believe fervently in occult
sympathies and, up to his last unpublished works such as
the Thaumaturgia, tried to preserve as much of the
Neoplatonic magical tradition as possible. For Porta, the visible and
perceptible qualities of certain material dispositions become embodied
signs of a larger and ultimately divine cosmic order to which all
natural bodies, including human beings, are subject.
Porta’s account thus has the marked and unorthodox tendency
to eclipse human agency aside from the figure of the natural magus,
who by dint of his natural talent, erudition, and wealth is in a
position to manipulate and command the natural properties of many
substances and objects. Porta himself cultivated an image of being far
keener on staging marvellous experiments or divulging (more or less
credible) secrets than on investigating, say, theoretical foundations
of natural causation. His approach geared to the naturalization of the
human being—body and mind—is perhaps the most suitable
focus for studying his thought; here his ideas can be linked not only
to contemporaries of his such as Giordano Bruno but also to the
tradition of libertine philosophers leading up to Marquis de Sade
(1740–1814).
When measured against the sophisticated metaphysical backdrop of
Neoplatonic Renaissance magic, Porta’s theoretical approach
appears disappointingly simple and rather epigonic—or, as
Borelli (2014) has argued, unsystematic and thereby unfettered by
doctrinal ballast and open to innovation. Upon closer scrutiny, a very
complex picture emerges. When one considers Porta’s numerous
literary and scientific texts, he must be ranked among a highly
influential group of philosophers/scientists/magicians including
Marsilio Ficino, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463–1494),
Pietro Pomponazzi, and Agrippa von Nettesheim (see Agrippa
1991). Under shifting historical circumstances and in various ways,
these “preternatural philosophers” shared a deep interest
in the marvelous and the demonic arts.
Within this tradition, Porta was a relative latecomer; he dedicated
his endeavor to a “sublime science” that catered to a
courtly environment increasingly subject to absolutist leadership
(Daston and Park 1998). Indeed, Porta managed to attract the attention
of the most powerful patrons in the occult arts and alchemy, among
them Emperor Rudolph II and Philip II of Spain. When seen in their
proper historical context, Porta’s literary and scientific
activities appear as a particular form of self-fashioning for the
emerging class of courtiers under absolutist rulers (Greenblatt 1980;
Biagioli 1991; MacDonald 2005). Hence, viewing Porta’s oeuvre as
a product of this courtly environment helps us understand his
contribution to a characteristic form of comportment, where the
practice of deception and dissimulation is tied to the crafty staging
of marvellous appearances (Snyder 2009; Kodera 2012).
This topic of the marvellous (meraviglia), and of emotions
elicited by attendant stupefaction, is so essential for Porta that he
projects it onto the whole of creation, thus endowing it with the
status of a universal law. In a crucial passage from
the Magia 1558, he writes that Nature herself—the great
female magician—creates all her wonders out of delight in her
own shows (bk. 1, ch. 9).
Both this anthropomorphic perception of nature and the importance
accorded to marveling in it reveal the close affinity between
Porta’s magical practices and his texts for the stage. Porta
evidences a keen sense for media’s power to manipulate
individuals and masses alike by way of drugs or optical deceptions,
wondrous performances, and the employment of the physical traits of
individual human beings. He believed that our physiognomonic features,
the shapes of our bodies, are indicative of hidden inclinations (for
this reason, a master physiognomonist may speedily detect criminals
and other abject persons). Hence, throughout Porta’s oeuvre we
can detect the link he establishes between policing, naturalizing and
assimilating human beings among other animals, all under the sway of
occult but natural astrological influences. With his works on
physiognomony, Porta undoubtedly sought to offer his services to
absolutist rulers and courtiers. This approach distinguishes Porta
from his predecessors: Ficino had directed his intellectual energies
towards the development of a Theologia Platonica, i.e., a
spiritual culture in which the Platonic tradition would be compatible
with Christianity, to which end Ficino translated and wrote
commentaries on Plato and the Neoplatonists. Ficino developed the
principles for a kind of natural magic directed not at impressing
audiences, but rather at the amelioration of elderly scholars’
melancholy temperaments (Copenhaver 2007).