Gorampa Sonam Senge (Go rams pa bSod nams Seng ge, 1429–89) is
one of the most widely-studied philosophers in the Sakya (sa skya)
school of Tibetan Buddhism. A fierce critic of Tsongkhapa, the founder
of what later came to be known as the Gelug (dge lugs)
school, his works were so controversial that they were suppressed by
Gelug leaders shortly after they were composed. Gorampa’s texts
remained hidden until the early 20th century, when the monk
Jamgyal Rinpoche received permission from the thirteenth Dalai Lama to
collect Gorampa’s extant texts and have them reprinted in
Derge. Today, Gorampa’s philosophy is studied widely in monastic
colleges, not only in those affiliated with his own Sakya tradition,
but also in institutions affiliated with the Kagyu (bka'
brgyud) and Nyingma (rnying ma) schools.


Gorampa, like most Tibetan Buddhist philosophers, considers himself a
follower of the Madhyamaka (Middle Way) school developed by the Indian
philosopher Nāgārjuna in the second century, CE. His views
with respect to particular issues within Madhyamaka, however, differ
significantly from the views of scholars belonging to other sects of
Tibetan Buddhism (e.g., Tsongkhapa and Dolpopa), and at times, his
views even differ from those of other Sakya scholars (most notably
Shakya Chokden). Gorampa’s particular brand of Madhyamaka
philosophy is defined by his understanding of the relationship between
the two truths, the use of negation, the role of logic, and proper
methods of philosophical argumentation.
 
1. Life and Works


Gorampa was born in 1429 in eastern Tibet. At age nineteen, he
traveled to central Tibet to pursue monastic studies. He briefly
attended Nalendra monastery, one of the prominent Sakya monastic
institutions in Tibet, where he studied Madhyamaka texts with the
scholar Rongton (rong ston). Rongton passed away the following summer,
and Gorampa began to travel throughout central Tibet, studying with a
number of other teachers. In addition to becoming a skilled
philosopher, Gorampa mastered a variety of Tantric practices, including
the Lamdre (lam ‘bras), the defining practice of the Sakya
School.


After completing his studies, Gorampa became a teacher, and in 1473
he founded Thubten Namgyal Ling Monastery, developing a curriculum that
emphasized both rigorous philosophical education and thorough training
in meditative practices. Gorampa later spent four years as the sixth
abbot of Ewam Choden, the primary institution of the Ngor subsect of
the Sakya school. He died in 1489.


Gorampa lived during a period of political instability in Tibet.
From 1244 until 1354, the Sakya sect had held political control over
Tibet, and was backed by the support of the Mongol army. Eventually the
Mongolian court’s interest in Tibet weakened, and the Pagmodruk
sect of Tibetan Buddhism ousted the Sakyapas from power in a violent
confrontation. The Pagmodrukpas ruled over Tibet for 130 years, but
during the latter half of Gorampa’s life, they fell from power,
resulting in a number of groups fiercely competing for religious and
political dominance.


Gorampa composed his philosophical texts, therefore, at a time in
which the Sakya sect was struggling to re-assert its dominance.
Although verifiable information about the political motivations of the
Sakyapas remains elusive, the unstable political situation in Tibet
could have at least partially accounted for the overtly polemical
nature of some of Gorampa’s Madhyamaka texts. When the Gelugpas
eventually ascended to political power in the sixteenth century, the
fifth Dalai Lama ordered that Gorampa’s texts, which were so
critical of Tsongkhapa, be destroyed or otherwise removed from monastic
institutions. However, many of Gorampa’s texts continued to be
studied in eastern Tibet, where the central government was unable to
exert a strong influence.


When work began on the republication of Gorampa’s writings in 1905,
thirteen volumes of texts were recovered from monasteries
throughout Tibet. In addition to his works on Madhyamaka philosophy,
Gorampa composed a number of treatises on Abhidharma, several
commentaries on the Indian text the
Abhisamayālaṅkāra, and various practice texts
based on Tantra. Gorampa’s major Madhyamaka texts, which will
form the basis for the rest of this article, comprise only two of these
thirteen volumes. His three major Madhyamaka texts are:

Freedom from Extremes (lta
ba’i shan ‘byed), a polemical text distinguishing
Gorampa’s own view from those of Tsongkhapa (Tsong kha pa bLo bzang Grags pa, 1357–1419) and Dolpopa (Dol po pa Shes rab rGyal mtshan, 1292–1361);
Elucidating the View (lta ba
ngan sel), a commentary on the Indian scholar
Candrakīrti’s Madhyamakāvatāra;
The General Meaning of
Madhyamaka (dbu ma’i spyi don), an encyclopedic
text outlining Gorampa’s views on the major points of
Madhyamaka, as well as the views of a number of Indian and Tibetan
scholars with whom he both agrees and disagrees.



Although there are some subtle differences in the presentation of
Gorampa’s philosophy in each of these three texts, his
explanation of Madhyamaka is relatively consistent throughout his writings. The
remainder of this article will provide a general sketch of
Gorampa’s Madhyamaka views as they are presented in all three of these texts.
2. Gorampa’s Madhyamaka


Because Gorampa was educated in the Tibetan monastic system, he
affiliates himself with the Madhyamaka school of Buddhist thought. All
Tibetan Buddhist philosophers cite Nāgārjuna’s texts
as authoritative, and disagreements among different scholars in Tibetan
Buddhism primarily concern the correct ways to interpret the works of
Nāgārjuna and his commentators. As such, the basis of
Gorampa’s views are relatively non-controversial in the context
of Tibetan Madhyamaka. His philosophy is based on
Nāgārjuna’s concepts of emptiness and the two truths,
and, like all Buddhists, Gorampa agrees that the elimination of
ignorance will eliminate suffering and lead to enlightenment. What
distinguishes Gorampa’s Madhyamaka from that of other Tibetan
scholars is more subtle. His understanding of the nature of emptiness,
ignorance, and the two truths, as well as his articulation of the
proper methods for realizing emptiness and attaining enlightenment, are
what originally set Gorampa apart from other scholars, and what
ultimately led to the censoring of his texts in Tibet.


The scholar with whom Gorampa most vehemently disagrees in his
Madhyamaka texts is Tsongkhapa (1357–1419), the scholar who founded
what later came to be known as the Gelug sect. Before establishing his
own monastery and composing his own philosophical commentaries,
Tsongkhapa received a significant portion of his training from Sakya
teachers. It is possible, therefore, that Gorampa made such overtly
critical remarks against Tsongkhapa’s views because the former
saw the latter as misconstruing the Sakya philosophical tradition.


Several works have been published in English that focus explicitly on
the debates between Gorampa and Tsongkhapa (see Cabezon & Dargay
2007, Thakchoe 2007).  While his philosophical treatises were
undoubtedly composed partly in response to Tsongkhapa’s views, the
remainder of this section will concern itself with Gorampa’s own
views, only drawing comparisons to Tsongkhapa when Gorampa has
specifically constructed his arguments in such a way.


With this in mind, there are four defining characteristics of
Gorampa’s philosophy that set him apart from other Tibetan
philosophers. They are his understandings of: (1) the two truths; (2)
negation and the tetralemma; (3) the role of logic and reasoning; and
(4) proper methods of argumentation on the path to Buddhist
enlightenment.
2.1 The Two Truths


The theory of the two truths is fundamental to all Madhyamaka
philosophy. Reality is understood in terms of the conventional truth,
which corresponds to the perspectives of ordinary beings, and the
ultimate truth, which can only be perceived by enlightened beings.
While Mādhyamikas tend to disagree about the nature of and
relationship between the conventional and ultimate truths, the final
goal of Madhyamaka philosophy involves arriving at a direct realization
of the ultimate truth.


Gorampa argues that the two truths are divided based on the
perspective of an apprehending subject (yul can), rather than
being divided on the basis of an apprehended object
(yul). The way in which one engages with the world
determines whether one perceives things conventionally or ultimately.
The conventional truth involves concepts, logic, and reasoning, while
the ultimate truth is outside of the realm of conceptual thought. As
long as one is engaged in concepts, one is interacting with the
conventional realm. Once all concepts have been eliminated by following
the Buddhist path (as will be explained below), one realizes the
ultimate truth.


Gorampa defines “conventional truth” as that which appears
to ordinary beings: objects, concepts, words, and so on. They are true
in the sense that they appear to be true for ordinary persons, without
any sort of philosophical analysis. Most people, for example, can
point to the Eiffel Tower and agree, “That is the Eiffel
Tower.” The existence of the Eiffel Tower, therefore, is
conventionally true. It appears to ordinary, unenlightened people, and
these ordinary, unenlightened people identify it by means of the
linguistic convention, “Eiffel Tower.”


There are, of course, things that are understood by most ordinary
beings to be false. If something is conventionally false, it appears
incorrectly to the perspective of ordinary beings. If a tourist in
Paris drinks too much wine and starts seeing double, for example, this
does not mean that there are suddenly two Eiffel Towers instead of
one.  The drunk person’s perception is simply skewed, and after he
sobers up, he will once again see that really, there is only one
Eiffel Tower. To illustrate this point in his texts, Gorampa refers to
Candrakīrti’s well-known Madhyamaka analogy of a person with an
eye disorder (rab rib can) incorrectly seeing floating hairs
on account of his impaired perception. The hairs are not really there,
as a person with normally functioning eyes can affirm.


The conventional truth, therefore, is true in the sense that it is
something upon which all ordinary beings, who do not have impaired
forms of perception, can agree. The conventional truth is what allows
for ordinary persons to travel to Paris to visit the Eiffel Tower, to
talk about the weather, and to engage in debates about politics. It is
also, most importantly, what allows people to understand conceptually
what a realization of the ultimate truth is like, and what enables
practitioners to correctly develop logical reasoning and engage in
proper types of meditative practices. In other words, some features of
the conventional—such as reasoning and language—can be used
to approach an understanding of the ultimate, even though the ultimate
itself transcends those features.


In contrast to the conventional, the ultimate truth is understood as
the way things really are, independent of the concepts and conventions
with which ordinary persons engage. Gorampa contends that the
conventional truth is mired in ignorance—the cause
of saṃsāra, which keeps sentient beings cycling
from lifetime to lifetime. When this ignorance is removed, one is
capable of realizing the ultimate truth, and through that realization,
one can attain freedom from the cycle of rebirth.


Based on this account, then, when ordinary, unenlightened persons
talk about “the ultimate truth,” they necessarily identify
it in terms of concepts. This conceptual understanding of the ultimate
truth, while not a direct realization of the ultimate truth, is a
crucial step on the Buddhist path, linking ordinary persons to
enlightened buddhas. Developing a concept of the ultimate is not
enlightenment itself, but it gives one a sense of what enlightenment is
like.


In order to explain the difference between a conceptual understanding
and a nonconceptual realization of the ultimate truth, Gorampa divides
it into two types: the ultimate that is taught (bstan pa'i don dam) and the ultimate that is realized (rtogs pa'i don dam).  The
ultimate that is taught corresponds to an ordinary person’s understanding of
the ultimate, while the ultimate that is realized is directly perceived by
enlightened beings. Similarly, Gorampa contends that the conventional
truth is also divided according to the perspective of ordinary and
enlightened beings: the former perceive conventional truth (kun
rdzob bden pa) while the latter understand it as mere convention
(kun rdzob tsam).


Again, the conventional truth is that which is true for
ordinary, unenlightened beings (such as the Eiffel Tower).
Mere convention, on the other hand, is a term that corresponds
to the perspective of enlightened beings. When highly realized beings
(āryas, who are superior to ordinary beings on the
Buddhist path, but not yet fully enlightened buddhas) engage in
meditation (rnyam gzhag), they directly and nonconceptually
perceive the ultimate truth. Once they emerge from their meditative
states (rjes thob), however, they realize that the things that
they had previously understood to be conventionally “true”
are not actually true. After an ārya has directly
realized the ultimate, conventional things appear as merely
conventional. This mere convention is not false; it is simply
understood as a mode of perception that is subordinated to the ultimate
truth that has been directly experienced in meditation.


It is important to note that conventional objects, such as the
Eiffel Tower, tables, persons, ideas, and so on, are the same
regardless of whether their existences are understood as conventionally true or
mere conventions. The difference between conventional truth and mere
convention is based entirely on the subject who apprehends these
objects. The same table appears as truly existent to an ordinary being,
and as a mere conceptual imputation to an ārya. 
(Tsongkhapa, on the other hand, distinguishes the two truths on the
basis of the object, arguing that every object consists of an ultimate
and a conventional aspect (ngo bo gcig la ldog pa tha
dad). Tsongkhapa contends that these two aspects are not
substantially different, but only differ conceptually. Nevertheless,
the important distinction here is that for Tsongkhapa, the difference
between the two truths is made on the basis of the apprehended object
(yul), while for Gorampa, the distinction is made on the
basis of the mind of the apprehending subject (yul can).


With respect to the ultimate truth, the ultimate that is taught is an
ordinary being’s conceptual understanding of what the ultimate
truth is like. After studying Buddhist scriptures and learning
philosophy, ordinary beings come to understand the ultimate truth in
the Madyamaka sense as emptiness. The ultimate truth that is realized corresponds
to that which is directly experienced by fully enlightened buddhas, and
āryas in meditation. The real ultimate truth is free from
all concepts, including the concepts of emptiness and interdependence.
It is a state that is entirely nonconceptual, and is the end goal of
the Buddhist path.


In short, ordinary beings can understand the conventional
truth, and the ultimate that is taught. Āryas in their
post-meditative states, can understand mere convention. And
Āryas in meditation and fully enlightened buddhas can directly,
nonconceptually experience the ultimate that is realized, which is free from all
concepts. On this model, the Buddhist path involves a process of
transforming one’s perspective. One begins by correctly
identifying and understanding the conventional truth. Then, through
logical reasoning and meditative practices, one gradually begins to
realize that this so-called truth is merely conventional and that it is
based entirely on concepts that are rooted in ignorance; in this way
one comes to a conceptual understanding of the ultimate that is taught.
Through more analysis and practice still, one eventually leaves behind
the mere convention and directly realizes the ultimate truth, which
does not depend on ignorance and concepts. In other words, in the process of realizing the ultimate, a distinctive feature of this
realization is that, even though it depends on concepts (and thus
ignorance), it can be used to negate concepts and ignorance.


Gorampa describes the ultimate that is realized in terms of freedom from conceptual
constructs (spros pa dang bral ba). It should be noted that
this is not, however, the same as simply not thinking. (Gorampa defends
himself against accusations equating his method to mere non-thinking in
his lta ba’i shan ‘byed.) Concepts must be eliminated
on the Buddhist path, but they must be eliminated in specific ways.
These specific ways involve both logical reasoning and meditative
practices, eliminating concepts gradually, in stages. When no more
concepts remain to be analyzed, no conceptual constructs remain. As
will be shown below, Gorampa outlines a very specific fourfold process
for eliminating concepts in order to arrive at this desired state of
nonconceptuality.
2.2 Negation


Gorampa employs a fourfold negation known as the tetralemma
(mtha’ bzhi) in order to refute all concepts in their
entirety. Use of the tetralemma as a tool in Buddhist philosophy can be
traced to Nāgārjuna’s
Mūlamadhyamakakārika, in which he famously remarks,
“Neither from itself, nor from another, nor from both, nor
without a cause, does anything, anywhere, ever, arise” (MMK I:1).
This fourfold rejection of one extreme, its opposite, both, and
neither, is adopted by later Mādhyamikas and is frequently used as
a tool in order to demonstrate the Madhyamaka view.


Nāgārjuna’s commentator Āryadeva applies this
fourfold negation to the extremes of existence, nonexistence, both, and
neither in his Jñānasārasamuccaya, writing,
“There is no existence, there is no nonexistence, there is no
existence and nonexistence, nor is there the absence of both.”
Gorampa frequently cites this passage in order to illustrate the
Madhyamaka view as that which is free from conceptual constructs. He
contends that a proper understanding and application of this passage
allows a practitioner to successfully transition from the state of an
ordinary person who sees conventional truth, to an enlightened buddha
who directly and nonconceptually realizes the ultimate.


Most Tibetan Buddhist philosophers agree that the tetralemma is a
tool that allows one to realize the ultimate, but they differ in their
explanations of the ways in which this tool functions. Gorampa argues
that one must negate each of the four extremes in succession by using
logic and reasoning, and then one must subsequently realize the
negation of all four extremes simultaneously through meditative
practices.
2.2.1 The Process of Refuting the Four Extremes


Gorampa’s Synopsis indicates that one must begin the
process of the fourfold negation by analyzing and refuting the concept
of existence. This can be done by using the five Madhyamaka reasonings
(gtan tshigs lnga). These five types of reasoning are:

Neither one nor many (gcig du
dral), which analyzes the essence (ngo bo) of things.
Diamond splinters (rdo rje'i gzegs
ma), which analyzes causes.
Refuting the arising of something
existent or nonexistent (yod med skye ‘gog), which analyzes
effects.
Refuting the four possibilities of
arising (mu bzhi skye ‘gog), which analyzes causes and effects
together.
Dependent arising (rten ‘brel),
which shows that phenomena cannot exist independently.



These points are generally agreed upon by all Mādhyamikas, and
entire essays can be devoted to each of these five types of reasoning,
so they will not be discussed in detail here.


After one has successfully negated the first extreme, Gorampa
concedes that a person’s natural inclination is to assume that the
negation of existence implies the assertion of nonexistence. If one
were to stop his logical analysis at this point, Gorampa argues that
one would adhere to a nihilist view; failure to correctly negate
nonexistence can lead one to wrongly believe that nonexistence is
ultimately real. In order to show that the acceptance of nonexistence
is untenable, Gorampa argues that the concepts of existence and
nonexistence depend upon each other; one makes no sense without the
other. And, since the concept of existence has already been negated, it
makes no sense to conceive of nonexistence independently.


Once he has shown that existence and nonexistence are each
untenable, Gorampa refutes the third extreme view, that things can
somehow simultaneously both exist and not exist. He dismisses this
possibility quite succinctly in his Synopsis, stating that if
existence and nonexistence have each been refuted individually, then it
makes no sense that they could somehow exist together.


The refutation of the fourth extreme, neither existence nor
nonexistence, yet again depends upon the successful refutation of the
previous three. Gorampa argues that to conceive of something as
“neither existent nor nonexistent” is to conceive of
something that is somewhere between the two extremes of existence and
nonexistence. He contends, however, that if one has any concept of
anything at all – even if it is some sort of concept of
quasi-existence – this is still a wrong view. With the refutation
of this fourth extreme, Gorampa shows that any possible way of
conceiving of the ontological status of a thing, even something
seemingly as convoluted as “things neither exist nor do not
exist,” must be eliminated completely. If one is capable of
conceiving of things as existing or not existing in any way whatsoever,
then one cannot have a true, nonconceptual realization of the way
things really are.


Gorampa contends that one must understand the refutation of each of
these four concepts in succession; the logic that refutes the concept
of nonexistence depends upon the successful refutation of the
existence, the refutation of the third concept (both existence and
nonexistence) depends on the refutation of the first two, and the
refutation of the fourth (neither existence nor nonexistence) depends
upon the refutation of the first three concepts. Existence,
nonexistence, both, and neither are the only possible ways of
conceiving of the status of a thing, so once each of these possible
ways are eliminated, there is no way to conceive of things anymore.


The process of negating the four extreme views also involves
meditative practices. Gorampa argues that along with conducting a
thorough philosophical analysis, one must meditate on the refutation of
each of the four extremes individually, in succession. Then, one will
come to directly realize all four negations simultaneously. One way to
understand this style of meditative practice is in terms of a
“turning off” of concepts. After one conceptually
understands the negation of things existing inherently, for example,
one meditates on this negation and eventually stops having concepts of
things existing altogether. This process continues through all four
possibilities in the tetralemma, until one no longer conceives of
things at all. Again, it is important to note that this is distinct
from simply arresting the process of thought.
2.2.2 The Role of Negation and the Function of the Tetralemma


Gorampa understands the tetralemma as a tool that one uses to
analyze the ultimate truth. One uses logic and reasoning to arrive at a
conceptual understanding of the ultimate that is taught, and meditative
practices allow one to reach a direct, nonconceptual realization of the ultimate truth. The logical reasoning involved in the fourfold
negation is implemented by ordinary persons in order to understand what
the ultimate truth is like, but logic alone is not sufficient
to arrive at a direct realization of the ultimate.


This particular way of understanding the tetralemma is, again, at
odds with the views of Tsongkhapa. Tsongkhapa contends that Gorampa’s
assertion that all concepts must be eliminated entirely amounts to
nihilistic quietism. Tsongkhapa understands each of the four extremes
of the tetralemma as being qualified according to the conventional or
ultimate truths. According to him, existence is negated ultimately,
while nonexistence is negated conventionally.


This debate between Gorampa and Tsongkhapa is based on each
philosopher’s understanding of the ways in which negation functions
within the tetralemma. Tsongkhapa upholds the law of double negation
elimination (dgag pa gnyis kyi rnal ma go ba), a logical law
stating that the negation of a negation implies an affirmation. The
negation of existence, therefore, implies the acceptance of
nonexistence, while the negation of nonexistence implies the assertion
of existence. Because of this, Tsongkhapa’s understanding of the
tetralemma involves a complex system of logical statements, each
qualified according to one of the two truths. If one accepts double
negation elimination, then it makes no sense for both existence and
nonexistence to be negated, unless these negations are qualified in
certain ways.


Gorampa, on the other hand, does not adhere to double negation in
the context of the tetralemma. Instead, he understands the tetralemma
as a succession of four negations that are applied to the four possible
ways of conceiving of the status of the ultimate truth. Because the
ultimate truth is nonconceptualizable, Gorampa contends that
Tsongkhapa’s understanding of the tetralemma is incomplete,
because it doesn’t negate enough (literally, it underpervades
[khyab chung ba]). While Tsongkhapa’s model
successfully refutes the extreme view of existence at the ultimate
level, Gorampa argues that it does not eliminate all extreme views
ultimately and in their entirety.


Tsongkhapa argues that a negation of all four extremes at the
ultimate level contradicts logic, but Gorampa contends that an
elimination of logic is specifically the tetralemma’s purpose.
By negating all possibilities for logical, conceptual thought, the only
recourse is to abandon concepts completely. True freedom from
conceptual constructs lies outside of the scope of conceptual
thought, and is therefore inexpressible. Gorampa maintains, however,
that because ordinary persons utilize conceptual thought, they
necessarily construe the ultimate truth as an object of conceptual
constructs (that is, they construe it as the ultimate that is taught). As
such, one must first use conceptual reasoning to refute each of the
four extremes, but these concepts must eventually be abandoned.


In other words, because all four extremes are negated under the
analysis of the tetralemma, Gorampa concludes that a correct
realization of the ultimate truth must be something that is other than
these conceptualizations of and dichotomizations into existence and
nonexistence. As such, the ultimate truth cannot be described using
these terms. And, since these are the only possible ways of speaking of
or conceptualizing the status of the existence of things, once they are
all negated, one is forced to conclude that the ultimate truth cannot
be described linguistically or conceptually. The ultimate truth that is realized
transcends the boundaries of language and conceptual thought. However,
Gorampa still maintains that logic and analysis are essential in
arriving at a state of nonconceptuality.
2.3 The Role of Logic


Gorampa’s understanding of the relationship between the two truths
and the use of negation in the tetralemma inform his understanding of
the ways in which a practitioner should proceed on the Buddhist path.
The end result of this path, enlightenment, is the ultimate goal toward
which all Buddhists strive. Gorampa’s arguments regarding the above
points therefore inform the ways in which one should understand the
nature of this end result. According to Gorampa, concepts come from
ignorance, and the path of eliminating ignorance involves eliminating
concepts.


In other words, since a buddha is completely free of ignorance, he
has no concepts whatsoever. This claim is quite controversial for
obvious reasons: buddhas are understood as consisting of perfect
wisdom, and are described in scriptures as omniscient beings. How,
then, can a buddha have no concepts at all, but still be considered
omniscient?


Gelugpa opponents criticize Gorampa for this very reason. They
contend that Gorampa’s philosophy negates too much (literally
“overpervades” [khyab che ba]). If the end result
is a complete elimination of concepts, then one could attain
enlightenment by simply falling asleep or otherwise becoming
unconscious. Gorampa contends, however, that in order to successfully
eliminate all concepts in their entirety, it is absolutely essential
that one begins by using logic and reasoning. The end result is indeed
nonconceptual, but it differs from the quietism that is a result of
simply not-thinking, without any prior analysis.


The issue underlying this debate concerns the conceptual content of
fully enlightened buddhas. Gorampa contends, citing Candrakīrti,
that fully enlightened buddhas have no conceptual content whatsoever;
they have completely eliminated ignorance in its entirety, and
therefore do not actively engage in the conventional world. They do not
conceive of things as existent, nonexistent, both, or neither. In fact,
they do not conceive of things at all. They do, however,
appear omniscient from the perspective of ordinary beings, and
because of their previous karma and the compassion that they have
cultivated on the path to enlightenment, they continue to function in
the world for the benefit of ordinary unenlightened beings for a period
of time.


The implications of Gorampa’s view are significant. On
Tsongkhapa’s model, certain concepts (i.e., concepts about
emptiness) are the right kinds of concepts, which means that if one has
not carefully constructed the right kinds of concepts in the right
ways, one will not attain enlightenment. On Gorampa’s model, as
long as one uses logic and reasoning to refute the ignorance that gives
rise to concepts, one can attain enlightenment. While
Tsongkhapa’s model espouses one specific view that must be
cultivated in one specific way, Gorampa’s model leaves open the
possibility for different practitioners to employ different styles of
reasoning.
2.4 Methods of Argumentation


Gorampa’s articulation of the idea that there are different styles
of reasoning that are capable of leading to enlightenment on the
Buddhist path exists in the context of his assessment of the difference
between the so-called Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika
schools of Madhyamaka thought. These two subschools were understood by
Tibetan thinkers as being developed by the Indian Mādhyamikas
Buddhapālita and Bhāviveka, the former advocating the
Prāsaṅgika position and the latter that of the
Svātantrika. Candrakīrti is understood as upholding the
Prāsaṅgika tradition, because he defended
Buddhapālita’s views against Bhāviveka’s criticisms. It is
important to note, however, that none of these Indian scholars labeled
themselves as adherents of particular subschools of Madhyamaka, and
that the terms rang gyud pa (Svātantrika) and thal
‘gyur ba (Prāsaṅgika) were coined centuries later by
Tibetans. (Western scholars, moreover, have contributed to the
misconception that these two schools actually existed in India by
Sanskritizing these Tibetan terms.)


Regardless of whether Buddhapālita, Bhāviveka, or
Candrakīrti actually understood themselves as advocating these
distinct positions, the distinction between Svātantrika and
Prāsaṅgika became reified in medieval Tibetan Buddhist
discourse. Because Tibetans held Candrakīrti’s Madhyamaka in high
regard, they purported to be Prāsaṅgikas themselves, and
many constructed detailed explanations of the division between the
Svātantrika and Prāsaṅgika systems, always upholding
Prāsaṅgika as the highest form of Madhyamaka.


Tsongkhapa composed a list of “eight difficult points”
(dka’ gnad brgyad) distinguishing his own
Prāsaṅgika view from that of the Svātantrika. Many of
these points are quite technical, and the details of this list will not
be addressed here. The important point to consider is that based on
these eight points, Tsongkhapa considers the two schools to differ in
terms of their views regarding the nature of the ultimate truth. Based
on these eight points, Tsongkhapa argues that the Prāsaṅgika
view is superior to that of the Svātantrika.


Gorampa similarly considers himself a Prāsaṅgika, but
disagrees with Tsongkhapa on nearly all eight of his “difficult
points.” Because his views regarding the two truths and negation
inform a process whereby the Mādhyamika begins with logic and
analysis, but ends in a state of nonconceptuality, Gorampa contends
that there can be no differences between Mādhyamikas with respect
to their final view. There cannot be different types of
nonconceptuality; freedom from conceptual constructs is freedom from
conceptual constructs. The differences between these Madhyamaka
subschools, therefore, occur with respect to the ways in which they
understand the conventional truth, and utilize logic and reasoning.


Gorampa’s refutations of Tsongkhapa’s eight points are especially
technical, and a considerable portion of his Madhyamaka texts are
devoted to articulating the nature of the differences between these two
views. (Almost one third of his Synopsis, for example, is
devoted to setting out the distinction between these two schools.) The
essence of Gorampa’s argument is that Svātantrikas utilize
“autonomous syllogisms” to argue for emptiness, while
Prāsaṅgikas do not. Because both schools assert that a
realization of the ultimate truth involves freedom from all conceptual
constructs (spros bral), as long as one is in such a state,
one can realize the ultimate. There is no such thing as correct and
incorrect spros bral. Once one has successfully arrived at
this state, the methods that he has used to get there are no longer
relevant.


To use an analogy: suppose that a person wishes to drive from New
York City to Boston. Depending on the kind of car that she is
accustomed to driving, she can travel in a car with either manual or
automatic transmission. Once she has arrived in Boston, the type of car
that she drove no longer matters, even though she would have had to
drive differently along the way. In the same way, if spros
bral is the desired destination at the end of the Buddhist path,
then depending on the ways in which one is accustomed to reasoning, one
can successfully follow the Svātantrika or the
Prāsaṅgika method in order to arrive at the same result.
Gorampa still contends, however, that the Prāsaṅgika method
of reasoning is a more efficient way of arriving at that result. Once
one is in a state of spros bral, however, the type of
reasoning that he used to get there no longer matters.


Gorampa’s particular brand of Madhyamaka is characterized by his
understanding of the two truths and negation, as shown above. Because
the ultimate truth is entirely free from concepts, one utilizes
negation to eliminate all concepts in their entirety. The ways in which
one employs Madhyamaka reasoning in order to negate these concepts are
ultimately not as important as actually arriving at a state of
nonconceptuality. Thus, unlike Tsongkhapa, who concludes that there is
one correct final view (i.e., that of the Prāsaṅgikas),
Gorampa contends that the final, ultimate view is actually no view at
all.
3. Influence on Other Philosophers


Gorampa’s harsh criticisms of Tsongkhapa resulted in his
works being banned throughout Tibet for centuries. When these texts
were recovered and reprinted, however, Gorampa’s philosophy
experienced a resurgence of sorts, not only among fellow Sakyapas, but
also among some scholars belonging to the Kagyu and Nyingma schools.
Gorampa’s articulation of the use of logic and reasoning in
order to refute all views (as opposed to carefully constructing one
specific view), and his emphasis on the notion that different methods
could successfully be applied to arrive at the same result of spros
bral, appealed to non-Sakya scholars who had historically placed
more of an emphasis on meditative practices, but wished to counter
Gelugpa-style logical arguments.


Just as Gorampa argues that the distinction between Svātantrika
and Prāsaṅgika is a matter of method, but not of a
Mādhyamika’s final view, later Tibetan commentators have extended
this reasoning to apply to other, non-Sakya schools within Tibetan
Buddhism. Gorampa’s philosophy has become influential within what has
recently come to be known as the “nonsectarian movement”
(ris med) of Tibetan Buddhism. (Incidentally, the
republication of his works occurred only a few decades after the
development of ris med.)


Kagyu and Nyingma scholars, who, until the 19th century, did not
have analytical systems of their own that were as highly developed as
those of Gelug and Sakya scholars, were able to appropriate
Gorampa’s philosophy and incorporate it into their own systems.
Not only did Gorampa provide a compelling refutation of
Tsongkhapa’s particular understanding of Madhyamaka, but his
philosophical arguments also proved compatible with Kagyu and Nyingma
styles of meditative practice. Today, Kagyu and Nyingma scholars study
Gorampa’s philosophical texts at Sakya monastic institutions, and some
even teach Gorampa’s philosophy in their own monasteries.