Behind the various Christian ideas about heaven and hell lies the more
basic belief that our lives extend beyond the grave (see the entry on
 afterlife).
 For suppose that our lives do not extend beyond the grave. In
addition to excluding a variety of ideas about reincarnation and
karma, this would also preclude the very possibility of future
compensation of any kind for those who experience horrendous
evil during their earthly lives. Indeed, despite their profound
differences, many Christians (though perhaps not all) and many
atheists can presumably agree on one thing at least. If a young girl
should be brutally raped and murdered and this should be the end of
the story for the child, then a supremely powerful, benevolent, and
just God would not exist. An atheist may seriously doubt that
any future compensation would suffice to justify a supreme
being’s decision to permit such an evil in the first place. But
the point is that even many Christians would concede that, apart from
an afterlife, such an evil would constitute overwhelming evidence
against the existence of God; some might even concede that such an
evil would be logically (or metaphysically) inconsistent with his
existence as well.

It is hardly surprising, then, that a belief in an afterlife should be
an important part of the Christian tradition. Even if our lives do
extend beyond the grave, however, the question remains concerning the
nature of the future in store for us on the other side, and the
various Christian views about heaven and hell are proposed answers to
this question. According to a relatively common view in the wider
Christian culture, heaven and hell are essentially deserved
compensations for the kind of earthly lives we live. Good people go to
heaven as a deserved reward for a virtuous life, and bad people go to
hell as a just punishment for an immoral life; in that way, the scales
of justice are sometimes thought to balance. But virtually all
Christian theologians regard such a view, however common it may be in
the popular culture, as overly simplistic and unsophisticated; the
biblical perspective, as they see it, is far more subtly nuanced than
that.

When we turn to the theological and philosophical literature in the
Christian tradition, we encounter, as we would in any of the other
great religious traditions as well, a bewildering variety of different
(and often inconsistent) theological views. The views about hell in
particular include very different conceptions of divine love, divine
justice, and divine grace, very different ideas about free will and
its role (if any) in determining a person’s ultimate destiny,
very different understandings of moral evil and the purpose of
punishment, and very different views about the nature of moral
responsibility and the possibility of inherited guilt. There is also
this further complication: in the Abrahamic family of monotheistic
religions to which Christianity belongs (along with Judaism and
Islam), theological reflection often includes an interpretation of
various texts thought to be both sacred and authoritative. But the
meaning of these texts, particularly when read in their original
languages, is rarely transparent to all reasonable interpreters; that
is, not even all who regard a relevant text as authoritative seem able
to agree on its correct interpretation. Still, despite this
bewildering diversity of theological opinion, there may be a
relatively easy way to identify three primary eschatological views
within the Christian religion and thus to organize the various ideas
about heaven and hell around these three primary views.
 
1. Three Primary Eschatological Views

Let theism in general be the belief that a supremely
powerful, supremely wise, and supremely good (loving, just, merciful)
personal being exists as the Creator of the universe. Christian
theism is, of course, more specific than that, and Christian
theists typically make the following two-fold assumption: first, that
the highest possible good for created persons (true blessedness, if
you will) requires that they enter into a proper relationship (or even
a kind of union) with their Creator, and second, that a life wholly
apart from any implicit experience of God would be a
terrifying evil (see
 note 11).
 As C. S. Lewis once put it, union with the divine “Nature is
bliss and separation from it [an objective] horror” (1955, 232).
Although most Christians would probably agree with this, some may want
additional clarity on the nature of the union and the separation in
question here. But in any case, whereas heaven is in general thought
of as a realm in which people experience the bliss of perfect
fellowship and harmony with God and with each other, hell is in
general thought of as a realm in which people experience the greatest
possible estrangement from God, the greatest possible sense of
alienation, and perhaps also an intense hatred of everyone including
themselves.

The ideas of heaven and hell are also closely associated with the
religious idea of salvation, which in turn rests upon a
theological interpretation of the human condition. Even the
non-religious can perhaps agree that, for whatever reason, we humans
begin our earthly lives with many imperfections and with no
(conscious) awareness of God. We also emerge and begin making choices
in a context of ambiguity, ignorance, and misperception, and behind
our earliest choices lie a host of genetically determined inclinations
and environmental (including social and cultural) influences. As young
children, moreover, we initially pursue our own needs and interests as
we perceive (or misperceive) them. So the context in which we humans
emerge with a first person perspective and then begin developing into
minimally rational agents virtually guarantees, it seems, that we
would repeatedly misconstrue our own interests and pursue them in
misguided ways; it also includes many sources of misery, at least some
of which—the horror of war, horrifying examples of inhumanity to
children, people striving to benefit themselves at the expense of
others, etc.—are the product of misguided human choices. But
other sources include such non-moral evils as natural disasters,
sickness, and especially physical death itself.

Clearly, then, we all encounter in our natural environment many
threats to our immediate welfare and many obstacles, some of our own
making and some not, to enduring happiness. The Christian
interpretation of this human condition thus postulates an initial
estrangement from God, and the Christian religion then offers a
prescription for how we can be saved from such estrangement; it
teaches in particular that God is at work reconciling “the
world” to himself (see 2 Cor. 5:19). But Christians also
disagree among themselves concerning the extent and ultimate success
of God’s saving activity among human beings. Some believe that
God will positively reject unrepentant sinners after a given deadline,
typically thought of as the moment of physical death, and actively
punish them forever after; others believe that God would never reject
any of his own loved ones even though some of them may freely reject
him forever, thereby placing themselves in a kind of self-created
hell; and still others believe that God’s love will triumph in
the end and will successfully reconcile to himself all of those whom
he has loved into existence in the first place. So one way to organize
our thinking here is against the backdrop of the following
inconsistent set of three propositions:

All humans are equal objects of God’s unconditional
love in the sense that God sincerely wills or desires to reconcile
each one of them to himself and thus to prepare each one of them for
the bliss of union with him.
Almighty God will triumph in the end and successfully reconcile to
himself each person whose reconciliation he sincerely wills or
desires.
Some humans will never be reconciled to God and will therefore
remain separated from him forever.


If this set of propositions is logically inconsistent, as it surely
is, then at least one proposition in the set is false. In no way does
it follow, of course, that only one proposition in the set is
false, and neither does it follow that at least two of them are true.
But if someone does accept any two of these propositions, as virtually
every mainline Christian theologian does, then such a person has no
choice but to reject the
 third.[1]
 It is typically rather easy, moreover, to determine which proposition
a given theologian ultimately rejects, and we can therefore classify
theologians according to which of these propositions they do reject.
So that leaves exactly three primary eschatological views. Because the
Augustinians, named after St. Augustine of Hippo (354–430),
believe strongly in both the sovereignty of God’s will
(proposition (2)) and the reality of an everlasting separation from
God (proposition (3)), they finally reject the idea that God’s
unconditional (or electing) love extends to all humans equally
(proposition (1)); because the Arminians, named after Jacobus Arminius
(1560–1609) for his opposition to the Augustinian understanding
of limited election, believe in both God’s equal love for all
(proposition (1)) and the reality of an everlasting separation from
God (proposition (3)), they finally reject the idea that God’s
desire to win over all will be fully satisfied (proposition (2)); and
finally, because the Christian universalists believe in both
God’s equal love for all (proposition (1)) and the ultimate
triumph of his loving will (proposition (2)), they finally reject
altogether the idea of an everlasting separation from God (proposition
(3)).

So here, then, are three quite different systems of theology.
According to Augustinian theology, God’s sovereign will to save
the objects of his redemptive love cannot be thwarted, but the scope
of that love is restricted to a limited elect. According to Arminian
theology, God’s redemptive love extends to all humans equally,
but his will to save them all can be thwarted by factors, such as
certain human choices, over which he has no direct causal control. And
according to universalist theology, God’s redemptive love
extends to all humans equally and his will to save everyone cannot be
thwarted forever. Accordingly, a question that may now arise is,
“Which system of theology best preserves the praiseworthy
character and the glory of the divine nature?”
1.1 Postulating a Final and Irreversible Division within the Human Race

Some may already have observed that the third proposition in our
inconsistent triad, namely

Some humans will never be reconciled to God and will therefore
remain separated from him forever,


is fairly unspecific concerning the fate of the wicked and the import
of separation from God. For if we think of such separation as a state
of being estranged or alienated from God, or if we think of it as
simply the absence of a loving union with him, then (3) is equally
consistent with many different conceptions of hell, some arguably
milder than others. It is equally consistent, for example, with the
idea that hell is a realm where the wicked receive retribution in the
form of everlasting torment, with the idea that they will simply be
annihilated in the end, with the idea that they create their own hell
by rejecting God, and with the idea that God will simply make them as
comfortable as possible in hell even as he limits the harm they can do
to each other (see Stump 1986). This lack of specificity is by design.
For however one understands the fate of those who supposedly remain
separated from God forever, such a fate will entail something
like (3). Alternatively, anyone who rejects (3) will likewise reject
the idea of everlasting torment as well as any of the supposedly
milder conceptions of an everlasting separation from God.

Now when the Fifth General Council of the Christian church condemned
the doctrine of universal reconciliation in 553 CE, it did not,
strictly speaking, commit the institutional church of that day to a
doctrine of everlasting conscious torment in hell. But it did commit
the church to a final and irreversible division within the human race
between those who will be saved, on the one hand, and those who will
be hopelessly lost forever, on the other. So anyone who accepted the
Council’s decision on this point, as most major theologians over
the subsequent thousand years did, inevitably confronted an obvious
question. If there is to be such a final and irreversible division
within the human race, just what accounts for it? According to the
Augustinians, the explanation lies in the mystery of God’s
freedom to extend his love and mercy to a limited elect and to
withhold it from the rest of humanity; but according to the Arminians,
the explanation lies in our human free choices. Thanks to God’s
grace, we ultimately determine our own destiny in heaven or
hell.

These two very different explanations for a final and irrevocable
division within the human race, where some end up in heaven and others
in hell, also reflect profound disagreements over the nature of divine
grace. Because the Augustinians hold that, in our present condition at
least, God owes us nothing, they also believe that the grace he
confers upon a limited elect is utterly gratuitous and supererogatory.
As John Calvin put it, “For as Jacob, deserving nothing by good
works, is taken into grace, Esau, as yet undefiled by any crime, is
hated” (Calvin 1960, Bk. III, Ch. XXIII, sec. 12). But the
Arminians reject such a doctrine as inherently unjust; it is simply
unjust, they say, for God to do for some, namely the elect, what he
refuses to do for others, particularly since the elect have done
nothing to deserve their special treatment. The Arminians therefore
hold that God offers his grace to all human beings, though
many are those who freely reject it and eventually seal their fate in
hell forever. But for their part, the Augustinians counter that this
Arminian explanation in terms of human free will contradicts St.
Paul’s clear teaching that salvation is wholly a matter of
grace: “For by grace you have been saved through faith,”
Paul declared, “and this [the faith] is not your own doing; it
is the gift of God—not the result of works, so that no one may
boast” (Eph. 2:8–9). The Augustinians also challenge the
Arminians with the following question: if the ultimate difference
between the saved and the lost lies in the superior free choices that
the saved have made during their earthly lives, then why
shouldn’t they take credit for this difference or even boast
about it? Why shouldn’t they say, “Well, at least
I’m not as bad as those miserable people in hell who were so
stupid as to have freely rejected the grace that God offers to
all.”

A universalist, of course, might insist that the Augustinians and the
Arminians are both right in their respective criticisms of each
other.
1.2 Restricting the Scope of God’s Love

We have seen so far that the Augustinians in effect reason as follows:
God’s saving grace is irresistible in the end, and yet
everlasting torment in hell will nonetheless be the terrible fate for
some; therefore, God does not love all created persons equally and his
(electing) love is thus limited in its scope. Augustine’s own
interpretation of 1 Timothy 2:4 provides a nice illustration. He wrote:
“the word concerning God, ‘who will have all men to be
saved,’ does not mean that there is no one whose salvation he
[God] doth not will … but by ‘all men’ we are to
understand the whole of mankind, in every single group into which it
can be divided … For from which of these groups doth not God
will that some men from every nation should be saved through
his only-begotten Son our Lord?” (Enchiridion,
103—italics added).

So it is not God’s will, Augustine claimed, to save every
individual from every group and every nation; it is merely God’s
will to save all kinds of people, that is, some individuals
from every group and every nation. Augustine’s exegetical
arguments for such an interpretation, however fantastic they may
appear to non-Augustinians, need not concern us here. More important
for our purposes is his pattern of argument, as illustrated in the
following comment: “We could interpret it [1 Tim. 2:4] in any
other fashion, as long as we are not compelled to believe that the
Omnipotent hath willed something to be done which was not
done”—and as long as we are not compelled to believe, he
no doubt took for granted, that no one will be eternally damned. For
if propositions (2) and (3) are both true, then proposition
(1) is false and the scope of God’s love is restricted to a
limited elect. It is as simple as that.

Nor should one suppose that this Augustinian understanding of limited
election is totally bereft of contemporary defenders. One such
contemporary defender, the Christian philosopher Paul Helm, has argued
that God’s loving nature no more necessitates that he extend his
redemptive love equally to all humans than it necessitates that he
create them all with the same human characteristics. For why is it,
Helm asks, “that some are strong, some weak, some male, some
female, some healthy, some diseased, and so forth?” He then
makes the following claim: “if it is possible for there to be
differentiations in the created universe that are consistent with the
attributes of God then it is presumably possible for there to be
differentiations with regard to God’s redemptive purposes which
are entirely consistent with the divine attributes” (Helm 1985,
53). How one evaluates such a claim will no doubt depend, at least in
part, upon how one answers such questions as these: Would God’s
willing that one person have black hair and another brown hair be
compatible with his loving both of them equally and with his acting
justly toward both of them? Would God’s willing that one person
should come to a glorious end and another to a horrific end be
compatible with his loving both of them equally and with his acting
justly toward both of them?

In response to similar questions, Jeff Jordan has challenged the whole
idea, which he acknowledges to be widely accepted among theistic
philosophers, that “God’s love must be maximally extended
and equally intense” (Jordan 2012, 53). According to Jordan,
such maximally extended love would be a deficiency in any human who
manifested it; hence, it should not be numbered among God’s
perfections or great-making properties. Neither is it possible, he
appears to argue, that God should love equally all of the persons whom
he has in fact created. For “if God has deep attachments [with
some of them], it follows that he does not love all [of them] equally.
And being a perfect being, God would have loves of the deepest
kind” (Jordan 2012, 67). Jordan thus asks in a later article,
“What if ... it is not possible in-principle [even for God] to
love every person uniformly to the same degree?” And in support
of his contention that this is indeed impossible, Jordan argues,
first, that people in fact have incompatible interests, second, that
two “interests are incompatible just in case attempts to bring
about one of them require that the other be impeded,” and third,
that love of the deepest kind “has as a necessary constituent
identifying with the interests of one’s beloved” (Jordan
2015, 184). 

Two critical problems arise at this point. First, why suppose that the
deepest love for others (in the sense of willing the very best for
them) always requires identifying with their own interests? According
to Jordan, a person’s interest is merely “a desire or goal
had by that person—something that a person cares about”
(Jordan 2012, 62, n. 26). But in that sense of “interest,”
God’s deepest love for a person surely requires that he actually
oppose or impede some of that person’s interests. Why else would
Christians believe that God often chastises or corrects those whom he
loves? And second, why suppose that God cannot identify with
incompatible interests anyway? Indeed, why cannot a single individual
identify with incompatible interests (or conflicting desires) of his
or her own? Jordan himself offers the following explanation of what it
means to identify with an interest: “Identifying with an interest we
might understand as, roughly, caring about what one’s beloved
cares about because one’s beloved cares about it” (Jordan
2015, 184). But why, then, cannot a loving mother, for example, care
deeply about the incompatible interests (or immediate desires) of her
two small children as they squabble over a toy and care about these
incompatible interests, however trivial they might otherwise have
seemed to her, precisely because her beloved children care about them?
The impossibility of her satisfying such incompatible
interests hardly entails the impossibility of her identifying with
them in the sense of caring deeply about
 them.[2]
 Accordingly, what a proponent of limited election needs at this point
is to specify a clear sense of “to identify with” such
that (a) it is impossible for God to identify with incompatible
interests and (b) an equally deep love for all created persons would
nonetheless require that he be able to identify with at least some of
their incompatible interests. 

In any case, the vast majority of Christian philosophers who have
addressed the topic of hell in recent decades and have
published at least some of their work in the standard philosophical
journals do accept proposition (1) and also reject, therefore, any
hint of Augustinian limited election. However ephemeral and changeable
such a consensus may be, the contemporary consensus does seem to be
that God’s redemptive love extends to all humans equally (see,
for example, Buckareff and Plug 2005, Knight 1997, Kronen and Reitan
2011, Kvanvig 1993, Murray 1998, Seymour 2000b, Stump 1983, Swinburne
1983, and Walls 1998). For a more thorough examination and critique of
Jordan’s specific arguments, see Parker 2013 and Talbott 2013;
and for Jordan’s reply to some of this criticism, see Jordan
2015.
2. The Augustinian Understanding of Hell

Behind the Augustinian understanding of hell lies a commitment to a
retributive theory of punishment, according to which the primary
purpose of punishment is to satisfy the demands of justice or, as some
might say, to balance the scales of justice. And the Augustinian
commitment to such a theory is hardly surprising. For based upon his
interpretation of various New Testament texts, Augustine insisted that
hell is a literal lake of fire in which the damned will experience the
horror of everlasting torment; they will experience, that is, the
unbearable physical pain of literally being burned forever. The
primary purpose of such unending torment, according to Augustine, is
not correction, or deterrence, or even the protection of the innocent;
nor did he make any claim for it except that it is fully deserved and
therefore just. As for how such torment could be even physically
possible, Augustine insisted further that “by a miracle of their
most omnipotent Creator, they [living creatures who are damned] can
burn without being consumed, and suffer without dying” (City
of God, Bk. 21, Ch. 9). Such is the metaphysics of hell, as
Augustine understood it.

It would be unfair, however, to imply that all Augustinians, as
classified above, accept Augustine’s own understanding of an
eternal torture chamber. For many Augustinians view the agony of hell
as essentially psychological and spiritual in nature, consisting of
the knowledge that every possibility for joy and happiness has been
lost forever. Hell, as they see it, is thus a condition in which
self-loathing, hatred of others, hopelessness, and infinite despair
consumes the soul like a metaphorical fire. Still, virtually all
Augustinians agree with Jonathan Edwards concerning this: whatever the
precise nature of the suffering, “In hell God manifests his
being and perfections only in hatred and wrath, and hatred without
love” (Edwards 1738, 390). In fact, according to Edwards, the
damned never were an object of God’s electing love in the first
place: “The saints in glory will know concerning the damned in
hell, that God never loved them, but that he hates them, and [that
they] will be for ever hated of God” (Edwards 1834, sec. III).
So why are Christians required to love even those whom God has always
hated? Because, says Edwards, we have no way of knowing in this life
who is an object of God’s eternal love and who is an object of
his eternal hatred. “We ought now to love all, and even wicked
men” because “we know not but that God loves them”
(sec. III). In the next life, however, “the heavenly inhabitants
will know that [the damned] … are the objects of God’s
eternal hatred” (sec. II). Edwards and other Augustinians thus
hold that the damned differ from the saved in one respect only: God
has freely chosen not to lavish his grace upon them in the same way
that he does lavish it, in their view, on the elect.

So why, one may wonder at this point, do the Augustinians believe that
anyone—whether it be Judas Iscariot, Saul of Tarsus, or Adolph
Hitler—actually deserves unending torment as a just recompense
for their sins? The typical Augustinian answer appeals to the
seriousness or the heinous character of even the most minor offense
against God. In Cur Deus Homo (or Why God Became
Man), a classic statement of the substitution theory of
atonement, St. Anselm illustrated such an appeal with the following
example. Suppose that God were to forbid you to look in a certain
direction, even though it seemed to you that by doing so you could
preserve the entire creation from destruction. If you were to disobey
God and to look in that forbidden direction, you would sin so gravely,
Anselm declared, that you could never do anything to pay for that sin
adequately. As a proponent of the retributive theory, Anselm first
insisted that “God demands satisfaction in proportion to the
extent of the sin.” He then went on to insist that “you do
not make satisfaction [for any sin] unless you pay something greater
than is that for whose sake [namely God’s] you ought not to have
sinned” (Cur Deus Homo I, Ch. 21). Anselm’s
argument, then, appears to run as follows: Because God is infinitely
great, the slightest offense against him is also infinitely serious;
and if an offense is infinitely serious, then no suffering the sinner
might endure over a finite period of time could possibly pay for it.
So either the sinner does not pay for the sin at all, or the sinner
must pay for it by enduring everlasting suffering (or at least a
permanent loss of happiness).

But what about those who never commit any offense against God at all,
such as those who die in infancy or those who, because of severe brain
damage or some other factor, never develop into minimally rational
agents? These too, according to Augustine, deserve to be condemned
along with the human race as a whole. “For … the whole
human race,” he insisted, “was condemned in its apostate
head by a divine judgment so just that even if not a single member of
the race [including, therefore, those who die in infancy] were ever
saved from it, no one could rail against God’s justice”
(Enchiridion,
 99).[3]
 Registering his agreement with Augustine, Calvin likewise wrote:
“Hence, as Augustine says, whether a man is a guilty unbeliever
or an innocent believer, he begets not innocent but guilty
children, for he begets them from a corrupted nature” (Calvin
1536, Bk. II, Ch. I, sec. 7 —italics added). Augustine and
Calvin both believed, then, that God justly condemns some who die in
infancy; indeed, if their innocence required that he unite with them,
then the ground of his decision to do so would lie in them and not in
his own free decision to do whatever he pleases in this
 matter.[4]
 With respect to the unborn twins Jacob and Esau, Augustine thus
wrote: “both the twins were ‘by nature children of
wrath,’ not because of any works of their own, but because they
were both bound in the fetters of damnation originally forged by
Adam” (Enchiridion, 98).

As these remarks illustrate, the Augustinian understanding of original
sin implies that we are all born guilty of a heinous sin against God,
and this inherited guilt relieves God of any responsibility for our
spiritual welfare. In Augustine’s own words, “Now it is
clear that the one sin originally inherited, even if it were the
only one involved, makes men liable to condemnation”
(Enchiridion, 50—italics added). Augustine thus
concluded that God can save whomsoever he wills and also damn
whomsoever he wills without committing any injustice at all.
“Now, who but a fool,” he declared, “would think God
unfair either when he imposes penal judgment on the deserving or when
he shows mercy to the undeserving” (Enchiridion, 98). For the
Augustinians, then, the bottom line is that, even as our Creator, God
owes us nothing in our present condition because, thanks to original
sin, we come into this earthly life already deserving nothing but
everlasting punishment in hell as a just recompense for original
sin.

Although this Augustinian rationale for the justice of hell has had a
profound influence on the Western theological tradition, particularly
in the past, critics of Augustinian theology, both ancient and
contemporary, have raised a number of powerful objections to it.
2.1 Retributivist Objections

One set of objections arises from within the retributive theory
itself, and here are three such objections that critics have raised.
First, why should the greatness of the one against whom an
offense occurs determine the degree of one’s personal
guilt? According to most proponents of the retributive theory,
the personal guilt of those who act wrongly must depend, at least in
part, upon certain facts about them. A schizophrenic young
man who tragically kills his loving mother, believing her to be a
sinister space alien who has devoured his real mother, may need
treatment, they would say, but a just punishment seems out of the
question. Similarly, the personal guilt of those who disobey God or
violate the divine commands must likewise depend upon the answer to
such questions as: Have they knowingly violated a divine
command?—and if so, to what extent are they responsible for
their own rebellious impulses? To what extent do they possess not only
an implicit knowledge of God and his will for them, but a clear vision
of the nature of God? To what extent do they see clearly the choice of
roads, the consequences of their actions, or the true nature of evil?
Even many Augustinians admit the relevance of such questions when they
insist that Adam’s sin was especially heinous because he
supposedly had special advantages, such as great happiness and the
beatific vision, that his descendants do not enjoy. If Adam’s
sin was especially heinous because he had special advantages, then the
sins of those who lack his special advantages must be less heinous;
and if that is true, if some sins against God are less heinous than
others, then the greatness of God cannot be the only, or even the
decisive, factor in determining the degree of one’s personal
guilt or the seriousness of a given sin (see Adams 1975, 442; Kvanvig
1993, 40–50; and Talbott 2014, 140–148).

Second, virtually all retributivists, with the notable exception of
the Augustinian theologians, reject as absurd the whole idea of
inherited guilt. So why, one may ask, do so many Augustinians, despite
their commitment to a retributive theory of punishment, insist that
God could justly condemn even infants on account of their supposedly
inherited guilt? Part of the explanation, according to Philip Quinn,
may lie “in a homuncular view of human nature itself”
(Quinn 1988, 99) or in what some philosophers might label as a simple
category mistake. A good illustration of the homuncular view, as Quinn
calls it, might be the following chapter heading in Anselm’s
Cur Deus Homo: “What it was that man, when he sinned,
removed from God and cannot repay” (I, Ch. 23). The implication
of such language, which we also find in Augustine, Calvin, and a host
of others, is that humankind or human nature or the human race as a
whole is itself a person (or homunculus) who can act and sin against
God. Perhaps that explains how Augustine could write: “Man
… produced depraved and condemned children. For we were all in
that one man, since we were all that one man who fell into sin”
(City of God, Bk. XIII, Ch. 14). And perhaps it also explains
how Calvin could write: “even infants themselves, while they
carry their condemnation with them from the mother’s womb, are
guilty not of another’s fault but of their own” fault
(Calvin 1536, Bk. II, Ch. I, sec. 8). The reasoning here appears to
run as follows: Humankind is guilty of a grievous offense against God;
infants are instances of humankind; therefore, infants are likewise
guilty of a grievous offense against God. But most retributivists
would reject this way of speaking as simply incoherent. Whether one
agrees with it or not, one can at least understand the claim that
Adam’s sin had disastrous consequences for all his progeny in
that they inherited many defects, deficiencies, and degenerate
dispositions. One can also understand Calvin’s claim that, as a
result of original sin, “our own insight … is utterly
blind and stupid in divine matters” and that “man’s
keenness of mind is mere blindness as far as the knowledge of God is
concerned” (Calvin 1536, Bk. II, Ch. II, sec. 19). One can even
understand the claim that we are morally responsible for doing
something about our inherited defects, provided that we have the power
and the opportunity to do so. But the claim that we are born
guilty is another matter, as is the claim that we are all
deserving of everlasting punishment on account of having inherited
certain defects or deficiencies. Most retributivists would regard such
inherited defects as excusing conditions that decrease,
rather than increase, the degree of one’s personal
guilt. So even though the Augustinians accept the idea of divine
retribution, they appear at the same time to reject important parts of
the retributive theory of punishment.

Third, if, as Anselm insisted, even the slightest offense against God
is infinitely serious and thus deserves a permanent loss of happiness
as a just recompense, then the idea, so essential to the retributive
theory, that we can grade offenses and fit lesser punishments to
lesser crimes appears to be in danger of collapsing. Many Christians
do, it is true, speculate that gradations of punishment exist in hell;
some sinners, they suggest, may experience greater pain than others,
and some places in hell may be hotter than others. Augustine even
tried to ameliorate his views concerning the fate of unbaptized
infants by suggesting that “such infants as quit the body
without being baptized will be involved in the mildest condemnation of
all” (On Merit and the Forgiveness of Sins, and the Baptism
of Infants, Bk. I, Ch. 21
 [available online]).
 But many retributivists would nonetheless respond as follows. If all
of those in hell, including the condemned infants, are dead in the
theological sense of being separated from God forever, and if this
implies a permanent loss of both the beatific vision and every other
conceivable source of worthwhile happiness, then they have all
received a punishment so severe that the further grading of offenses
seems pointless. We would hardly regard a king who executes every
law-breaker, the jaywalker no less than the murderer, as just; nor
would we feel much better if, in an effort to fit the punishment to
the crime, the king should reserve the more “humane” forms
of execution for the jaywalker. Once you make a permanent and
irreversible loss of happiness the supposedly just penalty for the
most minor offense, the only option left for more serious offenses is
to pile on additional suffering. But at some point piling on
additional suffering for more serious offenses seems utterly demonic,
or at least so many retributivists would insist; and it does nothing
to ameliorate a permanent loss of happiness for a minor offense or, as
in the case of non-elect babies who die in infancy, for no real
offense at all.

All of which brings one to what Marilyn McCord Adams and many others
see as the most crucial question of all. How could any sin
that a finite being commits in a context of ambiguity, ignorance, and
illusion deserve an infinite penalty as a just recompense? (See Adams
1993, 313).
2.2 Challenging the Retributive Theory Itself

Another set of objections to the Augustinian understanding of hell
arises from the perspective of those who reject a retributive theory
of punishment. According to Anselm and the Augustinians generally, no
punishment that a sinner might endure over a finite period of time can
justly compensate for the slightest offense against God. Anselm thus
speculated that if no suffering of finite duration will fully
satisfy the demands of justice, perhaps suffering of infinite
duration will do the trick. But the truth, according to many critics,
is that no suffering and no punishment of any duration could
in and of itself compensate for someone’s wrongdoing.
In the right circumstances punishment might be a means to something
that satisfies the demands of justice, but it has no power to do so in
and of itself. The Victorian visionary George MacDonald thus put it
this way: “Punishment, or deserved suffering, is no equipoise to
sin. It is no use laying it on the other scale. It will not move it a
hair’s breadth. Suffering weighs nothing at all against
sin” (MacDonald 1889, 510). Why not? Because punishment, whether
it consists of additional suffering or a painless annihilation, does
nothing in and of itself, MacDonald insisted, to cancel out a sin, to
compensate or to make up for it, to repair the harm that it brings
into our lives, or to heal the estrangement that makes it possible in
the first
 place.[5]
 Neither does it justify God’s decision to permit the wrongdoing
in the first place.

So what, theoretically, would make things right or fully
satisfy justice in the event that someone should commit murder or
otherwise act wrongly? Whereas the Augustinians insist that justice
requires punishment, other religious writers insist that justice
requires something very different, namely reconciliation and
restoration (see, for example, Marshall, 2001). Only God,
however, has the power to achieve true restoration in the case of
murder, for only God can resurrect the victims of murder as easily as
he can the victims of old age. According to George MacDonald, whose
religious vision was almost the polar opposite of the Augustinian
vision, perfect justice therefore requires, first, that
sinners repent of their sin and turn away from everything that would
separate them from God and from others; it requires, second, that God
forgive repentant sinners and that they forgive each other; and it
requires, third, that God overcome, perhaps with their own
cooperation, any harm that sinners do either to others or to
themselves. Augustinians typically object to the idea that divine
justice, no less than divine love, requires that God forgive sinners
and undertake the divine toil of restoring a just order. But MacDonald
insisted that, even as human parents have an obligation to care for
their children, so God has a freely accepted responsibility, as our
Creator, to meet our moral and spiritual needs. God therefore
owes us forgiveness for the same reason that human parents
owe it to their children to forgive them in the event that
they misbehave. Of course, precisely because they do forgive their
children, loving parents may sometimes punish their children and even
hold the feet of a child to the proverbial fire when this seems
necessary for the child’s own welfare. And if the time should
come when loving parents are required to respect the misguided choices
of a rebellious teenager or an adult child, they will always stand
ready to restore fellowship with a prodigal son or daughter in the
event of a ruptured relationship.

We thus encounter two radically different religious visions of divine
justice, both of which deserve a full and careful examination.
According to the Augustinian vision, those condemned to hell are
recipients of God’s justice but are not recipients of his mercy;
hence justice and mercy are radically different (even inconsistent)
attributes of
 God.[6]
 But according to an alternative religious vision, as exemplified in
the work of George MacDonald 1889 and J.A.T. Robinson 1968,
God’s justice and mercy are the very same attribute in this
sense: his justice is altogether merciful even as his mercy is
altogether just.
3. Free–will Theodicies of Hell

Unlike the Augustinians, Arminian theologians emphasize the role that
free will plays in determining one’s eternal destiny in heaven
or hell; they also accept the so-called libertarian understanding of
free will, according to which freedom and determinism are
incompatible. Because not even an omnipotent being can causally
determine a genuinely free choice, the reality of free will, they say,
introduces into the universe an element that, from God’s
perspective, is utterly random in that it lies outside of his direct
causal control. Accordingly, if some person should freely act
wrongly—or worse yet, freely reject God’s grace—in a
given set of circumstances, then it was not within God’s power
to induce this person to have freely acted otherwise, at least not in
the exact same circumstances in which the person was left free to act
wrongly. So in that sense, our human free choices, particularly the
bad ones, are genuine obstacles that God must work around as he tries
to bring his loving purposes to fruition. And this may suggest the
further possibility that, with respect to some free persons, God
cannot both preserve their freedom in relation to him
and prevent them from continuing forever to reject him
freely. As C. S. Lewis, an early 20th Century proponent of such a
theodicy, once put it, “In creating beings with free will,
omnipotence from the outset submits to the possibility of …
defeat. … I willingly believe that the damned are, in one
sense, successful, rebels to the end; that the doors of hell are
locked on the inside” (Lewis 1944, 115). 

The basic idea here is that hell is essentially a freely embraced
condition and the self-imposed misery it entails rather than a
forcibly imposed
 punishment;[7]
 and because freedom and determinism are incompatible, the creation of
free moral agents carries an inherent risk of ultimate tragedy.
Whether essential to our personhood or not, free will is a precious
gift, an expression of God’s love for us; and because the very
love that seeks our salvation also respects our freedom, God will not
prevent us from separating ourselves from him, even forever, if that
is what we freely choose to do. So even though the perfectly loving
God would never reject anyone, sinners can reject God and shut him out
forever; they not only have the power as free agents to reject God for
a season, during the time when they are mired in ambiguity and subject
to illusion, but they are also able to cling forever to the illusions
that make such rejection possible in the first place. 

But why suppose it even possible that a free creature should freely
reject forever the redemptive will of a perfectly loving and
infinitely resourceful God? In the relevant literature over the past
several decades, advocates of a free–will theodicy of hell have
offered at least three quite different answers to this question: 

Perhaps the most commonly expressed answer concerns the
possibility of an irrevocable decision to reject God forever. Jerry
Walls thus describes the damned as those who have made a decisive
choice of evil (see Walls 1992, Ch. 5), Richard Swinburne suggests
that “once our will is fixed for bad, we shall never [again]
desire or seek what we have missed” because we have made an
“irrevocable choice of character” (Swinburne 1989, 199),
and R. Zachary Manis interprets Kierkegaard, whose view he defends, as
suggesting that the “damned are so filled with hatred …
so motivated by malice and spite … that they will to remain in
their state of torment, all for the sake of demonstrating that they
are in the right, and that God is in the wrong” (Manis 2016,
290).
Another proposed answer rejects altogether the traditional idea
that those in hell are lost without any further hope of restoration.
Buckareff and Plug (2005) have thus argued from the very nature of the
divine perfections (including perfect love) that God will always have
“an open-door policy towards those in hell—making it
[always] possible for those in hell to escape” (39); and
similarly, Raymond VanArragon has argued that those in hell continue
to reject God freely only if they retain the power to act otherwise
and hence also the power to repent and be saved (see VanArragon 2010).
Because the damned never lose forever their libertarian freedom in
relation to God’s offer of salvation, in other words, and never
lose forever the psychological possibility for genuine repentance,
there is no irreversible finality in the so-called final
 judgment.[8]
 Still, the possibility remains, according to this view, that some
will never avail themselves of the opportunity to escape from hell.

A third proposed answer rests upon a Molinist perspective,
according to which God’s omniscience includes what philosophers
now call middle knowledge, which includes far more than a simple
foreknowledge of a person’s future free actions. It also
includes a perfect knowledge of what a person would have done
freely in circumstances that do not even obtain. So with respect
to his decision whether or not to create a given person and to place
that person in a given set of circumstances, God can base this
decision in part on his knowledge of what the person would do freely
if created and placed in these precise circumstances—or if, for
that matter, the person were placed in any other possible set of
circumstances as well. From this Molinist perspective, William Lane
Craig has defended the possibility that some free persons are utterly
irredeemable in this sense: nothing God can do—that is, no
revelation he might impart, no punishment he might administer, and no
conditions he might create—would ever induce them to repent
freely or successfully reconcile them to him (Craig 1989).
Craig himself calls this dreadful property of being irredeemable
transworld damnation (184).


Each of these answers illustrates in its own way how an argument for
some controversial philosophical (or theological) thesis can often
include a premise that is no less controversial, or sometimes even
more controversial, than the thesis its proponents aim to support. And
perhaps Craig’s defense of eternal damnation from a Molinist
perspective provides a particularly instructive illustration of this
common feature of such arguments. For Molinism itself is highly
controversial (see Perszyk 2011 for a review of some of the current
controversies), and many theistic philosophers who accept the
possibility of an everlasting hell nonetheless have serious
reservations about the idea of middle knowledge (see, for example,
Walls 1992, 37–44). But even if one should accept this idea and
should concede, at least for the sake of argument, that transworld
damnation is a coherent concept, a natural question to ask in the
present context would be, “Why suppose it even possible that a
morally perfect God would create a person (or instantiate the
individual essence of someone) who suffers from transworld
damnation?” By way of an answer, Craig insists on the
possibility that some persons would submit to God freely only in a
world in which others should damn themselves forever; it is even
possible, he insists, that God must permit a large number of people to
damn themselves in order to fill heaven with a larger number of
redeemed. Craig himself has put it this way:

It is possible that the terrible price of filling heaven is also
filling hell and that in any other possible world which was feasible
for God the balance between saved and lost was worse. It is possible
that had God actualized a world in which there are less persons in
hell, there would also have been less persons in heaven. It is
possible that in order to achieve this much blessedness, God was
forced to accept this much loss (1989, 183).


As this passage illustrates, Craig accepts at least the possibility
that, because of free will, history includes an element of
irreducible tragedy; he even accepts the possibility that if
fewer people were damned to hell, then fewer people would have been
saved as well. So perhaps God knows from the outset that his triumph
will never be complete no matter what he does; as a result, he merely
does the best he can to minimize his defeat, to cut his losses, and in
the process to fill heaven with more than he might otherwise have
managed to save. (For a critique of this reply, see Talbott 1992; for
Craig’s rejoinder, see Craig 1993; and for a critique of
Craig’s rejoinder, see Seymour 2000a.)

Be all of that as it may, one’s assessment of the three answers
above will depend upon one’s understanding of moral freedom and
the role it plays, if any, in someone landing in either heaven or
hell. The first two answers also represent a fundamental disagreement
concerning the existence of free will in hell and perhaps even the
nature of free will itself. According to the first answer, the
inhabitants of hell are those who have freely acquired a consistently
evil will and an irreversibly bad moral character. So while in hell,
these inhabitants do not even continue rejecting God freely
in any sense that requires the psychological possibility of choosing
otherwise. But is such an irreversibly bad moral character even
metaphysically possible? Not according to the second answer, which
implies that a morally perfect God would never cease providing those
in hell with opportunities for repentance and providing these
opportunities in contexts where such repentance remains a genuine
psychological possibility. Benjamin Matheson, however, criticizes the
second answer on the ground that “we ought to treat Heaven and
Hell symmetrically; so if there’s an open door policy on Hell,
then there should also be an open door policy on Heaven.” But
the whole idea of escapism with respect to “Heaven is
incoherent,” he argues, “and therefore escapism is not a
plausible response to the problem of Hell” either (Matheson
2014, 200). All of which points once again to the need for a clearer
understanding of the nature and purpose of moral freedom. 
3.1 The Limits of Possible Freedom

Given the New Testament imagery associated with Gehenna, the Lake of
Fire, and the outer darkness—where there is “weeping and
gnashing of teeth”—the question is not how
someone in a context of ambiguity, ignorance, and misperception could
freely choose separation from God over submission to him; the question
is instead how someone could both experience such separation
(or the unbearable misery of hell, for example) and freely
choose to remain in such a state forever. This is not a problem for
the Augustinians because, according to them, the damned have no
further choice in the matter once their everlasting punishment
commences. But it is a problem for those free will theists who believe
that the damned freely embrace an eternal destiny apart from God, and
the latter view requires, at the very least, a plausible account of
the relevant freedom.

Now it will come as no surprise to anyone familiar with Jonathan
Kvanvig’s earlier work (Kvanvig 1993) that in a later work he
would again adopt “a libertarian account of human freedom in
order to provide a complete response to” the problem of hell
(Kvanvig 2011, 54). In the same work he also speaks for many
libertarians, though by no means for all of them, when he assumes
“that some formulation of the Principle of Alternative
Possibilities (PAP) correctly describes this notion of [libertarian]
freedom (the principle claims that in order to act freely one must be
able to do otherwise)” (48). 

Note, however, that his sentence in parentheses implies only that PAP
is a necessary condition of the relevant freedom; and even if that
should be true, it would hardly follow that PAP provides a complete
(or even an adequate) description of it. For consider again the
example, introduced in section 2.1 above, of a schizophrenic young man
who kills his loving mother, believing her to be a sinister space
alien who has devoured his real mother; and suppose this time that he
does so in a context in which he categorically could have chosen
otherwise (perhaps because he worries about possible retaliation from
other sinister space aliens). Why suppose that such an irrational
choice and action, even if not causally determined, would qualify as
an instance of acting freely? It is hardly enough to point out that
the young man has acted in accordance with his own will in this
matter. For that would be true even if his will were the product of
sufficient causes that existed in the distant past. Or suppose, if you
prefer, that someone should be at least partly responsible for having
become cognitively impaired—as when, for example, a teenager
foolishly experiments with powerful drugs and ends up with a scrambled
brain and an utterly deluded and irrational set of beliefs. Whatever
the explanation for such cognitive impairment, at some point moral
freedom is no longer possible, not even in cases where someone retains
the power of contrary choice. Either our seriously deluded beliefs,
particularly those with destructive consequences in our own lives, are
in principle correctable by some degree of powerful evidence against
them, or the choices that rest upon them are simply too irrational to
qualify as free moral choices. 

Such examples illustrate why it is not enough merely to specify a
single necessary condition of moral freedom—namely that a choice
is free in the relevant sense only if it is not causally determined by
factors outside the choosing agent’s control—and then simply
to leave it at that, as if there were no other necessary conditions of
free choice, which there surely are. For not just any uncaused event,
or just any agent caused choice, or just any randomly generated
selection between alternatives will qualify as a free choice for which
the choosing agent is morally responsible. Moral freedom also requires
a minimal degree of rationality on the part of the choosing agent,
including an ability to learn from experience, an ability to discern
normal reasons for acting, and a capacity for moral improvement. With
good reason, therefore, do we exclude small children, the severely
brain damaged, paranoid schizophrenics, and even dogs from the class
of free moral agents. For, however causally undetermined some of their
behaviors might be, they all lack some part of the rationality
required to qualify as free moral
 agents.[9]


Now consider again the view of C. S. Lewis and many other Christians
concerning the bliss that union with the divine nature entails and the
objective horror that separation from it entails, and suppose that the
outer darkness—a soul suspended alone in nothingness, without
even a physical order to experience and without any human
relationships at all—should be the logical limit (short of
annihilation) of possible separation from the divine nature. Within
the context of these ideas, two consequences seem to follow. The first
is a dilemma argument for the conclusion that a freely chosen eternal
destiny apart from God is metaphysically impossible. For either a
person S is fully informed about who God is and what both union
with him and separation from him entail, or S is not so
informed. If S is fully informed and should choose a life
apart from God anyway, then S’s choice would be utterly
and almost inconceivably irrational; such a choice would fall well
below the threshold required for moral freedom. And if S is not
fully informed, then God can of course continue to work with S,
subjecting S to new experiences, shattering S’s
illusions, and correcting S’s misjudgments in perfectly
natural ways that do not interfere with S’s freedom.
Beyond that, for as long as S remains less than fully informed,
S is simply in no position to reject the true God; S may
reject a caricature of God, perhaps even a caricature of
S’s own devising, but S is in no position to
reject the true God himself. Therefore, in either case, whether
S is fully informed or less than fully informed, it is simply
not possible that S should reject the true God freely
(see Talbott 2007, 455),.

A second consequence of the above ideas is an obvious asymmetry
between heaven and hell. According to Benjamin Matheson (see section 3
above), a libertarian freedom to escape from hell is possible only if
a libertarian freedom to escape from heaven is likewise possible. But
even if one should accept that claim, an important asymmetry would
remain. For suppose that some person S meets the minimal degree
of rationality that moral freedom requires. Whereas S’s
having experienced the bliss of union with the divine nature in heaven
could never, all by itself, provide S with an incentive to
escape from it, as Matheson himself points out (see 2014, 201),
S’s having experienced the objective horror of separation
from that nature in hell would inevitably provide S with at least
some incentive to escape from the resulting horror. So, for
this reason alone, a perfectly loving God would have every reason to
treat escapism with respect to hell very differently than he would
escapism with respect to heaven (see also Morgan Luck’s example
in 2016, 400). 

Finally, by way of a reply to the above dilemma argument and in
defense of his own free–will approach to hell—which, by
the way, in no way excludes the possibility that some inhabitants of
hell may eventually escape from it—Jerry Walls concedes that
“the choice of evil is impossible for anyone who has a fully
formed awareness that God is the source of happiness and sin the cause
of misery” (Walls 1992, 133). But Walls also contends that, even
if those in hell have rejected a caricature of God rather than the
true God himself, it remains possible that some of them will finally
make a decisive choice of evil and will thus remain in hell
forever. He then makes a three-fold claim: first, that the damned have
in some sense deluded themselves, second, that they have the power to
cling to their delusions forever, and third, that God cannot forcibly
remove their self-imposed deceptions without interfering with
their freedom in relation to him (Walls 1992, Ch. 5).

For more detailed discussions of these and related issues, see
Swinburne 1989 (Ch. 12), Craig 1989 and 1993, Talbott 1992, 2001b,
2004, and 2007, Walls 1992 (Ch. 5), 2004a, and 2004b, Kronen and
Reitan 2011 (142–146), and Manis 2016. See also section 4.2
below for more on the issue of human freedom.
3.2 The Limits of Permissible Freedom

In addition to a question about the limits of possible freedom, there
is a further question about the limits of permissible freedom.
Consider the two kinds of conditions under which we humans typically
feel justified in interfering with the freedom of others (see Talbott
1990a, 38). We feel justified, on the one hand, in preventing one
person from doing irreparable harm—or more accurately, harm that
no human being can repair—to another; a loving father
may thus report his own son to the police in an effort to prevent the
son from committing murder. We also feel justified, on the other hand,
in preventing our loved ones from doing irreparable harm to
themselves; a loving father may thus physically overpower his daughter
in an effort to prevent her from committing suicide.

Now one might, it is true, draw a number of faulty inferences from
such examples as these, in part because we humans tend to think of
irreparable harm within the context of a very limited time-frame, a
person’s life on earth. Harm that no human being can repair may
nonetheless be harm that God can repair. It does not follow,
therefore, that a loving God, whose goal is the reconciliation of the
world, would prevent every suicide and every murder; it follows only
that he would prevent every harm that not even omnipotence can repair,
and neither suicide nor murder is necessarily an instance of that
kind of harm. So even though a loving God might sometimes
permit murder, he would never permit one person to annihilate the soul
of another or to destroy the very possibility of future happiness in
another; and even though he might sometimes permit suicide, he would
never permit his loved ones to destroy the very possibility of future
happiness in themselves either. The latter conclusion concerning
suicide is no doubt the more controversial, and Jonathan Kvanvig in
particular has in fact challenged it (see Kvanvig 1993, 83–88
and Talbott’s rejoinder in 2014, 178–180). But whatever
the resolution of this particular debate, perhaps both parties can
agree that God, if he exists, would deal with a much larger picture
and a much longer time-frame than that with which we humans are
immediately concerned.

So the idea of irreparable harm—that is, of harm that
not even omnipotence can repair—is critical to the argument
concerning permissible freedom. It is most relevant, perhaps, in cases
where someone imagines sinners freely choosing annihilation (Kvanvig),
or imagines them freely making a decisive and irreversible choice of
evil (Walls), or imagines them freely locking the gates of hell from
the inside (C. S. Lewis). But proponents of the so-called escapism
understanding of hell can plausibly counter that hell is not
necessarily an instance of such irreparable harm, and Raymond
VanArragon in particular raises the possibility that God might permit
his loved ones to continue forever rejecting him in some non-decisive
way that would not, at any given time, harm them irreparably (see
VanArragon 2010, 37ff; see also Kvanvig 2011, 52). Here it is
important to note how broadly VanArragon defines the term
“rejecting God” (see 2010, 30–31)—so broadly,
in fact, that any sin for which one is morally responsible would count
as an instance of someone rejecting God. He thus explicitly states
that rejecting God in his broad sense requires neither an awareness of
God nor a conscious decision, however confused it may be, to embrace a
life apart from God. Accordingly, persistent sinning without end would
never result, given such an account, in anything like the traditional
hell, whether it be understood as a lake of fire, the outer darkness,
or any other condition that would reveal the full horror of separation
from God (given the traditional Christian understanding of such
separation).

But here is perhaps the most important point of all. If people are
free to continue rejecting God forever, it seems to follow, given
VanArragon’s own understanding of libertarian freedom, that they
will also have infinitely many opportunities over an unending stretch
of time to submit to God freely. And that leads directly to Eric
Reitan’s argument against the latter idea (see Kronen and Reitan
2011, Ch. 8). For consider this. Although it is logically possible,
given the normal philosophical view of the matter, that a fair coin
would never land heads up, not even once in a trillion tosses, such an
eventuality is so incredibly improbable and so close to an
impossibility that no one need fear it actually happening. Similarly,
in working with some sinner S (shattering S’s
illusions and correcting S’s ignorance), God could
presumably bring S to a point, just short of actually
determining S’s choice, where S would see the
choice between horror and bliss with such clarity that the probability
of S repenting and submitting to God would be extremely high.
Or, if you prefer, drop the probability to .5. Over an indefinitely
long period of time, S would still have an indefinitely large
number of opportunities to repent; and so, according to Reitan, the
assumption that sinners retain their libertarian freedom together with
the Christian doctrine of the preservation of the saints yields the
following result. We can be just as confident that God will eventually
win over all sinners (and do so without causally determining their
choices), as we can be that a fair coin will land heads up at least
once in a trillion tosses.

A possible reply to Reitan’s argument, as just briefly
summarized, is that our free choices can sometimes create a hardened
character, which in turn places constraints on future free choices.
But either the hardened character of those in hell removes forever the
psychological possibility of their choosing to repent, or it does not.
If it does remove that psychological possibility, then they do not
continue rejecting God freely in VanArragon’s libertarian sense;
and if it does not remove that psychological possibility, then
Reitan’s argument remains pertinent. Beyond that, the most
critical issue at this point concerns the relationship between free
choice, on the one hand, and character formation, on the other. Our
moral experience does seem to provide evidence that a pattern of bad
choices can sometimes produce bad habits and a bad moral character,
but it also seems to provide evidence that a pattern of bad choices
can sometimes bring one closer to a dramatic conversion of some kind.
So why not suppose that a pattern of bad choices might be even more
useful to God than a pattern of good choices would be in teaching the
hard lessons we sometimes need to learn and in thus rendering a
dramatic conversion increasingly more probable over the long
 run?[10]
 For more on this issue, see Swinburne 1989 (Ch. 12), Sennett 1999,
Murray 1999, the rejoinder to Murray in Kronen and Reitan 2011
(170–177) and the discussion of character formation in Talbott
2010 (9–13).
4. The Universalist Rejection of Everlasting Separation

Theists who accept the traditional idea of everlasting punishment, or
even the idea of an everlasting separation from God, must either
reject the idea that God wills or desires to save all humans and thus
desires to reconcile them all to himself (see proposition (1) in
section 1 above) or reject the idea that God will successfully
accomplish his will and satisfy his own desire in this matter
(proposition (2)). But a theist who accepts proposition (1), as the
Arminians do, and also accepts proposition (2), as the Augustinians
do, can then reason deductively that almighty God will triumph in the
end and successfully reconcile to himself each and every human being.
From the perspective of an interpretation of the Christian Bible,
moreover, Christian universalists need only accept the exegetical
arguments of the Arminian theologians in support of (1) and the
exegetical arguments of the Augustinian theologians in support of (2);
that alone would enable them to build an exegetical case for a
universalist interpretation of the Bible as a whole.
4.1 Divine Grace and the Inclusive Nature of Love

One argument in support of proposition (1) contends that love
(especially in the form of willing the very best for another) is
inclusive in this sense: even where it is logically possible for a
loving relationship to come to an end, two persons are bound together
in love only when their purposes and interests, even the conditions of
their happiness, are so logically intertwined as to be inseparable. If
a mother should love her child even as she loves herself, for example,
then any evil that befalls the child is likewise an evil that befalls
the mother and any good that befalls the child is likewise a good that
befalls the mother; hence, it is simply not possible, according to
this argument, for God to will the best for the mother unless he also
wills the best for the child as well.

For similar reasons, Kenneth Einar Himma has argued that some
widespread moral intuitions, “together with Christian
exclusivism and the traditional doctrine of hell, entail that it is
morally wrong for anyone to have children” (Himma 2011, 198).
That argument seems especially forceful in the context of Augustinian
theology, which implies that, for all any set of potential parents
know, any child they might produce could be one of the reprobate whom
God has hated from the beginning and has destined from the beginning
for eternal torment in hell. The title of Himma’s article,
“Birth as a Grave Misfortune,” would seem to describe such
cases perfectly. (See Bawulski 2013 for a reply to Himma and Himma
2016 for Himma’s rejoinder.)

In any event, Arminians and universalists both regard an acceptance of
proposition (1) as essential to a proper understanding of divine
grace. Is God being gracious to an elect mother, they might ask, when
he makes the baby she loves with all her heart the object of his
“sovereign hatred” and does so, as the Augustinians say he
did in the case of Esau, even before the child was born or had done
anything good or bad? As the Arminians and the universalists both view
the matter, the Augustinians have embraced a logical impossibility:
the idea that God could extend his love and compassion to one person
even as he withholds it from some of that person’s own loved
ones. They therefore reject the doctrine of limited election on the
ground that it undermines the concept of grace altogether. Where they
disagree, of course, is over the issue of whether the objects of
God’s love can resist his grace forever. Whereas Arminians hold
that, given the reality of free will, we humans can, if we so choose,
resist God’s grace forever, universalists tend to believe that,
even though we can resist God’s grace for a while, perhaps even
for a substantial period of time (while mired in ignorance and
ambiguity), we cannot resist it forever. So the issue between these
two camps, the Arminians and the universalists, finally comes down to
the question of which position has the resources for a better account
of human freedom and of God’s respect for it (see, for example,
the exchange between Walls 2004 and Talbott 2004). Or, to put the
question in a slightly different way, which position, if either,
requires that God interfere with human freedom (or human
autonomy) in morally inappropriate ways? As the following section
should illustrate, the answer to this question may be far more
complicated than some might at first imagine.
4.2 Universalism and Human Freedom

A widely held assumption among free–will theists is that no
guarantee of universal reconciliation is even possible apart from
God’s willingness to interfere with human freedom in those cases
where someone persists in rejecting God and his grace. Indeed,
Jonathan Kvanvig goes so far as to describe universalism as a
“view, according to which God finally decides that if one has
not freely chosen Heaven, there will come a time when one will be
brought to Heaven against one’s will. One will experience, in
this sense, coercive redemption at some point” (Kvanvig 2011,
14). But in fact, no universalist—not even a theological
determinist—holds that God sometimes coerces people into heaven
against their will. For although many Christian universalists
believe that God provided Saul of Tarsus, for example, with certain
revelatory experiences that changed his mind in the end and
therefore changed his will as well, this is a far cry from claiming
that he was coerced against his will. If God has middle knowledge,
moreover, then that already establishes the possibility that
God can bring about a universal reconciliation without in any way
interfering with human freedom.

Because so many philosophers now reject the idea of middle knowledge,
however, the more interesting question for these philosophers is
whether a God without middle knowledge would be required, under
certain conditions, “to override our freedom”in order to
“secure our presence in Heaven” (kvanvig 2011, 52). Is
that true? Not according to one of the more surprising arguments for
universalism, which has the following conclusion: only by interfering
with human freedom in morally inappropriate ways could God protect us
from those metaphysical realities that will inevitably teach us,
provided we are rational enough to qualify as free moral agents, the
true meaning of separation from God. But to understand this argument,
one must first come to appreciate two very different ways in which God
might interfere with human freedom.

Suppose that a man is standing atop the Empire State Building with the
intent of committing suicide by jumping off and plunging to his death
below. One obvious way in which God could interfere with the
man’s freedom in this matter would be simply to cause him to
change his mind; that would effectively prevent the suicide from
occurring. But there is another, less obvious, way in which God could
interfere with the man’s freedom to commit suicide; God could
permit him to leap from the building and then cause him to float
gently to the ground like a feather; that too would effectively
prevent the suicide from occurring. So one is not free to accomplish
some action or to achieve some end, unless God permits one to
experience the chosen end, however confusedly one may have chosen it;
and neither is one free to separate oneself from God, or from the
ultimate source of human happiness as Christians understand it, unless
God permits one to experience the very life one has chosen and the
full measure of misery that it entails.

Given the almost universal Christian assumption that separation from
God (in the outer darkness, for example) would be an objective horror,
it looks as if even God himself would face a dilemma with respect to
human freedom: Either he could permit sinners to follow their chosen
path, or he could prevent them from following it and from opting for
what he knows (but they may not yet know) is an objective horror. If
he should perpetually prevent them from following their chosen path,
then they would have no real freedom to do so; and if he should permit
them to follow it—to continue opting for what he knows will be
an objective horror—then their own experience, provided they are
rational enough to qualify as free moral agents, would eventually
shatter their illusions and remove their libertarian freedom
in this matter. So in neither case would sinners be able to retain
forever their libertarian freedom to continue separating themselves
from the ultimate source of human happiness. (For an expanded
statement of this argument, see Talbott 2001b, 429–433, and
Talbott 2014, 195–198.) 

If this argument should be sound, it would seem to follow that, no
matter how tenaciously some sinners might pursue a life apart from God
and resist his loving purpose for their lives, God would have, as a
sort of last resort, a sure-fire way to shatter the illusions that
make their rebellion possible in the first place. To do so, he need
only honor their own free choices and permit them to experience the
very life they have confusedly chosen for themselves. Why interfere
with someone’s freedom, after all, at the very point where
honoring that freedom would in fact teach a hard lesson and therefore
do the most good? Would that not be utterly incompatible with
God’s moral character? 

However one might answer such a question, the universalist
understanding of the nature and scope of God’s irresistible
grace is very different from the Augustinian understanding. For the
universalists not only reject the Augustinian idea that God restricts
his irresistible grace to a limited elect; they also hold that
God’s judgment of sin—his permitting sinners to experience
the very condition of separation they have confusedly chosen—is
itself an expression of his boundless mercy and therefore part of what
makes his grace irresistible. If, as a last resort, God should allow a
sinner to live for a while without even an implicit experience of the
divine
 nature,[11]
 the resulting horror, they believe, will at last shatter any illusion
that some good is achievable apart from him; and such a discovery will
in the end elicit a cry for help of a kind that, however faint, is
just what God needs in order to begin and eventually to complete the
process of reconciliation. 

In sum, opponents of universalism must either restrict God’s
redemptive love to a limited elect or admit that God’s love will
suffer an ultimate defeat in the sense that his own desire for the
human race as a whole, as expressed in places like 1 Timothy 2:4, will
never be satisfied. Because the Arminians and the universalists agree
that God could never love an elect mother even as he, at the same
time, rejects her beloved baby, they both agree that the first
alternative is utterly impossible. But because the issues surrounding
the idea of free will are so complex and remain the source of so much
philosophical controversy, perhaps they can also agree that a
free–will theodicy of hell is the best philosophical account
currently available for a doctrine of everlasting separation from
God.
5. Heaven: Two Critical Issues

Rarely are theists very specific about what heaven will supposedly be
like, and there are no doubt good reasons for that. For most
theists, even those who believe in revelation, would deny that we have
much information on this matter. But two issues have typically arisen
in the relevant philosophical literature: first, whether the misery of
loved ones in hell would undermine the blessedness of those in heaven,
and second, whether immortality of any kind would ultimately lead to
tedium, boredom, and an insipid life.
5.1 Concerning the Misery of Loved Ones in Hell

Assuming that love ties people’s interests together in the way
described in section 4.1 above, one might then wonder how God could
preserve the happiness of those in heaven who know that some of their
own loved ones are suffering forever in hell. For the question
inevitably arises, “How could anyone remain happy knowing that a
genuine loved one, however corrupted, is destined to be miserable
forever”. When a reporter asked the mother of Ted
Bundy, a serial murderer of young women, whether she could still
support a son who had become a monster, her answer provided a poignant
illustration of the problem. “Of course I support him,”
she declared, as her eyes filled with tears and her body literally
began shaking. “He is my son. I love him. I have to support
him.” She obviously did not support his monstrous crimes, and
neither did she even object to the severity of his punishment. But
still, one wonders how this suffering woman—a committed
Christian, by the way—could ever achieve supreme happiness
knowing that the son she continued to love was destined to be lost
forever without any future hope of redemption.

Such considerations have led some, including the 19th
Century theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher, to argue that the misery
of those in hell would undermine altogether the blessedness of the
redeemed in heaven (see Schleiermacher 1830, 721–722; Kronen and
Reitan 2011, 80–89; and Talbott 1990b, 237–241). But
others have argued that God could always shield forever the redeemed
in heaven from painful memories of the lost in hell. William Lane
Craig thus raises the possibility that God could simply
“obliterate” from the minds of the redeemed “any
knowledge of lost persons so that they experience no pangs of remorse
for them” (Craig, 1991, 306). Given the widespread theological
view, which Craig seems to accept, that billions of people will
eventually be lost forever, one issue here concerns how much of some
people’s minds, particularly those whose entire family is lost
forever, God would have to wipe out in order to accomplish such a
strategy. Another concerns how God, as an infinitely loving being,
might expunge the infinitely more painful memories from his own mind.
But the main issue to be resolved here is whether blissful
ignorance qualifies as a worthwhile form of happiness at all.

As a matter of historical fact, in any case, some of the most
influential theologians in the Western tradition, including some who
are widely admired as heroes of faith, have not only made an eternal
torture chamber an important part of their teaching about hell; they
seem also to have gloried in the idea that the torments of those
writhing in hell forever will increase the joy of those in heaven.
Jonathan Edwards thus wrote: “When the saints in glory …
shall see how miserable others of their fellow-creatures are, who were
naturally in the same circumstances with themselves; when they shall
see the smoke of their torment, and the raging of the flames of their
burning, and hear their dolorous shrieks and cries, and consider that
they [the saints] in the mean time are in the most blissful state and
shall surely be in it to all eternity; how will they rejoice!”
(Edwards 1834, sec. II
 [available online]).
 Remarkably, Edwards was also a theological determinist who held that
God determined from the beginning to bring a huge number of people to
a horrific end and did so for the precise purpose of increasing the
joy of the elect in heaven. He even insisted, contra Craig,
that the inhabitants of heaven and hell will be acutely aware of each
other’s condition; so even as the torments of former loved ones
in hell will contribute to the joy of those in heaven, so the joy of
former loved ones in heaven will contribute to the psychological
torment of those in hell. He thus made the following kind of warning
an important part of his preaching: “How will you bear to see
your parents, who in this life had so dear an affection for you, now
without any love to you … How will you bear to see and hear
them praising the Judge, for his justice exercised in pronouncing this
sentence, and hearing it with holy joy in their countenances, and
shouting forth the praises and hallelujahs of God and Christ on that
account?” (sec. IV).

As horrifying as such descriptions are apt to appear to someone such
as Ted Bundy’s mother, perhaps all parties can agree on one
thing at least. If justice were to require that one suffer
eternally for sins that God himself causally determined, then such
suffering would have to be a source of satisfaction, if not outright
bliss, on the part of any fair-minded person witnessing it. But since,
as they say, one person’s modus ponens is another’s modus
 tollens,[12]
 a critic of Edwards will simply reply in the following way. No
fair-minded person would find satisfaction in someone’s
experiencing eternal torment as punishment for even the worst of sins,
particularly in the case of sins that God himself has causally
determined; therefore, such torment is not what justice requires.
According to Edwards’s own theology, moreover, he was no less
deserving of eternal torment himself than are those who suffer in
hell. Schleiermacher and many others therefore find it hard to
understand how those who receive special favor in this regard could be
so deliriously happy in the knowledge that some of their own loved
ones do not receive a similar special
 favor.[13]

5.2 Concerning the Supposed Tedium of Immortality

A second issue concerning heaven that sometimes arises is whether
everlasting bliss is even a possible state of affairs. Bernard
Williams has suggested “that immortality would be, where
conceivable at all, intolerable” (in Fischer 1993, 73).
Commenting on a play by Karel Capek about a women who at age 42
receives immortality and by age 342 no longer wants to live, Williams
wrote: “Her trouble was, it seems, boredom: a boredom connected
with the fact that everything that could happen and make sense to one
human being of 42 had already happened to her” by age 342
(82).

Such a statement is reminiscent of a quotation often attributed to
Charles H. Duell, who became commissioner of the U.S. patent office in
1898. According to legend, Duell declared that everything that can be
invented has already been invented; and even though this wonderful
story is probably apocryphal, it nonetheless illustrates in a humorous
way the possible consequences of an impoverished imagination. It would
hardly take even 30 years, depending upon the circumstances, for a
given life to become dull and insipid. But the idea that a healthy
person could exhaust all the possibilities for adventure and
meaningful experience in a mere 300 years will strike many as simply
preposterous. A mere 300 years is virtually nothing, it is true, when
compared to a life without end. So the real issue is whether it is
logically possible that an unending life (in which one retains
one’s identity as the same person) should be filled with
unending joy and ever increasing opportunities for novel and
meaningful experiences.

Addressing this very issue, John Martin Fischer writes:
“Remember [the possibility] that certain … of one’s
family and friends also have the relevant sort of immortality. It
seems to me that under such circumstances one could live an attractive
life characterized by a desirable mix of fulfilling
activities” (Fischer 1993, 10—his italics). Might not an
unending life even increase the possibilities for such a
desirable mix? A favorite symphony not heard for a hundred years or so
might be experienced as utterly fresh and exciting. And even if we set
aside anything that might raise a controversy about personal identity,
the mere discovery of an unexpected means of traversing our
extravagant universe, with its billions of galaxies and billions of
star systems within each of them, might open up—for adventurous
spirits anyway—incredible possibilities for new and exciting
experiences. Nor should we ignore the further possibility of
experiencing infinitely many other realms and universes that are not
spatially contiguous with our own. Pursuing Fischer’s idea of a
desirable mix even further, a longer life could also increase the
chances for the experience of boredom itself to fit into a larger
context of meaningful experience. In caring for her baby, for example,
a mother typically performs many mundane tasks that might seem utterly
tedious were it not for the joy of interacting with her baby and of
watching it grow and flourish. Similarly, St. Paul found even the
tedium of prison to be tolerable, so he claimed, because he saw it as
part of a larger story that he believed to be both true and glorious.
So why allow, many religious people would ask, an impoverished
imagination to exclude the very possibility of an over-arching story
arc perpetually giving fresh meaning to our individual lives?

Still, all of that having been said, Williams’s view concerning
the inevitably tedious nature of an unending life is not that far
removed from the religious view that in our present unperfected
condition we are not yet fit for eternity and not yet capable of
experiencing the most worthwhile forms of happiness; indeed, given our
present condition, some would claim, we might even turn heaven itself
into a hellish experience. And if that be true, then the task of
rendering someone fit for eternal joy may be far more complicated,
even for an omnipotent being, than one might have imagined. As many
religions including Christianity teach, we must first learn to love
properly before we can experience enduring happiness, and this
requires that we also be purged of all selfish tendencies, all lust
for power over others, every temptation to benefit ourselves at the
expense of others, and anything else that might separate one person
from another. Right here, of course, is where Williams would question
whether a suitably transformed person would be the same individual as
the unperfected person that existed previously. But none of our moral
imperfections, a religious person might retort, can coherently be
numbered among our essential properties—as if we could never
progress morally and never learn to become more loving persons. So
here, perhaps, is the sum of the matter from a religious perspective:
the more self-absorbed we become, the more tedious and dreary our
lives inevitably become over time. But the more outwardly focused we
become in loving relationships, the more joyful and meaningful our
lives also become over time.

In any case, the controversies associated with Williams’s
understanding of immortality are also relevant to the problem of evil.
For the same considerations that lead some to wonder whether
immortality would eventually become dreadfully boring may also lead
some of the religious to consider favorably the following hypothesis.
For all we know, an environment such as the one we live in—an
environment in which one encounters real threats and dangers of a
temporary kind, where one person’s temporary welfare may depend
upon the choices of others and upon natural forces over which one has
limited or no control, where a quest for truth and genuine discoveries
about the glories of God’s creation are possible, and where
moral failure would likely provide ample opportunities for repentance,
forgiveness, and atonement—for all we know, such an environment
is an important part of the process whereby God renders us fit for
eternal joy. Although the problem of evil is the subject of another
entry (see the entry on
 The Problem of Evil),
 the relevant point for the topic of heaven is just this: one need not
think of heaven (or the coming age, as the Gospel writers sometimes
refer to it) as a static ethereal realm in which there is nothing to
do. One might instead suppose that God will never stop creating
additional persons to love and additional realms for us to experience
and that we will always have important roles to play, as Paul hinted
in Ephesians 2:7, in this ongoing process of creation and
revelation.