David Hume's philosophy, especially the positive project of his
“science of man,” is often thought to be modeled on
Newton's successes in natural philosophy. Hume's self-described
“experimental method” (see the subtitle to
Treatise) and the resemblance of his “rules of
 reasoning” 
 (Treatise, 1.3.15)[1]
 with Newton's are said to be evidence for this position (Noxon 1973;
De Pierris 2002). Hume encourages this view of his project by
employing Newtonian metaphors: he talks of an “attraction”
in the “mental world” on a par with that in the
“natural world” (1.1.4.6). Hume infers the existence of
“habits” as a kind of mental “force” (EHU
5.2.2) analogous to gravity; the discovery of the “the
principles of association,” which in the Abstract he
 calls his most important
 achievement [see the section on Association in the 
entry on
 Hume
 in this Encyclopedia], 
 are, then, analogous to the laws of motion. Hume certainly appears to
want his readers to feel that he is modeling his project on the
successes of natural philosophy, exemplified by Newton. In the
“Introduction” to the Treatise and even more
explicitly in the opening pages of EHU (1.15), Hume suggests that his
“science of man” can parallel recent achievements in
natural philosophy (with rather obvious nods to Newton's successes in
planetary astronomy). And at the start of EPM, he echoes Newton's
rejection of “hypotheses” (1.10). There is, thus, no doubt
that Hume wants his readers to believe that Newton forms a kind of
model.


Yet, in the totality of Hume's oeuvre the technical details of
Newton's philosophy are rarely discussed explicitly. In fact, some of
the most sophisticated analyses of the implications of Newton's
philosophy are attributed to Cleanthes, the spokesperson for the
inductive argument from design in the Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion (Dialogues). While in recent years many commentators
have come to doubt that Philo should be considered a straightforward
spokesperson of Hume's views, few suggest that Hume endorses without
qualification Cleanthes's Newtonian argument from design—the
foundations of which are undermined throughout Hume's writings. But
this raises further complications because Hume can be read as implying
that criticism of the design argument can be generated on strictly
Newtonian methodological grounds: the authority of
“experience”—to which Hume and Newton both
appeal—does not license an inference (supported by analogical
reasoning) to a God-like designer of the universe. This would make
Hume something of an internal critic of Newtonianism (Hurlbutt
1985). The same strategy—generate internal criticism to
Newtonian natural philosophy—may be thought to operate in Hume's
Empiricist attack on the putative meaningfulness of invisible or
theoretical entities (e.g., forces, powers, and masses) that made him
a favorite of Logical
 Positivists early in the 20th century
 [see the entry on 
  Ayer
 in this Encyclopedia]. 
 This Positivist interpretation seemed to go well with Hume's
reputation for skepticism. Yet, as Positivism gave way to Naturalism
as the dominant force in 20th century Anglophone
philosophy, scholarship on Hume has increasingly emphasized the
naturalistic elements in Hume, while reinterpreting, even downplaying,
his skeptical tendencies (Kemp Smith, 1941; Stroud 1977, Garrett
1997). But if by naturalism one (also) means that one is willing
to accept the authority of science
 [see the section on Naturalism and Holism in the entry on 
 indispensability arguments in the philosophy of mathematics
  in this Encyclopedia]
 then one runs into a problem: it is by no means clear that Hume
accepts the independent intellectual authority of natural philosophers
(including Newton) to have the final word in interpreting Newton's
achievements.


Before, turning to discussion of Hume's relationship to Newton and
Newtonianism, one ought to emphasize three problems that beset the
scholarly literature on this topic. First, much scholarship on Hume is
still surprisingly ahistorical; especially among philosophers, it
tends to favor rational reconstruction of arguments over attention to
more contextual forms of interpretation. If such philosophers pay
attention to historical figures, these tend to be other canonical
philosophers: Descartes, Locke, Malebranche, and Berkeley. Second,
even scholars that emphasize the historical Hume (e.g., Wright 1983, Broughton
1987, Bell 1997, Winkler 2000) do not tend to exhibit a working
knowledge of the details of Newton's natural philosophy. Nearly all of
the literature in this genre, most of it quite careful, compares the
details of Hume's philosophy to evidence from various text-books
(often “Newtonian”) potentially available to
Hume. Finally, even the most careful and insightful scholarship on
Hume tends to ignore the recent scholarly literature generated by the
renewed philosophic and historical interest in Newton's philosophy
(Cohen
 and Smith 2002; see also 
 Newton's philosophy
 in this Encyclopedia).
 
1. Hume's Evaluation of Newton


This section analyzes Hume's relationship to the public Newton and
other early interpreters of Newton as available to Hume. The analysis
reveals that Hume is more critical of and less indebted to core
elements of Newton's philosophy than commonly thought. A benefit of
this analysis is that many interpretive debates over how to understand
Hume's philosophy can be reformulated clearly and with fewer
anachronisms.


Hume's explicit reflections on Newton's writings and character reveal
a more ambivalent picture than commonly thought: Hume shows respect,
even admiration for Newton's achievements, but he also expresses
reservations. Behind this ambivalence one can find serious philosophic
objections to Newton's life and project. This section looks, first, at
Hume's brief discussions of Newton's life and achievements and, then,
analyzes the aims behind Hume's “science of man.”


Hume does not doubt the longevity of Newton's intellectual
achievement: “The severest scrutiny, which NEWTON'S theory has
undergone, proceeded not from his own countrymen, but from foreigners;
and if it can overcome the obstacles, which it meets with at present
in all parts of Europe, it will probably go down triumphant to the
latest posterity” (“Of the Rise and Progress of the Arts
and Sciences,” EMPL, 121). But elsewhere, when Hume comments
more directly on Newton, there are signs of ambivalence: “Were
we to distinguish the Ranks of Men by the Genius and Capacity more
than by their Virtue and Usefulness to the Public, great Philosophers
would certainly challenge the first Rank, and must be plac'd at the
Top of human Kind. So rare is this Character, that, perhaps, there has
not, as yet, been above two in the World, who can lay a just Claim to
it. At least, Galileo and Newton seem to me so far to
excel all the rest” (“Of the Middle Station of
Life,” EMPL, 550). According to Hume, Newton has unusual
philosophic talent. Yet, the backhanded nature of Hume's compliment is
unmistakable.  Newton's work is not characterized by its virtue; the
achievements of Newton's philosophy are not very useful to the rest of
mankind.  For Hume there is a moral point of view from which Newton's
achievements may seem less than entirely praiseworthy.


This ambivalence about Newton is not an isolated incident in Hume's
writings. In the last volume of The History of England, Hume
writes:


In Newton this island may boast of having produced the greatest and
rarest genius that ever arose for the ornament and instruction of the
species. From modesty, ignorant of his superiority above the rest of
mankind; and thence, less careful to accommodate his reasonings to
common apprehensions: More anxious to merit than to acquire fame: He
was, from these causes, long unknown to the world; but his reputation
at last broke out with a lustre, which scarcely any writer, during his
own life-time, had ever before attained. (History VI, 542)


In this passage, Hume singles out Newton as the “greatest
genius.” (No mention of Galileo this time.) Hume is following
Fontenelle's interpretation of Newton as a modest genius not concerned
with acquiring fame (Fontenelle 1728 — see Other Internet
Resources below).  But again, Hume's praise is not entirely
straightforward. It turns out that part of Newton's achievement is due
to his failure to possess two kinds of self-knowledge: Newton did not
understand how much smarter he was than others and Newton did not
understand how far removed from ordinary people's concerns his
theories were. Hume implies that if Newton had been more self-aware
and more attuned to the environment in which he was writing, he would
have been more likely to adjust his mode of reasoning to public
prejudice. On Hume's account Newton did not properly understand his
relationship to his readership and, paradoxically, this partly
accounts for Newton's success. It seems not to have occurred to Hume
that Newton's mode of presentation in the Principia was a deliberate
one to avoid controversy with those who could not follow its intricate
geometric arguments.


Moreover, Hume thinks that in certain other respects, Newton shares in
the superstitious prejudices of his time. This shows another sense in
which Hume's admiration for Newton's genius is limited.  While
defending the stylistic abilities of King James I, Hume comments:
“[King James I] has composed a commentary on the Revelations,
and proved the pope to be Antichrist; may not a similar reproach be
extended to the famous writer Napier; and even to Newton, at a time
when learning was much more advanced than during the reign of James?
From the grossness of its superstitions, we may infer the ignorance of
an age; but never should pronounce concerning the folly of an
individual, from his admitting popular errors, consecrated by the
appearance of religion” (The History of England, V,
155). However, Hume did not doubt Newton's religious sincerity:
“It is for the same reason, I maintain, that Newton, Locke,
Clarke, etc. being Arians or Socinians, were very sincere in the creed
they profest: And I always oppose this argument to some libertines,
who will needs have it, that it was impossible, but that these
philosophers must have been hypocrites” (The Natural History
of Religion, Section XII).


Thus, Hume has no doubts about the intellectual quality of Newton's
achievements. His reservations are moral in nature. One can
distinguish these along a private and a public dimension. Hume thinks
that Newton's life reveals a man with genuine limitations in
understanding (let alone transcending) himself and his times. Hume
calls into question the moral quality of Newton's works because they
do not serve the public interest and they are infected with
superstitious beliefs. While Hume's criticism of Newton as a man are
revealing of Hume's understanding of what it is to be a philosopher,
Hume's criticism of the purpose behind Newton's project ties directly
to the anti-Newtonian aims of Hume's “science of
man”. This project is viewed by many contemporary scholars, who
emphasize Hume's “naturalism”, as Hume's equivalent of
what one today would call ‘cognitive science’ (Garrett
1997).


While Hume admits that Newton was the “greatest genius”
that “ever arose for the ornament and instruction of the
species”, he is unwilling to acknowledge Newton's
“Virtue” or “Usefulness to the Public”.
Moreover, Newton's project lends cover for gross
“superstition”. Instead, in the “Introduction”
to the Treatise, Hume offers an ambitious alternative
project: his “science of man”. (In EHU 1.12 he calls it a
“true metaphysics”, which battles “abstruse
philosophy and metaphysical jargon…mixed up with popular
superstition”. Given Hume's criticism of Newton, he may have
Newton in mind here.) Hume emphasizes the foundational nature of this
project: “There is no question of importance, whose decision is
not comprised in the science of man; and there is none, which can be
decided with any certainty, before we become acquainted with that
science. In pretending, therefore, to explain the principles of human
nature, we in effect propose a compleat system of the sciences, built
on a foundation almost entirely new, and the only one upon which they
can stand with any security” (Treatise,
“Introduction”). The success of Hume's systematic
“science of man” has a positive and a negative component.
On the positive side, “In these four sciences of Logic, Morals,
Criticism, and Politics [i.e., political economy], is comprehended
almost everything, which it can any way import us to be acquainted
with, or which can tend either to the improvement or ornament of the
human mind.” Hume makes it absolutely clear where his priorities
are: “Nor ought we to think, that this latter improvement in the
science of man will do less honour to our native country than the
former in natural philosophy, but ought rather to esteem it a greater
glory, upon account of the greater importance of that science, as well
as the necessity it lay under of such a reformation.” In short,
according to Hume his “science of man” is far more
valuable than Newton's natural philosophy. This is why Hume ends the
“Introduction” to the Treatise with the claim that
“we may hope to establish…a science [of man], which will
not be inferior in certainty, and will be much superior in utility to
any other of human comprehension.”


Moreover, the content of the “science of man” reveals that
even the very Newtonian sciences of “Mathematics, Natural
Philosophy, and Natural Religion, are in some measure dependent on the
science of MAN; since they lie under the cognizance of men, and are
judged of by their powers and faculties” (Treatise,
“Introduction”). For Hume the “science of man”
is the “foundational” science because it is presupposed to
some degree by all the other sciences.


The details of Hume's “science of man” show the weakness
of our ordinary cognitive capacity; at the same time it
offers an argument for staying within confines of (potential) ordinary
experience. Hume's cognitive science has a normative consequence in
that knowledge of it is supposed to reduce the inclination toward
intellectual overreaching. For, the practitioners of “mitigated
scepticism” (cf. the “modest scepticism” of
“Appendix” to the Treatise) will not “be
tempted to go beyond common life, so long as they consider the
imperfection of those faculties which they employ, their narrow reach,
and their inaccurate operations” (EHU 12.3.25).  Hume's
“science of man” constrains the extent of our
theorizing. In subsequent sections it will be illustrated how Hume
reinterprets the limits and content of Newtonian natural philosophy in
light of his “science of man” or “true
metaphysics.”
2. Hume's scientific education


There is surprisingly little direct evidence of Hume's knowledge of
Newton's texts. Most of it is circumstantial. Recent archival and
careful hermeneutic research by Michael Barfoot (1990) has increased
our knowledge of the kind of education in different elements of
natural philosophy Hume would have received as a student at
Edinburgh. (See also Wright 1990.) This usefully supplements what can
be gleaned from Hume's writings and letters. While new material may
show up one day, four important conclusions follow from his study.


First, it is very likely that Hume was exposed to many works in the
new natural philosophy, medicine, and mathematics in Europe and
Britain. Second, while Hume was a student, Boyle's writings and
methodology were emphasized at The University of Edinburgh. It appears
that Boyle was favored as the pre-eminent exemplar of modern natural
philosophy because of the theological uses of this form of knowledge
in eighteenth century natural religion. Given the tenor of the
education at Edinburgh and evidence derived from Hume's oeuvre, it is
very likely that Hume had a working knowledge of Boyle's
hydrostatics.


Third, Hume would have been reasonably familiar with Newton's
Opticks, especially his writings on colors. It is less clear
how thorough his working knowledge of it was (see Schliesser 2004 for
some concerns). However, it is less likely that he was exposed to most
of the technically challenging parts of Principia. Moreover,
if Hume never read the third edition of the Principia, then
this could help explain his lack of interest in Newton's fourth rule
of reasoning which was added to the third edition (see section 4.5,
Rules of Reasoning). Fourth, it remains unclear how proficient Hume
became in mathematics. It is likely that he attended some of Colin
MacLaurin's lectures in mathematics. Moreover, there is manuscript
evidence that he attended George Campbell's extramural lectures on
 fluxions.[2]
 These notes require careful study, but Barfoot
reports that these manuscripts show “little evidence of the
application of fluxions to natural philosophy as such.” Barfoot
is correct to suggest that Hume's treatment of mathematics shows
debts to Berkeley's criticism of Newton. There is less evidence
for Barfoot's claim that Hume would have had working knowledge of
the most technical parts of the Principia.


It should be emphasized, however, that archival evidence may radically
change our picture of Hume's formal education and continuing interest
in Newton's natural philosophy. In addition to the manuscript
mentioned above, known marginal notes in Hume's hand in a copy of the
Edinburgh Review, where works in Newtonian natural philosophy
were reviewed, may reveal further evidence about the nature and
 quality of his response to issues in Newtonian natural
 philosophy.[3]
3. Hume's Berkeley-ian view of Newton's achievements


In The History of England, Hume writes about Newton's
research methodology as follows: “there flourished during this
period a Boyle and a Newton: men who trod with cautious, and therefore
the more secure steps, the only road which leads to true
philosophy…[Newton is] cautious in admitting no principles but
such as were founded on experiment; but resolute to adopt every such
principle, however new or unusual” (VI, 542). While this is
rather terse, Hume calls attention to three important elements in
Newton's natural philosophy: (a) Newton's commitment to an experimental
method; (b) the cautious nature of Newton's methodology; (c) Newton's
boldness once experiments have established a “principle.”
In 18th century terminology, a “principle” is
akin to what we would call a “law” or a
“fundamental/causal explanation.” In order to avoid
misunderstanding, Hume equates Newton's methodology with Boyle's only
on points (a) and (b), not point (c).  Moreover, Hume is aware (as
will be shown in section 4.1) that Newton rightly rejected Boyle's
conception of mechanism. So, Hume admires Newton's methodology, and
sees it as a source of progress.


So, for Hume, Newton uses experiment to arrive at explanations. Thus,
he seems
 to echo and accept Newton's claim about “hypotheses non fingo” 
 [see the relevant section in the entry on 
 Newton
 in this Encyclopedia]. 
 Once such ‘principles’ or explanations have been arrived
at experimentally, Hume sees Newton as adopting them boldly, even if
they are unusual or surprising. Hume appears to have assimilated the
importance of Newton's third rule of reasoning (see section 4.5
below). Moreover, Hume is discerning the (broad) outlines of Newton's
commitment to the method of analysis and synthesis (Newton's
Opticks, Query 31; for discussion, see Smith 2002). But in
Hume's account there is no mention of the importance of mathematics in
Newton's methodology. Hume lack of interest in this aspect of Newton's
methodology may be a consequence of his education (see Section 2).


Nevertheless, Hume's interpretation of the status of
“principles” makes him deviate from Newton's methodology
in a fundamental fashion. In the Treatise, he uses the
“science of man” to claim it is “beyond the reach of
human understanding” to “penetrate into the nature of
bodies, or explain the secret causes of their operations.” He
cannot “approve” of the ambition to go beyond knowing
bodies by their external properties (Treatise,
1.2.5.25). This contradicts the final paragraph of the “General
Scholium” of the Principia, where Newton promises a
program of research, perhaps inspired by the success of Francis
Hauksbee's electrical experiments, to penetrate into the nature of
matter. Although this program was by no means finished by the time of
Newton's death, Newton's optical research had revealed, for example,
that light has an internal constitution characterized by the
proportions, in it, of the distinct homogeneal (or
“uniform”) kinds, which have different degrees of
refrangibility (Schliesser 2004).


To see why Hume cannot “approve,” going beyond external
properties of bodies, let us take a brief detour through some core
elements of Hume's epistemology. For Hume, we build up our causal
theories from experience of particular events. (See, for
instance, the demands at Treatise, 1.3.14.6–15 and also
the footnote at EHU 11.26.) This is an important constraint
for Hume because it allows him to ask who has ever perceived an
instance of a power or force in action. This is crucial for Hume's
attack on theoretical and invisible entities.


For Hume all our simple ideas are derived from impressions
(Treatise 1.2.3.2–3). Hume's attacks on notions of
substance, mode, essence, force, power, self, and—of course
— God, all rely on his rhetorically powerful ability to ask to
what impression such notions can be traced (e.g., Treatise
1.1.6; 1.2.5.28; 1.4.14, and 1.4.5.3–4; on idea of God, see EHU
2.6). For, “[I]deas always represent the objects or
impressions, from which they are derived” (Treatise,
1.2.3.11). In the scholarly literature, this has become known as the
“copy principle” (Garrett 1997, chapter 2). If no such
objects or impressions are to be found, then one must conclude that
such ideas are the product of “passions and emotions”
(1.1.6.1), a “trivial suggestion of the fancy” (1.4.7.6),
or “some imperfection in [the] faculties [of
mind]” (1.1.7.8). The thrust of Hume's account is to make talk
of, say, substance or force (power, God, etc.) seem either meaningless
or restricted to the particular qualities of bodies from which the
idea is derived (1.1.6.1; EHU 4.2.16). At best, they have
reference to “an effect, or some other event
constantly conjoined with” the cause (EHU 7.2.29; for a more
 detailed account, see the section on Empiricism in the entry on
 [Hume
 in this Encyclopedia]). 
 Thomas Reid, who saw what was at stake, described the strategy as
“a tribunal of inquisition erected by certain modern
philosophers before which every thing in nature must answer”
(An Inquiry into the Human Mind: or the Principles of Common
Sense, Chapter 6, Section VIII).


Hume's “science of man” will not permit a realist
interpretation of forces as real causes (see, for different arguments,
Broughton 1987; Bell 1997). When the sciences talk about forces or
powers, these words must be reinterpreted. (For example, the note to
EHU, 4.2.16 tells us to look for this in section 7 of EHU.)  According
to Hume, word's like “force” and “power” have,
at best, a reference to “an effect, or some other
event.” And “Force, Power, Energy…[these] words, as
commonly used, have very loose meanings annexed to them; and their
ideas are very uncertain and confused” (EHU 7.2.29;
Cf. Treatise, 1.3.14.27). Hume denies here the fundamental achievement
 of the
 Principia.[4]
 Rather, he offers a reinterpretation of Newton.


This is made very clear by his addition to the Treatise: I
must, he writes, “confine our speculations to the
appearances of objects to our senses, without entering into
disquisitions concerning their real nature and operations.” Hume
is willing to grant that Newton has experimentally discovered various
“principles.” But given Hume's aversion to talk of forces,
it is likely that he thinks these principles must be understood at
best as a means to keep track of the phenomena. This is, in fact, for
Hume the “Newtonian philosophy…rightly
understood…Nothing is more suitable to that philosophy, than a
modest skepticism to a certain confession of ignorance in subjects
that exceed all human capacity” (1.2.5.26 n. 12; emphasis in
original). In context, Hume re-describes the Newtonian commitment to a
vacuum. So when, elsewhere, Hume describes the
“philosopher” [i.e., Newton] who had “determined the
laws and forces, by which the revolutions of the planets are governed
and directed,” (EHU 1.8) his language of “forces”
must be interpreted in light of his deflationary commitments.


One may think that Hume's use of “Newtonian philosophy” in
the addition to the Treatise suggests that Hume has described Newton's
natural philosophy as Newton understood it (as understood by
Hume). But this is not likely because elsewhere he writes, “It
was never the meaning of Sir ISAAC NEWTON to rob second causes of all
force or energy; though some of his followers have endeavoured to
establish that theory upon his authority” (footnote at the end
of EHU 7.1.25: a note on Hume's Terminology: God is the “first
cause;” “second causes” are ordinary finite causes
that operate in nature). So, first, Hume's Newton accepts
some real causes in nature; Hume's Newton is neither a
skeptic about causation nor an occasionalist (Leibniz had raised this
concern in his exchange with Clarke). Second, Hume is careful to
distinguish Newton from the Newtonians (for more evidence on this, see
section 4.2).


Thus, a more likely interpretation is that Hume believes he has
offered a prescriptive interpretation of how Newtonian philosophy
should be viewed in light of the results of his “science of
man” (which shows the limitations of our cognitive capacity),
and his restrictive form of Empiricism which contribute to his
“modest” (or “mitigated”) skepticism. Hume may
well have thought himself as an internal critic or “cautious
Newtonian.” For Hume and Newton both appeal to the authority of
experience. Nevertheless, the “copy principle” guides how
Hume believes how “experiment” or “experience”
— authoritative for Newton as well as Hume—should be
analyzed. This may be why Hume claims that Boyle and Newton have shown
the road to the “true philosophy,” not that they
completed it. One way to understand Hume's “science of
man” is to see it, then, as the fulfillment of the Newtonian
philosophy, “rightly understood,” that is, by Hume.


While Hume does not match Berkeley's detail in
offering arguments or in explaining how to reinterpret Newtonian
invisible entities, he remains, in these respects, a follower of
 Berkeley;
 for a different argument see McGuire 1972). Hume does not accept that
we can know that invisible causal forces operate in a largely empty
universe as anything other than useful means to track the
appearances.
4. In what sense was Hume a Newtonian?
4.1 Experimentalism


It is often argued that the subtitle of the Treatise,
“Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into
Moral Subjects,” shows Hume's self-conscious debt to
Newton. Experiments certainly play an important role in Newton's
science. But only after 1712 does Newton refer to his own philosophy
as “experimental” (in the context of his polemic with
Leibniz; see Shapiro 2004). In general, Newton emphasizes the
mathematical nature of his philosophy; he calls attention to this in
the full title of the Principia: Mathematical Principles of
Natural Philosophy.


However one interprets Hume's “experimental method”, it is
in no sense mathematical. Hume's so-called “experiments”
do not have the tacit logic of Newtonian experiments; they almost
never offer measurements (which are very important for Newton's focus
on successive approximation); they do not connect to a tight
mathematical structure (Smith 2002).  Moreover, by the standards of
Newtonian natural philosophy, many of Hume's so-called
“experiments,” for all their ingenuity (see, e.g., the
eight experiments at Treatise, 2.2.2), have a rather simple
structure. They are more akin to systematic observations.
(cf. Introduction 8: 1.3.8.3; 1.3.12.11; 3.3.1.10) In fact, there is
(almost) nothing to distinguish Humean “experiment” from
normal, daily experience. In Hume the word “experiment”
seems to be nearly synonymous with “experience,” which is
not uncommon in the period. This interpretation is also suggested by
Hume's description of his experiments as being based on “a
cautious observation of human life” (Treatise,
“Introduction”). This is why Hume can claim that
“experimental inference and reasoning concerning the actions of
others enters so much into human life, that no man, while awake, is
ever a moment without employing it” (EHU 8.1.17). Even if we
allow for some hyperbole, it would betray considerable ignorance to
confuse Newton's “experimental method” with ordinary human
“experimental inference and reasoning.”


Rather, it is far more likely that the subtitle of the Treatise
illustrates Hume's methodological commitment to the 
ideas of 
  Robert Boyle,
 who was closely identified with the use of experimental techniques
 and published many books and pamphlets with the word
“experiment” in their title. This suggestion fits the
evidence that Boyle played a far more prominent role than Newton in
Hume's education (see section 2).
4.2 Skepticism


In our analysis of Hume's “science of man,” we have
already encountered Hume's claim that we are unable to penetrate into
the internal constitution of matter (section 3). So, however else
Hume's skepticism is understood — and it has been the subject of
intense scholarly discussion (including the so-called “New
Hume” debate, see Read and Richman, 2000) during the last two
decades — the science of man has skeptical implications with
regard to his interpretation of Newton's philosophy. Hume's evaluation
of Newton is an additional source of evidence in understanding the
nature of Hume's skepticism.  This evidence reveals that in evaluating
Newton's achievement Hume is pessimistic about the extent and
possibility of knowledge of nature. It also shows that Hume rejected
important Newtonian standards/criteria in evaluating the claims of
natural philosophy.


In The History of England, Hume writes:


…Boyle was a great partizan of the mechanical philosophy: a
theory, which, by discovering some of the secrets of nature, and
allowing us to imagine the rest, is so agreeable to the natural vanity
and curiosity of men…While Newton seemed to draw off the veil
from some of the mysteries of nature, he shewed at the same time the
imperfections of the mechanical philosophy; and thereby
restored her ultimate secrets to that obscurity, in which they ever
did and ever will remain” (VI, 542; emphasis added).



This quote reveals crucial details about Hume's position in three
areas: a) Hume's understanding of the relative merits of Newton's
philosophy and the mechanical philosophy of Boyle; b) Hume's attitude
toward criteria of intelligibility; c) Hume's skepticism. 


First, Hume treats Newton's account as a refutation of the mechanical
philosophy. Yet, while as we have seen (section 3), Hume certainly saw
it as part of the road to “true philosophy,” he does not
view Newton's achievement as a decisive advance in knowledge
of nature but, instead, as decisive evidence for the claim that nature
will remain unknowable in principle.  Hume understands Newton's
success as a double-edged sword: even if Newton removed a source of
error and/or enlarged our knowledge, he did so at the cost of
undermining any hope of establishing what we
might call a “final theory”  (see the entry on 
 physicalism
 in this Encyclopedia).  Moreover, it is by no means clear whether Hume
is willing to accept Newtonian natural philosophy as a form of
knowledge. A natural reading of the passage is to conclude that Hume
views Newton as successfully falsifying the mechanists' program, while
Hume hedges his bets on offering any evaluation of the positive side
of Newton's system (notice also the grudging use of
“seemed”). 


The way to make sense of Hume's remarks in The History of
England is that they reveal that he implicitly accepts the
Mechanists' insistence – explicitly associated with Boyle
—that theirs was the only program that offered the possibility
of intelligible explanation (even if in the hands of many of
its practitioners it only offered hope of post-facto rational
reconstruction). (See also Hume on Causation in section 4.4.)  Hume's
treatment of Boyle reveals that he thought it was a good thing Newton
falsified the mechanical philosophy. Hume acknowledges that the
mechanical philosophy could offer some successful
explanations. But he emphasizes that its practitioners were likely to
overestimate—on psychological and methodological grounds —
its potential. Hume appears to have assimilated Newton's devastating
criticisms of the mechanical philosophy. 


Furthermore, the passage in  The History of England, lends
support for a skeptical interpretation of Hume's philosophy. Hume
thinks the Newtonian project will enable some knowledge of nature at
the cost of keeping a “final theory” permanently
unavailable to human inquiry. Earlier Hume had offered a positive
account of the explanatory principles knowable to mankind:
“Elasticity, gravity, cohesion of parts, communication of motion
by impulse; these are probably the ultimate causes and principles
which we shall ever discover in nature; and we may esteem ourselves
sufficiently happy, if, by accurate enquiry and reasoning, we can
trace up the particular phenomena to, or near to, these general
principles” (EHU 4.1.12). Let's leave aside, for the moment, the
ultimate metaphysical status of “ultimate causes and
principles” in Hume's thought. He is willing to accept that some
limited set of fundamental scientific laws (i.e., “ultimate
causes and principles”) are available to human
researchers. (Hume hedges his bets a bit; note his use of
“probably”.)  Moreover, these four principles are all
associated with Newton's project; the mechanical philosophy had only
accepted communication of motion by impulse as an explanatory
principle. Of course, Hume treats these laws not so much as describing
genuine “causes” or “powers” of nature, but
rather—in opposition to Newton's own view which insisted on the
reality and causal nature of forces (Janiak 2007)—as a way to
keep track of the appearances (recall section 3 above).


Finally, these passages show that Hume rules out that we could ever
hope to explain the causes of these laws (or unify them in some more
ultimate principle). Newton would agree he did not know the cause of
these laws (“General Scholium,” Principia), but he would
treat it as a question open to further research and speculation. In
the context of a discussion of the doctrine of occasionalism, Hume
shows he is aware of this: “Sir Isaac Newton (tho’ some of
his Followers have taken a different Turn of thinking) plainly rejects
it, but substituting the Hypothesis of an Aetheral Fluid, not the
immediate Volition of the Deity, as the Cause of Attraction”
(“A Letter From a Gentleman to his Friend in
Edinburgh”). This quote is revealing in two more ways: besides
showing that Hume may have been aware of some of Newton's attempts at
articulating a mechanism for the operation of attraction (i.e.,
Newton's letters to Bentley or Boyle; see Newton 2004), Hume
recognizes that Newton's followers can deviate from Newton (recall
section 3).  


In light of the text of The History of England (VI, 542)
quoted at the start of this sub-section, it is clear Hume thinks that
Newton's laws are not sufficient for explaining all of nature. So
without (yet) taking a stance on how to interpret Hume's treatment of
induction or his account of causation, one can distinguish two further
strands of Hume's skepticism: i) Hume treats Newton as showing
conclusively that the domain of possible knowledge will leave
parts of nature unknown forever; ii) in particular, this will include
the causes behind our fundamental principles. Together with Hume's
emphasis on accounting for the phenomena in his interpretation of
Newtonian philosophy, Hume is far removed from Newton's realist
ontology of interacting forces (Janiak 2007).  Two further sources for
this difference are revealed when we analyze Hume's departure from
Newton's account of causation (4.4) and Newton's rules of reasoning
(4.5).
4.3 Fallibilism


One of Hume's great claims to fame is his articulation of what has
come to be known as the 
 ‘problem of induction,’
 or, to use language closer to Hume's: the problematic status of
inferences. An informal way to express his insight is that no claim to
knowledge of matters of fact ought to be thought of as definitive
because in all of our inductive reasoning (or inferences) we
presuppose that the future will be the same as the past. But we can
never be certain that the future will be the same as the past because
the evidence for the assumption is based on the uniformity of nature
in the past. The uniformity of nature is presupposed in our knowledge,
but our belief in it cannot be secured by reason. Infamously, Hume
claimed the source of the belief is not reason but habit and our
confidence in it is derived from instinct (see Millican 1995). While
there is ongoing scholarly debate over the extent of Hume's skepticism
that follows from this insight, it is less controversial that for Hume
knowledge of matters of fact, whatever its ultimate status in
Hume's thought, is always tentative, subject to revision. This is
known as fallibilism. While Hume's argument appears unique to
him (although elements of it are prefigured in Berkeley and the Dutch
Newtonian, 's Gravesande), the position is anticipated by
Newton. 
Newton's fourth rule of reasoning reads: 


In experimental philosophy, propositions gathered from phenomena by
induction should be considered either exactly or very nearly true
notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses, until yet other phenomena
make such propositions either more exact or liable to exceptions.
(Principia, Book III, Rule IV)


The rule is that we should treat well-confirmed propositions as true
(or nearly true) until there are deviations that promote new research,
which, in turn, lead us to refine our original propositions or reject
them for new ones (Smith 2002). But while one has a theory, one
must not be distracted by possible differing explanations for
the found regularities until one has empirical reason. One
accepts a theory as true as a means to developing a better
theory. As Newton writes in the “Preface” to the
Principia, “the principles set down here will shed some
light on either this mode of philosophizing or some truer
one” (emphasis added). Thus, Newton accepts that physical
inquiry is forward-looking and may be open-ended; not only its
theories may evolve, but also its methods. Rule IV implicitly accepts
that the future may bring surprises and new evidence, and, thus,
anticipates Hume's fallibilistic insights. As commentators on Hume
have noted, this strand of Hume's skepticism is shared by Newton. It
is less clear if Hume learned it from Newton because there is no
evidence that he was acquainted with Newton's fourth rule of reasoning
(added to the third edition of the Principia); there is no equivalent
in Hume's rules of reasoning to Newton's fourth rule. In the section
on Hume's Rule of Reasoning (4.5), the significance of the absence of
an equivalent to Newton's rule 4 in Hume's thought is explored.

4.4 Causation


In section 3, we saw that Hume rejected Newtonian forces as real
causes; he argues that we must reinterpret forces and powers as being
ideas about effects. In that section no reference to Hume's widely
discussed views on causation was made. In this section Hume's account
of causation is analyzed. Given our focus on the Hume-Newton
relationship no stance on the most controversial issue in Hume
scholarship are taken: are causes mere (psychological) regularity or
are they found in nature. However, recall that Hume insists that
“It was never the meaning of Sir ISAAC NEWTON to rob second
causes of all force or energy; though some of his followers have
endeavoured to establish that theory upon his authority”
(footnote at EHU 7.1.25). So Hume's Newton accepts some real causes in
nature. 


Hume's account of causality covers at least five related issues: : 1)
how we acquire an idea of cause; 2) what we mean by
‘cause;’ 3) how we reason about causes; 4) whether causes
are in the mind or in nature; 5) how we could infer the existence of
causes. In this section, we explore how Hume's treatment of what we
mean by ‘cause’ illustrates Hume's critical response to
and departure from Newton's philosophy (see also Schliesser,
2007). Hume's treatment of causation rejects at least two kinds of
causes that appear in Newton's philosophy: final causes and
simultaneous causes. Moreover, the structure of Humean causes is
deeply indebted to the Pre-Newtonian mechanical philosophy associated
with Boyle.


Hume analyzes how ‘our’ notion of causality—one
applying to events that are contiguous, exhibit temporal priority of
the cause, and have constant conjunction (Treatise, 1.3,
Sections 2, 6, and 15)—is derived from experiencing constant
conjunction of objects that produce a union in the imagination
(1.3.6.16). Hume's account  is causal in its own terms, that is,
his two definitions of the meaning of ‘cause’
(Treatise, 1.3.14.31) are patterned on the chain of events
that he thinks lead people to acquire the idea of cause. Hume's
analysis is a first approximation of and unifies what
“Moderns” tend to mean by ‘causation.’ In his
hands, a redefined version of Aristotelian ‘efficient
causation’ is the only kind of causation available for
use (Treatise, 1.3.14.32). There is, thus, a
stipulative quality to Hume's discussion (see also the
treatment of his Rules of Reasoning, Treatise 1.3.15
discussed in section 4.5). One of the tacit targets of Hume's approach
is Newton. For Hume's treatment of causation rules out the
permissibility of Newton's appeal to “final causes” in the
justification of the (inductive and probable) argument from design in
the “General Scholium” of the Principia:
“we know [the Deity] only by his most wise and excellent
contrivances of things, and final causes” (for discussion, see
Stein 2002).


Moreover, while Hume and Newton both appeal to the authority of
“experience,” there are further serious tensions between
Hume's account of causation and the contents of Newton's
natural philosophy. For Newton, the behavior of the moon in its orbit
and that of, say, apples falling on the earth have the same cause:
namely, the force of gravity, or weight, towards the earth
(Principia, Book III, Scholium to Proposition IV, Theorem
IV).  This conflicts with the contiguity requirement, which Hume
considers “essential” to causation”
(Treatise, 1.3.2.6). It is hard to see how contiguity could
be made consistent with the universal nature of attraction. The most
distant particles of the universe attract each other. (The contiguity
requirement disappears in EHU.) More important, the acceleration
produced by the exercise of a force is simultaneous with that
exercise—thus defying temporal priority. Hume claims that
temporal priority of the cause is “of no great importance”
(1.3.2.8), yet it appears explicitly or implicitly throughout his
treatment of causation.  Moreover, Hume explicitly attacks the
possibility of an effect being simultaneous with its
cause. (Treatise, 1.3.2.7–8)


Finally, there is a fundamental structural similarity between Humean
causes and the causes favored by pre-Newtonian Mechanical philosophers
(i.e., Boyle, Huygens, etc; for a different argument, see McGuire
1972). They have the same structure: i.e., priority of the cause over
the effect, contiguity, and constant conjunction. Now, to be sure,
Hume is aware that Newton decisively refuted the Mechanical
Philosophy's program which insisted that explanations be cast in terms
of the impact of colliding bodies (section 4.2). Hume rejects the
ontological and explanatory reductionism of the Mechanical
philosophy. Hume introduces eight “rules by which to judge of
causes and effects” (see section 4.5 below) because it is
“possible for all objects to become causes or effects to each
other” (Treatise 1.3.15). This is why Hume's list of
“ultimate causes” and “general principles” --
“Elasticity, gravity, cohesion of parts, communication of motion
by impulse” (EHU 4.1.12)—is more inclusive than the
Mechanical philosophy would allow. 


So, even if we leave aside the controversial question to what degree
Hume would allow the existence and our potential knowledge of real
causes in nature (as discussed in the “new Hume” debate),
his analysis of what we mean by ‘cause’ is hostile to
Newtonian natural philosophy. Hume rules out final and simultaneous
causes. The former play only a role in what we would call Newton's
theology, but the latter are an integral part of what we could his
science. 
4.5 Rules of Reasoning


Consider these passages:


(1)  The cause and effect must be contiguous in space and
time.


(2)  The cause must be prior to the effect.


(3)  There must be a constant union betwixt the cause and
effects. It is chiefly this quality, that constitutes the
relation.


(4)  The same cause always produces the same effect, and the same
effect never arises but from the same cause. This Principle we derive
from experience, and is the source of most of our philosophical
reasonings. For when by any clear experiment we have discovered the
causes or effects of any phaenomenon, we immediately extend our
observation to every phenomenon of the same kind, without waiting for
that constant repetition, from which the first idea of this relation
is derived.


(5)  There is another principle, which hangs upon this, viz.
that where several different objects produce the same effect, it must
be by means of some quality, which we discover common amongst
them. For as like effects imply like causes, we must always ascribe
the causation to the circumstance, wherein we discover the
resemblance.


(6)  The following principle is founded on the same reason. The
difference in the effects of two resembling objects must proceed from
that particular, in which they differ. For as like causes always
produce like effects, when in any instance we find our expectation to
be disappointed, we must conclude that this irregularity proceeds from
some difference in the causes.


(7)  When any object encreases or diminishes with the encrease or
diminution of its cause, it is to be regarded as a compounded effect,
derived from the union of the several different effects, which arise
from the several different parts of the cause. The absence or presence
of one part of the cause is here supposed to be always attended with
the absence or presence of a proportionable part of the effect. This
constant conjunction sufficiently proves, that the one part is the
cause of the other. We must, however, beware not to draw such a
conclusion from a few experiments. A certain degree of heat gives
pleasure; if you diminish that heat, the pleasure diminishes; but it
does not follow, that if you augment beyond a certain degree, the
pleasure will likewise augment; for we find that it degenerates into
pain.


(8)  The eight and last rule I shall take notice of is, that an
object, which exists for any time in its full perfection without any
effect, is not the sole cause of that effect, but requires to be
assisted by some other principle, which may forward its influences and
operation. For as like effects necessarily follow from like causes,
and in a contiguous time and place, their separation for a moment
shews, that these causes are not compleat ones (Treatise,
1.3.15).



In Treatise 1.3.15, Hume states eight “rules by which
to judge of causes and effects” (see the block-quote above)
because it is “possible for all objects to become causes or
effects to each other.” The source of these rules is ambiguous.
Although they “might have been supply'd by the natural
principles of our understanding” (1.3.15.11), Hume provides no
evidence for this. Nevertheless, Hume thinks it is
“proper” to employ them in his “reasoning”
(1.3.15.11; 1.3.15.2).  Earlier in the Treatise, he was even
more adamant about the regulative character of these rules: “We
shall afterwards take notice of some general rules, by which we ought
to regulate our judgment concerning causes and effects; and
these rules are form'd on the nature of our understanding, and on our
experience of its operations in the judgments we form concerning
objects” (emphasis added, 1.3.13.11; see De Pierris 2001). So,
while these rules may be derived from reflection on how our minds work
or some may be derived “from experience” (1.3.15.6), they
prescribe how we should ascribe causes to
“objects” in the world, especially in “most of our
philosophical reasonings.” But on Hume's definition of a cause
(rules 1–3), rules 4–8 are at most useful stipulations
(Hume uses “to fix” at 1.3.15.2) that help one
identify causal relations. This is not the place to resolve
how Hume is entitled to the normative character of these rules (see
Martin 1993). Now we examine these rules and their debt to
Newton's.


The first three rules define what it is to be cause and effect: as we
have seen, they must be contiguous in space and time; the cause must
be a prior to the effect; there must a constant union between cause
and effect (1.3.15.3–5). With the exception of these first three
(see section 4.4), Hume's rules of reasoning have a strong resemblance
to Newton's four “Rules for the Study of Natural
Philosophy” outlined at the start of Book 3 of the
Principia (third edition). For example, Hume's fourth rule,
“The same cause always produces the same effect, and the same
effect never arises but from the same cause,” is explained by
“[F]or when by any clear experiment I have discover'd the causes
or effects of any phænomenon, I immediately extend our
observation to every phenomenon of the same kind.” This echoes
Newton's second rule of 
 reasoning,[5] 
 especially in its generalizing tendency,
which Newton explicitly asserts in his third 
 rule.[6] 
 That is to say, in his
fourth rule, Hume makes explicit what is implied by the simplicity of
nature assumption in Newton's first 
 rule:[7] 
 that the same cause always produces the
same effect. Also, Hume's fifth rule is an articulation of Newton's
first and third rules. Hume's sixth rule is itself an extension of
Hume's fifth. 


Hume's seventh and eighth rules do not directly echo Newton's four
rules. Hume admits, however, that one should be cautious in applying
and extending the seventh rule because one cannot extrapolate from a
“few experiments” (1.3.15.9; he appeals to the rule at
Treatise 2.2.8.4). The example Hume offers (on the relationship
between heat and pleasure/pain) is about a mental phenomenon. Hume's
eighth rule is, as Hume himself implies, a refinement of Hume's fourth
rule; it prevents over-zealous causal ascription to an object. (In his
explanation of the rule, Hume presupposes the spatial and temporal
contiguity requirement of cause and effect, but it is not an essential
feature of the rule.) But the first part of it (“an object,
which exists for any time in its full perfection without any
effect,”) appears to target non-Newtonian theological or
Spinozistic arguments, so will not be discussed here. 


On Hume's interpretation, Newton's second rule, which he summarizes
as, “where any principle has been found to have a great force
and energy in one instance, to ascribe to it a like energy in all
similar instances,” is the most important one. Hume says it
“is Newton's chief rule of philosophizing” (EPM 3.2). A
version of it plays an important role in Hume's Rules of Reasoning as
Hume's fourth rule. For it is the only rule that is said to be derived
(un-controversially) “from experience” (Treatise,
1.3.15.6). It is a crucial rule because the fifth and sixth rules are,
by Hume's lights, extensions of the fourth
(1.3.15.7–8). Moreover, the conjunction of Hume's fourth and
seventh rules produces a new rule: “An effect always holds
proportion with its cause” (“Of Interest,” EMPL,
297). We can call this Hume's ninth rule. If one assumes (or
prescribes) that linear causal relationships are the only possible
ones, this new rule allows Hume to rule out competing claims
that posit the existence of causal relationships that are not
'proportional.' Hume can use the rule as a constraint on theory. It
plays a prominent role in Hume's political economy when he rejects
Mercantilism and, more important for our present purposes, in his
criticism of the use of analogy in the Newtonian argument from Design
(see EHU XI, and Dialogues Parts V-VII).  


Hume's ninth rule also has Newtonian debts. Since the time of
Aristotle, many philosophers have asserted proportionality between
cause and effect in one fashion or another. Hume's ninth rule echoes,
for instance, a principle Leibniz uses quite frequently: the principle
of the equality of cause and effect. It is the basis of arguments
Leibniz gives for his conservation principles (e.g., Specimen
Dynamicum). But Leibniz's formulation is in terms of equality and
not proportionality. Unlike Leibniz and other Cartesians, Newton
preferred to reason in terms of proportionality.  Although Hume's
ninth rule is not derived from any of Newton's official Rules of
Reasoning, Newton does implicitly use a rule like Hume's ninth
throughout the Principia. For example, the importance of a
proportion between cause and effect is emphasized throughout the
treatment of the behavior of bodies in resisting fluids (e.g., the
Scholium to Proposition 40, Book 2, Section 7, especially Experiment
14), which, given the importance, for Hume, of treating money as a
fluid (“Of the Balance of Trade,” EMPL, 312–315; see
Schabas 2002) may have caught Hume's attention. Hume also treats
resistance in his footnote to the EHU, Section 7.1.15.  Moreover,
there is a prominent place in the Principia (the Scholium
following Proposition 69, Book I, Section 11), where Newton implicitly
transforms a version of Hume's seventh rule into Hume's ninth rule in
which proportionality is emphasized. In this Scholium, Newton starts
employing the language and emphasizing the importance of
proportionality. This is not ruled out by Newton's own
“rules,” but it was not emphasized there. This passage
could have attracted Hume's attention for two reasons: it is one of
the few explicit methodological passages in the Principia,
and it offers an account of what Newton means by
“attraction.” Hume was almost certainly aware of this
passage because the proper meaning of “attraction” is
discussed, with explicit appeal to Newton's intentions, in Hume's
footnote to EHU 7.1.25. Hume makes the ninth rule explicit and uses it
as a constraint with which competing theories (in political economy,
the argument from design, etc) can be ruled out. Hume's use of it in
his attack on the design argument is an instance where Hume attacks
Newton with Newtonian tools.


Moreover, there are two connected, important further differences
between Hume's and Newton's rules. First, Hume never quite endorses
the universal reach implied by Newton's third rule. For Newton we
extend the known qualities of bodies within our experimental reach to
all bodies in the universe. While it could be compatible with Newton's
third rule, Hume's fourth rule does not go that far. There is one
instance where Hume appears to accept an implication of Newton's rule:
“The production of motion by impulse and gravity is an universal
law, which has hitherto admitted of no exception” (EHU
6.4). Leaving aside the fact that this would a very puzzling way to
express the inverse-square law, the context makes clear that Hume has
in mind causes that “are entirely uniform and constant” on
Earth, not their universal reach; this is why in context his other
examples involve the burning of fire and the suffocation of every
human creature by water. There is textual support to suspect that Hume
would deny the universal scope implied by Newton's third rule. Hume
states a “maxim” in a footnote to section XI of EHU which
argues against inferring new effects from any cause only “known
only by its particular effects.” This denies Newton's strategy
of making ever more audacious inferences (about planetary motions, the
tides, the shape of the Earth, comets, etc) based on the acceptance of
universal gravity (recall Hume's treatment of Newton's methodology in
History, VI, 542, discussed in 
 section 3).[8] 
 The argument in favor of the
“maxim” reveals the tension with Newton's third rule:
“To say, that the new effects proceed only from a continuation
of the same energy, which is already known from the first effects,
will not remove the difficulty. For even granting this to be the case
(which can seldom be supposed), the very continuation and exertion of
a like energy (for it is impossible it can be absolutely the same), I
say, this exertion of a like energy, in a different period of space
and time, is a very arbitrary supposition…” (EHU 11.26)
Newton's first three rules offer a bold methodological program that
attempts to unify science across different periods of space and time;
it is a bet on the causal unity of nature. The maxim cautions against
overconfidence in this regard. Hume's caution is prophetic because it
turns out that sub-atomic entities behave very differently than
macroscopic bodies. However, it is not entirely certain if one should
ascribe the “maxim” in the footnote to Hume because it is
offered in the voice of a “friend,” who is pretending to
be Epicurus.


Second, Hume lacks an equivalent to Newton's Rule 4. Hume is not alone
in ignoring rule 4. Even Reid and Priestley, who have much to say
about the authority of Newton's Rules of Reasoning, tend to ignore the
fourth rule (Tapper 2002). Adam Smith seems to have been one of few
18th century figures to have taken it seriously (Schliesser
2005a and 2005b).) Recall (from section 4.2) that Newton's Rule IV can
be viewed as (1) an encouragement to find and exploit known deviations
from the regularities one has established in order to make them
“more exact.” (2) A proposal about how to treat a theory,
that is, as true until proven otherwise. Hume seems to have not
appreciated the first point at all (Schliesser 2004).  On the second
point, we have seen that Hume shares Newton's commitment to
fallibilism. But this common commitment also hides an important
difference between Hume and Newton which is connected to the
observation just made about the contrast between Newton's third rule
and the maxim in the footnote to section XI of EHU. Newton's
fallibilism includes commitment to the truth of the propositions
within one's scientific theory until it is proven to be false. Newton
realizes that induction can never be certain for all time; he does
anticipate Hume in this respect. But it is also an expression of
Newton's
 “scientific naturalism”.  
  
 Empirical science is authoritative until one has empirical reason to
refine theory. This means that at any time one risks the danger of
going beyond one's evidence, but this is the methodological price one
must pay to make further progress. In his eagerness to combat
Newtonian superstition, Hume is willing to be more cautious.


Hume's omission of an equivalent rule has several implications for his
philosophy and its relationship to Newton's. First Hume replaces the
authority of natural philosophy by his own criterion, the ‘copy
 principle,’ when it comes to existence claims (see Section 2,
of the entry on 
  Hume
 in this Encyclopedia).  Only the ideas that can be traced to a
distinct impression will be permissible. Thus, Hume's “science
of man”, or “true philosophy”, offers to evaluate
the claims of natural philosophy from a privileged position. This is
the sense in which Hume is not a scientific naturalist.


Second, without commitment to the truth of a ‘scientific’
theory, Hume has conceptual elbow room for a distinction between the
provable, experimental claims of common life (including some parts of
natural philosophy) and the lesser, probable commitments of the more
abstract parts of natural philosophy. This, too, is a result of Hume's
“science of man.” Recall (from section 1) that the Humean
practitioners of “mitigated scepticism” will not “be
tempted to go beyond common life, so long as they consider the
imperfection of those faculties which they employ, their narrow reach,
and their inaccurate operations.” The distinction between a
provable common life and the far less probable parts of natural
philosophy runs through all of Hume's major works. Yet, its
implications for Hume's attitude toward Newtonian natural philosophy
are not discussed until the Dialogues. There, Cleanthes, the
spokesperson for a Newtonian natural religion, attacks the Humean
position:


They are even obliged to acknowledge, that the most abstruse and
remote objects are those, which are best explained by philosophy.
Light is in reality anatomized: The true system of the heavenly bodies
is discovered and ascertained. But the nourishment of bodies by food
is still an inexplicable mystery: The cohesion of the parts of matter
is still incomprehensible…In reality, would not a man be
ridiculous, who pretended to reject Newton's explication of the
wonderful phenomenon of the rainbow, because that explication gives a
minute anatomy of the rays of light; a subject, forsooth, too refined
for human comprehension? And what would you say to one, who having
nothing particular to object to the arguments of Copernicus and
Galileo for the motion of the earth, should withhold his assent, on
that general principle, That these subjects were too magnificent and
remote to be explained by the narrow and fallacious reason of
mankind?… In vain would the sceptic make a distinction between
science and common life, or between one science and another. The
arguments, employed in all, if just, are of a similar nature, and
contain the same force and evidence. Or if there be any difference
among them, the advantage lies entirely on the side of theology and
natural religion. Many principles of mechanics are founded on very
abstruse reasoning; yet no man, who has any pretensions to science,
even no speculative sceptic, pretends to entertain the least doubt
with regard to them. The Copernican system contains the most
surprising paradox, and the most contrary to our natural conceptions,
to appearances, and to our very senses: yet even monks and inquisitors
are now constrained to withdraw their opposition to it. (Part I,
Dialogues)


Cleanthes points out that if philosophy asserts the distinction
between common life and science, philosophy would set itself against
some of the best supported parts of natural philosophy which are often
most removed from common life. We may naturally think that the Sun is
in motion, but the reality behind the appearances can be very
surprising. Cleanthes's point is that philosophy cannot hope to argue
against the authority of science without looking as backward as monks
and inquisitors (who attacked Copernicanism). 


For our purposes, there are three important features in Cleanthes's
discussion. First, he claims that the same kind of correct reasoning
applies to all domains. This is a very popular argument among
religious Newtonians (e.g., Reid). So just because science deals with
uncommon domains and obscure topics, it can still contain “just
reasoning.” This is, in fact, one of the major assumptions
behind Hume's own Rules of Reasoning. So, Cleanthes uses Hume's
philosophy to undercut part of Hume's anti-Newtonian strategy. Even if
Philo were not bound by Hume's philosophy (and there is no evidence he
should be considered a strict spokesperson for Hume), as a defender of
the epistemic priority of common life he has no resources to claim
that there is a different, correct form of reasoning for areas beyond
common life. Second, if there is a debate between science and common
life, the advantage is with science. No skeptic, who at least
pretends to be informed, is seriously willing to
doubt the results of natural philosophy. That is, by the last third of
the 18th century natural philosophy has an authoritative
claim to knowledge even if it is founded on very uncommon,
“abstruse” principles. Third, Cleanthes assimilates the
success of natural philosophy to theology and natural religion; he
does not recognize a principled distinction between science and
religion. If Philo attacks natural religion he attacks science
itself. Contemporary advocates of “intelligent design,”
who claim that it should be treated as a scientific theory (see the
entry
 on Teleological Arguments),
 follow the same strategy as Cleanthes.


Initially it seems that Cleanthes's argument is left without a
response. So there appears no room for a principled difference between
common life, on the one hand, and natural philosophy and natural
religion, on the other hand. In the remainder of the Dialogues, Philo
makes sure not to be thought of as attacking natural philosophy again.
In the context where the intellectual authority of science has become
unchallengeable, Philo's best hope lies in driving a wedge between
natural philosophy and natural religion. This may explain why in
undermining Newtonian natural religion, Philo does not draw on some
core elements of Hume's philosophy: the “copy principle”
or Hume's attack on the permissibility of final causes. Rather,
throughout the Dialogues, Philo offers more narrow arguments attacking
the content of natural religion. So, while in Part I of the
Dialogues Philo has no immediate response to Cleanthes's argument,
later in the Dialogues he continues to use some distinction
between the secure reasoning available in common life and those too
far removed from it. For example, by using Hume's ninth rule, Philo is
critical of the use of analogy in making claims about the nature of
the first cause. Philo relies on common sense to formulate the problem
of evil—if God is all powerful then he is responsible for
natural and moral evil. (See Part XI) At the end of the Dialogue,
Philo is willing to grant Cleanthes “that the cause or
causes of order in the universe probably bear some remote analogy to
human intelligence” (Part XII; emphasis in original). So,
while Philo is unable to draw a conclusive, principled distinction
between natural philosophy and natural religion, he reduces the latter
to a very minimal thesis. 


It may, of course, be possible that by the end of his life, Hume had
limited his aims to removing the “superstitious” elements
in Newtonianism. (Recall his criticism of Newton in section A.)
Perhaps he had given up on claiming the priority of the science of man
over natural philosophy. But it would be a mistake to identify the
posthumous Dialogues as Hume's final, definitive philosophy. Hume
appended an “advertisement” to EHU, which was printed at
the start of the posthumous 1777 edition. After distancing himself (to
some degree) from his “juvenile work,” the
Treatise, he says about EHU: “Henceforth, the Author
desires, that the following Pieces may alone be regarded as containing
his philosophical sentiments and principles.” EHU contains, of
course, Hume's copy principle and the attack on final causes.
Perhaps, the closing remarks of Philo, where he apologizes for
“intervening in the education and instruction of his [i.e.,
Cleanthes's] pupil [i.e., Pamphillus—the official narrator of
(and witness to) the dialogues among Philo, Cleanthes, and
Demea],” should be taken more seriously by more of Hume's
readers. The Dialogues are Hume's efforts to educate the students of
natural religion; they are not a statement of Hume's positive
“science of man” or “true metaphysics.”