But to proceed in this reconciling project with regard to the
question of liberty and necessity; the most contentious question of
metaphysics, the most contentious science… —David
Hume (EU, 8.23/95)


David Hume is widely recognized as providing the most influential
statement of the “compatibilist” position in the free will
debate — the view that freedom and moral responsibility can be
reconciled with (causal) determinism. The arguments that Hume advances
on this subject are found primarily in the sections titled “Of
liberty and necessity”, as first presented in A Treatise of
Human Nature (2.3.1–2) and, later, in a slightly amended form, in
the Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (sec. 8).
Although there is considerable overlap in content between these two
statements of Hume's position, there are also some significant
differences. This includes, for example, some substantial additions in
the Enquiry discussion as it relates to problems of religion,
such as predestination and divine foreknowledge. While these
differences are certainly significant they should not be exaggerated.
Hume's basic strategy and compatibilist commitments in both
works remain the same in their essentials


It has become common practice to treat the two sections “Of
liberty and necessity” as self-standing contributions that can be
fully understood more or less in isolation from Hume's
philosophical commitments and principles as found outside these
sections. (Many anthologies present one or other of these sections as
complete statements of Hume's position on this subject.) There
is, nevertheless, an intimate and complex relationship between what
Hume has to say in the sections “Of liberty and necessity”
and his moral psychology and philosophical system as a whole. Neglect
of these features has led to some serious misunderstanding concerning
the character and content of Hume's compatibilism. Having said
this, it is equally important to acknowledge that the established or
“classical” interpretation of Hume's views on this
subject has served as the foundation for the subsequent development of
compatibilist strategy over the past two centuries — especially
as found in various prominent representatives of the 20th
century empiricist tradition (e.g., Ayer, Schlick, et al.).


 This article will be arranged around a basic contrast between
two alternative interpretations of Hume's compatibilist strategy:
the “classical” and “naturalistic”
interpretations. According to the classical account,
Hume's effort to articulate the conditions of moral
responsibility, and the way they relate to the free will problem,
should be understood primarily in terms of his views about the
logic of our concepts of “liberty” and
“necessity”. Free and responsible action, it is said, must
be caused by the agent. There is, therefore, no
incompatibility between free will and determinism. On the
contrary, free and responsible action (logically) requires
causal necessity. So interpreted, Hume's arguments involve (a
priori) observations about the logical relations that hold between the
key concepts involved in this dispute. In contrast with this, the
naturalistic approach maintains that what is essential to Hume's
account of the nature and conditions of responsible conduct is his
description of the role that moral sentiment
plays in this sphere. That is to say, it is one of Hume's primary
objectives to describe the circumstances in which people are
felt to be responsible. When we read Hume's arguments in
these terms, not only does this alter the way we understand his general
theory of responsibility, it also changes the way that we interpret his
core arguments relating specifically to the free will debate (i.e. as
presented in the two sections titled “Of liberty and
necessity”). This contrast between the classical and naturalistic
interpretations is of fundamental importance not only for our general
understanding of Hume's philosophical system but also for any
adequate assessment of the contemporary value and relevance of
his views on this subject. In the final section of this article I
consider the way in which Hume's discussion of free will relates
to his wider and more general irreligious philosophical
intentions, as presented throughout his philosophy
 
1. Two Kinds of “Liberty”: The Basics of the Classical Interpretation


 Lying at the heart of Hume's compatibilism are three
conclusions that constitute the core of his compatibilist position on
this subject as generally understood:

Actions that are subject to moral evaluation are not distinguished
from those that are not by an absence of cause but rather by
a different type of cause. Responsible or morally free
actions are caused by our own willings, whereas unfree actions are
brought about by causes external to the agent. Let us call the
argument that seeks to establish this conclusion the
“spontaneity argument”
A liberty which means “a negation of necessity and
causes” (T, 2.3.2.1/407) has no existence and would make
morality impossible. Let us call the argument which seeks to establish
this conclusion the “antilibertarian argument”.
Necessity, properly understood, is the constant conjunction of
objects and the inference of the mind from one object to the other (T,
2.3.1.4/400; EU, 8.5/82). Let us call the argument which seeks to
establish this conclusion the “necessity argument”.



Taken together these three arguments serve as the basis of
Hume's compatibilist strategy. All three arguments appear in some
relevant form in both the Treatise and Enquiry in the
sections “Of liberty and necessity”. The spontaneity and
antilibertarian arguments serve to distinguish two rival views of moral
freedom, providing a defence of one and a refutation of the other.
These two arguments may be referred to jointly as the “liberty
arguments”. A number of commentators take the view that the
“liberty arguments” constitute the main thread of
Hume's compatibilist strategy (Stroud, 1977: 144–6). Let us begin, therefore, with
Hume's views on “liberty”.


 In the Treatise Hume draws a
fundamental distinction between two kinds of liberty.


Few are capable of distinguishing betwixt the liberty of
spontaneity, as it is call'd in the schools, and the
liberty of indifference; betwixt that which is oppos'd
to violence, and that which means a negation of necessity and causes.
The first is even the most common sense of the word; and as ‘tis
only that species of liberty, which it concerns us to preserve, our
thoughts have been principally turn'd towards it, and have almost
universally confounded it with the other. (T, 2.3.2.1/407–8)


Hume's key point here is that free actions are those that are
caused by the agent's willings and desires. We hold an
agent responsible because it was his desires or willings that
were the determining causes of the action in question. Action caused in
this way is voluntary and involuntary when caused in some other way.
There is, therefore, no incompatibility between an action being
causally necessitated and it being a free action for which the agent is
responsible. On the contrary, morally free and responsible action
requires that an agent caused his actions through his
willings. If an action is the result of “violence” or
constraint of some kind, then, although it may be necessitated or
caused, it is not the result of the agent's will, and so cannot be
attributed to him (T, 2.3.2.6/411). In these circumstances, the agent
is forced or compelled to act, and, therefore, he is not responsible
for his actions. In short, the spontaneity argument seeks to establish
that free action is to be distinguished from unfree action not by the
absence of cause (as is suggested by conceptions of liberty of
indifference) but rather by a different type of cause.


Hume's account of liberty is complicated by his related but
distinct definition of “liberty” in the Enquiry.
In this context he drops his distinction between liberty of
“spontaneity” and “indifference” and offers the
following in its place:


By liberty, then we can only mean a power of acting or not
acting, according to the determinations of the will; that is, if
we choose to remain at rest, we may; if we choose to move, we also may.
Now this hypothetical liberty is universally allowed to belong to every
one who is not a prisoner and in chains. (EU, 8.23 /95)


Although this definition of “hypothetical liberty” also
serves Hume's compatibilist purposes, it is not exactly the same
as “liberty of spontaneity”. More specifically, a person
may enjoy “liberty of spontaneity” but still lack
“hypothetical liberty”. (For example, while you may choose
to remain in a room rather than leave it, it may still be the case that
if you chose to leave you could not because the door is
locked.) Clearly, then, liberty of spontaneity does not always secure
hypothetical liberty. The particular importance of this distinction for
the free will debate is that “hypothetical liberty”
provides compatibilism with a (plausible) account of alternate
possibilities — something that is generally assumed we need for
any acceptable theory of moral freedom and responsibility.


Hume's antilibertarian argument draws on, or develops out of,
several of the basic features of the spontaneity argument. The
antilibertarian argument purports to have found a fatal flaw in the
libertarian position. Liberty of indifference, as we have noted, is
“that which means a negation of necessity and causes”. Such
a libertarian view holds that it is a necessary condition of moral
responsibility that the act was not necessitated or caused.
But such a freedom, claims Hume, is nothing on which moral
responsibility could rest. If one removes necessity from actions, then
one thereby removes causes as well, and this “is the very same
thing with chance” (T, 2.3.1.18/407; cf. EU, 8.25/96 and T,
1.3.14.33/171). It seems clear that we cannot hold someone responsible
for an action which just happened, an action he contributed nothing to.
Where actions “proceed not from some cause in the character and
disposition of the person who performed them”, says Hume,
“they can neither redound to his honour, if good, nor infamy, if
evil” (EU, 8.29/98; cp. T, 2.3.2.6/411). For the libertarian,
therefore, there is a serious difficulty in giving a plausible account
of the mechanism or source of responsibility.


According to the classical interpretation, these two arguments (i.e.
the liberty arguments) are principally concerned with the
logic of our concepts of moral freedom and
responsibility. Hume is understood to be claiming that it would be
illogical to say that an agent did not cause this action but that it is
free and the agent is responsible for it. It is, therefore, illogical
to say that either an uncaused action or an action that is caused by
factors external to the agent is an action for which the agent may be
justly held responsible. Granted that a responsible action must be
determined by the will of the agent, it is unreasonable to
hold an agent responsible for actions that are due to indifference or
external violence. This account of the liberty arguments serves as the
foundation of the classical interpretation of Hume's compatibilist
strategy.


 There are a number of well-known
incompatibilist objections to the spontaneity argument. The first and
most obvious is that “liberty of spontaneity” is a wholly
inadequate conception of moral freedom. Kant, famously, describes this
account of moral freedom as a “wretched subterfuge” and
suggests that a freedom of this kind belongs to a clock that moves its
hands by means of internal causes. If our will is itself determined by
antecedent natural causes, then we are no more accountable for our
actions than any other mechanical object whose movements are internally
conditioned. Individuals who enjoy nothing more than a liberty of this
nature are, the incompatibilist claims, little more than
“robots” or “puppets” subject to the play of
fate. This general line of criticism against the spontaneity argument
leads directly to two further important criticisms.


The incompatibilist maintains that if our willings and choices are
themselves determined by antecedent causes then we could never
choose otherwise than we do. Given the antecedent
causal conditions, we must always act as we do. We cannot, therefore,
be held responsible for our conduct since, on this account, we have no
“genuine alternatives” or “open possibilities”
available to us. Moreover, incompatibilists do not accept that
Hume's notion of “hypothetical liberty”, as presented in the
Enquiry, can deal with this objection. It is true, of course,
that hypothetical liberty leaves room for the truth of
conditionals that suggest that we could have acted otherwise
if we had chosen to do so. However, it still remains the case,
the incompatibilist argues, that the agent could not have
chosen otherwise given the actual circumstances.
Responsibility, they claim, requires categorical freedom to
choose otherwise in the same circumstances. Hypothetical freedom alone
will not suffice. One way of expressing this point in more general
terms is that the incompatibililst holds that for responsibility we
need more than freedom of action, we also need freedom of will
— understood as a power to choose between open alternatives.
Failing this, the agent has no ultimate control over his
conduct.


The spontaneity argument also suffers from further difficulties
related to this. More specifically, according to the spontaneity
argument, the distinction between free and unfree (i.e. compelled)
action should be understood in terms of the difference between internal
and external causes. Critics of compatibilism argue that
this—attractively simple—distinction is impossible to
maintain. It seems obvious, for example, that there are cases in which
an agent acts according to the determinations of his own will but is
nevertheless clearly unfree. There are, in particular, circumstances in
which an agent may be subject to, and act on, desires and wants that
are themselves compulsive in nature (e.g., as with a drug addict or
kleptomaniac). Desires and wants of this kind, it is claimed, limit and
undermine an agent's freedom no less than external force and violence.
Although it may be true that in these circumstances the agent is acting
according to his own desires or willings, it is equally clear that such
an agent is neither free nor responsible for his behaviour. It would
appear, therefore, that we are required to acknowledge that some causes
“internal” to the agent may also be regarded as compelling
or constraining. This concession, however, generates serious
difficulties for the classical compatibilist strategy. It is no longer
evident, given this concession, which “internal” causes
should be regarded as “constraining” or
“compelling” and which should not. Lying behind this
objection is the more fundamental concern that the spontaneity argument
presupposes a wholly inadequate understanding of the nature of excusing
and mitigating considerations.


The spontaneity argument, as Hume presents it, is generally
thought to contain the seeds of an essentially forward-looking and
utilitarian account of moral responsibility. That is, Hume, following
thinkers like Thomas Hobbes, points out that rewards and punishments
serve to cause people to act in some ways and not in others and that
this is clearly a matter of considerable social utility (T,
2.3.2.5/410; EU, 8.2897–98). Hume's brief remarks on this subject
have been further developed by other compatibilists with whom Hume is
often closely identified (e.g., Moritz Schlick and J.J.C. Smart) This
sort of forward-looking, utilitarian account of responsibility has been
subject to telling criticism. The basic problem with this account, it
is argued, is that it is entirely blind to matters of desert
and thus lacks the required (backward-looking) retributive
element demanded in this sphere. Moreover, such a theory of
responsibility, critics claim, is at the same time both too wide and
too narrow. It is too wide because it would appear to make children and
animals responsible; and it is too narrow insofar as it would appear to
deny that those who are dead, or beyond the reach of the relevant forms
of “treatment”, can be judged responsible for their
actions. In short, all efforts to interpret responsibility along these
forward-looking, utilitarian lines seem to be plagued with
difficulties.
2. Hume's “New Light”: Necessity Without Force


The account of Hume's compatibilist strategy provided so far
has been almost entirely concerned with the significance of the liberty
arguments. On this view of things, Hume's distinction between two
kinds of “liberty” is what is central to his overall
strategy. If this is correct, then there is not much that is really new
about his general approach, as the liberty arguments are familiar
features of earlier compatibilist writings (e.g., those of Hobbes).
Contrary to this view, however, Hume makes clear in his
Abstract of the Treatise that it is his views about
“necessity” that puts “the whole controversy in a new
light” (TA, 34/661). For this reason we need to turn to the
necessity argument and consider more carefully what role it plays in
Hume's compatibilist strategy.


Hume's claim to put the free will controversy “in a new
light by giving a new definition of necessity” is
certainly consistent with his statement in the Enquiry,
“that a few intelligible definitions would immediately…
put an end to the whole controversy” (EU, 8.2/81). Although the
“verbal” aspect of this dispute is not emphasized in the
Treatise in the way that it is in the Enquiry, Hume
nevertheless makes clear in the Treatise what he takes the
“verbal” aspect of the dispute to be. At the end of
Treatise 2.3.1 he states:


I dare be positive no-one will ever endeavour to refute these
reasonings otherwise than by altering my definitions… if anyone
alters the definitions, I cannot pretend to argue with him, ‘till
I know the meaning he assigns to these terms [viz. ‘cause’,
‘effect’, ‘necessity’, ‘liberty’,
and ‘chance’] (T, 2.3.1.18/407).


Hume's subsequent remarks in this section make it clear that
it is the term “necessity”
that has been the major stumbling block to progress on this
subject.


 Hume's discussion
in both Treatise 3.2.1–2 and Enquiry sec. 8 begin
with an account of what he takes “necessity” to be.
According to Hume “two circumstances form the whole of that
necessity, which we ascribe to matter” (EU, 8.5/82). These two
circumstances are the constant conjunction of like objects and the
inference of the mind from one object to another. If we allow that
“these two circumstances take place in the voluntary actions of
men and in the operations of mind” (EU, 8.6/83), then we must
accept that the moral realm is governed by necessity. Hume proceeds to
show, first, that there is constant conjunction in the moral realm and,
second, that given the very nature of society and morality, we must
make inferences in the moral realm.


Hume believes that the question of whether or not there is constant
conjunction in the moral realm is amenable to empirical
resolution. It is just a matter of fact that there is constant
conjunction in the moral realm as well as the natural realm. Hume
admits that there are apparent irregularities and uncertainties in
both the natural and moral realms, but these can be attributed
to “imperfect knowledge” and can be accounted for by
contrary causes (T, 2.3.1.11–3/403–4; EU,
8.13–5/86–88).


Thus it appears, not only that the conjunction between motives and
voluntary actions is as regular and uniform as that between the cause
and effect in any part of nature; but also that this regular
conjunction has been universally acknowledged among mankind, and has
never been the subject of dispute, either in philosophy or common life.
(EU, 8.16/88)


In this way, Hume proceeds to try to show that this “regular
conjunction” between motive and action allows for inference in
the moral realm by “determining us to infer the existence of one
from that of another” (T, 2.3.1.14/404). Hume's arguments here
are based on what he claims are two incontestable facts about mankind:
“that men always seek society” (T, 2.3.1.8/402) and that
men regard other people as objects of praise or blame—that is,
they hold them responsible.


 These two arguments establishing that
people must make inferences in the moral realm are closely related. For
people to live in society, they must be able to infer the actions of
others from their character, and—in the opposite direction but
parallel to this—for people to regard one another as responsible,
they must be able to infer character from actions. Hume proceeds to
demonstrate that we draw inferences concerning motives and actions even
though “it may seem superfluous to prove” this.


The mutual dependence of men is so great in all societies that
scarce any human action is entirely complete in itself, or is performed
without some reference to the actions of others, which are requisite to
make it answer fully the intention of the agent… . In all those
conclusions [expectations concerning the actions of others] they take
their measures from past experience, in the same manner as in their
reasonings concerning external objects; and firmly believe that men, as
well as all the elements, are to continue, in their operations, the
same that they have ever found them. (EU, 8.17/89)


Our inferences in the moral realm seem no less certain than those in
the natural realm. “Moral evidence is”, Hume says,
“nothing but a conclusion concerning the actions of men, deriv'd
from the consideration of their motives, temper and situation”
(T, 2.3.1.15/404). This sort of reasoning “runs thro’ politics,
war, commerce, economy, and indeed mixes itself so entirely in human
life, that ‘tis impossible to act or subsist a moment without recourse
to it” (T, 2.3.1.15/405).


 To the extent that the moral realm is
subject to liberty of indifference (i.e. the absence of regularity and
inference), so to that extent we would find that society would be made
impossible. It is still not clear, however, why the two kinds of
liberty have been “almost universally confounded” with each
other, a confusion that leads many to embrace a mistaken view
of liberty as indifference. Hume's successors, adopting the
classical strategy, have interpreted the necessity argument as
providing an answer to this question. More specifically, Hume's
suggestion that causation and necessity seem “to imply something
of force, violence, and constraint, of which we are not sensible”
(T, 2.3.2.1/407) is taken to explain this fundamental (incompatibilist)
mistake. The idea of necessity seems to imply some sort of compulsion
or constraint, Hume suggests, because we erroneously believe that we
have some idea of necessity as it exists in matter
beyond that of constant conjunction and inference.


I may be mistaken in asserting, that we have no idea of any other
connexion in the actions of body… . But sure I am, I ascribe
nothing to the actions of the mind, but what must readily be allow'd
of. Let no one, therefore, put an invidious construction on my words,
by saying simply, that I assert the necessity of human actions, and
place them on the same footing with the operations of senseless matter.
I do not ascribe to the will that unintelligible necessity,
which is suppos'd to lie in matter. But I ascribe to matter,
that intelligible quality, call it necessity or not, which the most
rigorous orthodoxy does or must allow to belong to the will. I
change, therefore, nothing in the receiv'd systems, with regard to the
will, but only with regard to material objects. (T, 2.3.2.4/410;
my emphasis; cf. EU, 8.27/97)


In this way, Hume's remarks suggest that traditional
“metaphysical” theories of causation have encouraged a
fundamental confusion between the notion of an event being
caused and that of an event being compelled. On the
basis of such an erroneous conception of causation, many philosophers
have arrived at the equally mistaken conclusion that there must be an
incompatibility between determinism and freedom. The regularity theory
of causation, it is argued, identifies and removes the source of this
confusion in the free will dispute by way of challenging the
deep-seated assumption that there is something more to causation than
mere constant conjunction and the accompanying inference of the
mind.


 The significance of Hume's
necessity argument for the liberty arguments seems clear in light of
this. Free, responsible action, it is claimed, must be both
caused (i.e. by the agent's willings) and uncompelled.
Traditional, metaphysical theories of causation, however, confuse or
conflate causation and compulsion and thus generate an ineradicable
conflict between the positive and negative requirements of
freedom and responsibility. It is, therefore, the great merit of Hume's
regularity theory that it shows how the positive and negative
requirements of freedom and responsibility can be reconciled and how
the (“verbal”) confusion generated by traditional theories
of causation can be overcome.


 Hume's suggestion that metaphysical
or nonregularity conceptions of causation lead us to confuse causation
and compulsion has become a salient and established feature of the
classical compatibilist strategy as developed throughout the
20th century. What are we to make of this aspect of the
classical compatibilist strategy? Considered as an attempt to
strengthen the liberty arguments, it must be deemed a failure.
The line of reasoning advanced gives credence to the view that if there were
some stronger “bond” or “tie” between cause and
effect, beyond that of mere regularity, then causes would (somehow)
compel or constrain their effects. A close examination of the
spontaneity argument, however, reveals that this assumption is itself
confused. The distinction that is fundamental to the compatibilist
position is that between those actions which have external causes (i.e.
compelled or constrained actions) and those which have causes internal
to the agent. This crucial distinction between actions that originate
from the agent and those that do not is not compromised by
“metaphysical” (i.e. nonregularity) views of causation.
What is relevant to whether an action was compelled or not is the
nature of the cause (i.e. the object), not the nature of the
causal relation. Nothing about the metaphysical conception of
cause when applied to human action need suggest that we do not act
according to our own will and could not act otherwise if we so willed.
Clearly, therefore, proponents of the line of reasoning under
consideration are mistaken when they suggest that metaphysical theories
of causation would pose a threat to the (classical) compatibilist
strategy. To concede this point to the incompatibilist is to be
confused about the very force or significance of the spontaneity
argument itself.


 When we examine Hume's effort to
reinterpret the causal relation and explain its relevance to the free
will dispute, it becomes apparent that there is a deep ambivalence in
the classical compatibilist strategy in respect of this issue. That is,
the compatibilist, on the one hand, seems to argue that were we to
remove “causal necessity” from the from the relation that
holds between agent and action then we will thereby remove the basis on
which attributions of responsibility are founded. In these
circumstances there would be nothing to connect any agent with any
action. On the other hand, compatibilists also argue (in light of
Hume's remarks) that we must remove “metaphysical”
necessity from our conception of the causal relation so as to rid it of
all suggestion of compulsion and constraint. In this way, we find that
the compatibilist strategy has sought to find an account of the causal
relation that has to be “weak” enough to avoid implying
compulsion and “strong” (robust) enough to connect agent
and action. The regularity theory of causation, evidently, is thought
to allow the (classical) compatibilist to travel this middle path.
However, it may be argued, against this view, that the regularity
theory in fact constitutes something of an Achilles' heel for the
compatibilist position. That is, the regularity theory, we may argue,
not only fails to strengthen the compatibilist position, as I have
already suggested, but—what is even more disconcerting — it eats
away at the metaphysical underpinnings of the compatibilist position.
In order to understand these difficulties, we must consider, again, the
relations between the liberty arguments and the necessity argument.


 The liberty arguments
presuppose that any adequate theory of responsibility must establish
that agents produce or determine their actions and are, thereby,
connected with their deeds. The necessity argument suggests
that there exist only constant conjunctions between these objects (i.e.
willings and actions). These “objects” — like all
objects that we have any experience of — remain “entirely
loose and separate” (EU, 7.26/73–4). Insofar as we may suppose
that these causes do possess some power or agency and are, thereby,
connected with their effects, this is only because the mind fails to
distinguish between an (acquired) association of ideas and a perceived
power or connexion in the objects themselves. In general, on
Hume's account, in so far as we have any knowledge of
“causal connections” they are always subjective
(i.e. in the mind of the observer) and never objective (i.e.
discovered in the objects themselves). The fact that we suppose that
the objects themselves, qua cause, possess a power or efficacy
by which they are connected with their effects is entirely due to the
influence of experience or “custom” on the human mind;
there are no (known) corresponding features in these objects (see,
e.g., T, 1.3.14.14–25/162–7; cp. EU, 8.26–30/74–9). Given this,
Hume's account of liberty of spontaneity seems vulnerable to the very
same objections that the antilibertarian argument raised against the
libertarian position. That is, given the necessity argument, we still
have no reason to believe that such agents are (really) connected with
their actions, although our subjective experience may make us
feel that they are.


 We may conclude that Hume's account
of necessity not only fails to strengthen the liberty arguments, it
weakens them both. Since we never discover any (real) causal
connections between any objects both the antilibertarian
argument and the spontaneity argument rest on a demand that can never
be met — the demand that agent's can somehow be
“connected” to their actions in some relevant (i.e. robust
and objective) sense. While metaphysical conceptions of causation serve
these purposes very well, Hume's (sceptical) views about
(objective) causal connections undermine all such demands. In light of
these difficulties, one of two things must be true of Hume's
“reconciling project”. Either what he took to be its
greatest source of strength, the necessity argument, generates awkward
and serious difficulties for this “reconciling project”, or
his liberty arguments have been misunderstood. I will show that it is
indeed the case that Hume's liberty arguments have been misunderstood
in important respects.
3. The Naturalism of Hume's “Reconciling Project”


 As I have noted, Hume maintains that for
men to live in society they must be able to infer the actions of others
from their character. Without inferences of this kind, based on
perceived regularities, all reasonings and practices concerning
politics, war, commerce, and so on would be impossible. In the opposite
direction but parallel to this, Hume also maintains that for people to
regard one another as responsible they must be able to infer character
from action. Why should inference to character have any
importance or significance for morality? The following three points
must be kept in mind:

Only a person can be the object of love and hate.
Approval and disapproval are calm forms of love and hatred.
To hold someone responsible is to regard him as an object of
approval or disapproval.



Hume says:


The constant and universal object of hatred or anger is a person or
creature endowed with thought and consciousness; and when any criminal
or injurious actions excite that passion, it is only by their relation
to the person or connection with him.


He continues:


… and where they [sc. actions] proceed not from some cause in
the character and disposition of the person, who performed them
…it is impossible he can, upon its account, become the object of
punishment and vengeance (T, 2.3.2.6//411).


Evidently it is only a person, a character or a thinking being who
is an object of hatred and anger. Holding an agent responsible is,
for Hume, a matter of simply regarding him as an object of the
moral sentiments of approval or disapproval. These sentiments are calm
forms of the indirect passions of love or hatred. In his discussion of
the indirect passions of love and hatred Hume says:


One of these supposition, viz. that the cause of love and hatred
must be related to a person or thinking being in order to produce these
passions, is not only provable, but too evident to be contested. Virtue
and vice, when considered in the abstract … excite no degree of
love and hatred, esteem or contempt towards those who have no relation
to them (T, 2.2.1.7/331).


Once it is appreciated that in Hume's view approbation and
blame are “nothing but a fainter and more imperceptible love or
hatred” (T, 3.3.5.1/614) it is clear why “they must be
related to a person or thinking being”.


 Hume notes that the causes of the
indirect passions vary greatly in number and kind (T, 2.1.3.5/281).
Different and varied as they may be, however, they must be
“either parts of ourselves, or something nearly related to
us” (T, 2.1.5.2/285). Hume distinguishes four broad categories of
objects or features of ourselves which give rise to the indirect
passions: our wealth, external goods, or property; our immediate
relatives or those people who are closely related to us on another
basis; our bodily qualities or attributes; and, most important, our
qualities of mind, or character traits (T, 2.1.2.5; 2.1.7.1–5/279,
294f; DP, 146–53). Those character traits or mental qualities
that produce an independent pleasure in ourselves or others also, in
consequence of this, give rise to pride or love. Character traits or
qualities of mind of this nature are virtues. Similarly, those mental
qualities or character traits which produce pain, also, in consequence
of this, produce humility or hate, and, as such, they are deemed to be
vices (see, e.g., T, 3.3.1.3/574–75; cf. T, 3.1.2.5/473; DP,
146–47, 155–56) Clearly, then, virtue and vice, by means of
the general mechanism of the indirect passions, give rise to that
“faint and imperceptible” form of love and hatred which
constitutes the moral sentiments. It is, in other words, this
“regular mechanism” which is, on Hume's account, essential
to all ascriptions of responsibility.


 In order to know anyone's character
we require inference — from their actions to their character.
Without knowledge of anyone's character no sentiment of
approbation or blame would be aroused in us. Therefore, without
inference no one would be an object of praise or blame — that is
to say, no one would be regarded as responsible for their actions.
Accordingly, praising and blaming would be psychologically
impossible if there were no inferences from action to character.
Without this necessity morality would become a psychological
impossibility. It is also clear that external violence, like liberty of
indifference, makes it impossible to regard someone as an object of
praise or blame. For in such circumstances we could not make any
inference from the action to the agent's character. As the action
is caused by external forces we are led away from the
agent's character.


… liberty [sc. of spontaneity] … is also essential to
morality, and … no human actions, where it is wanting, are
susceptible of any moral qualities, or can be the objects either of
approbation or dislike. For as actions are objects of our moral
sentiment, so far only as they are indications of the internal
character, passions, and affections; it is impossible that they can
give rise either to praise or blame, where they proceed not from these
principles, but are derived altogether from external violence (EU,
8.31/99).


Only when an action is, or is believed to be, determined by the will
of an agent is that agent regarded as an object of praise or blame
— this is a matter of psychological fact for Hume. Actions that
are either uncaused or caused by external factors cannot render the
agent responsible not because it would be unreasonable to hold him
responsible, but rather because it would be psychologically
impossible to hold him responsible.


The salient features of Hume's naturalistic compatibilism can be
summarized under the following points:

Approval and disapproval are essential to morality.
Only character traits or mental qualities arouse our moral
sentiments of approval or disapproval.
Knowledge of a person's character traits or mental qualities
requires inference.
A person or thinking being is held responsible if we regard her as
an object of a moral sentiment.
Regarding an agent as responsible is, therefore, a matter of
feeling not judgment.
Without inference to character (i.e. necessity), no such
feeling could, as a matter of psychological fact, be aroused in us,
and therefore no one could be regarded as responsible.
Therefore, it is an (empirical) psychological fact that
without necessity, morality would be impossible.



 Hume's discussion of
liberty and necessity can be shown, on this reinterpretation, to be
closely connected with his discussions of the passions and moral
evaluations. These connexions are not apparent in the
Enquiries, where no lengthy or detailed discussion of the
passions appears. This may in part account for misinterpretations of
Hume's argument. However, as has been argued above, the necessity
argument is also of great importance to any adequate understanding of
what Hume has to say about liberty and necessity. The presentation in
the Treatise rather obscures these connexions in Hume's
argument—there being a gap of over two hundred pages between his
discussion of the idea of necessary connexion and that of liberty and
necessity. This quite serious flaw is remedied by the first
Enquiry but only at the cost of leaving the reader somewhat
puzzled as to why Hume put his discussion of “liberty and
necessity” in Book II of the Treatise in the first
place. The naturalistic interpretation, however, shows that
Hume's discussion of liberty and necessity is intimately
connected with his discussion of the passions in Book II of the
Treatise and cannot be fully understood without reference to
it.


 I have referred to this
interpretation of Hume's compatibilist strategy as being
“naturalistic”. In what sense are Hume's arguments
“naturalistic”? There are, I think, two quite different
senses of “naturalism” which can appropriately be applied
to Hume's discussion of liberty and necessity. The first and most
important sense is that it involves applying the experimental method of
reasoning to this “long disputed question”. As we have
seen, Hume is concerned to describe the circumstances under
which people are felt to be responsible (i.e. describe the
“regular mechanism” which generates the moral sentiments).
In this way, Hume's compatibilist strategy must be understood
within the general context of his effort to “introduce
the experimental method of reasoning into moral subjects”. This
aspect of Hume's “general strategy” goes completely
unnoticed on the classical interpretation (which presents Hume's
discussion as involving pure conceptual enquiry antecedent to any
application of the “experimental method”).


The second sense in which Hume's reconciling project may be said to be
naturalistic is that it stresses the role of feeling, as
opposed to reason, in resolving this dispute. An appreciation of this
sort of naturalism in Hume's philosophy is, as a number of
distinguished commentators have argued, of great importance if we are
to get a balanced and complete picture of Hume's philosophy. (Kemp
Smith, 1941) On the one hand, Hume is clearly anxious to show the
limitations of human reason and is, in particular, anxious to
show that reason alone is incapable of resolving the various
philosophical problems that he comes to consider in the course of the
Treatise. There is, on the other hand, a
“positive”, non-sceptical aspect to Hume's teaching that
argues for the important role of feeling in human life, and that it
this is essential for solving some the basic philosophical problems
that we are presented with — including the free will
problem.


 The naturalistic interpretation,
clearly, pursues very different avenues of thought. Necessity is
psychologically essential to ascriptions of responsibility, because in
the absence of the relevant regularities and inferences, the regular
mechanism which produces our moral sentiments would simply fail to
function. Similarly, liberty of spontaneity is (psychologically)
essential to responsibility for action because it is only in these
circumstances (i.e. in which we discover constant conjunctions between
motives and actions) that it is possible for us to draw the specific
kinds of inferences required to generate the moral sentiments. If
conduct is produced by external violence, no moral sentiment is aroused
and, thus, we do not (as a matter of fact) hold the person responsible.
On the naturalistic interpretation, Hume's concern with the nature and
significance of moral freedom and how it relates to ascriptions of
responsibility must be understood primarily in terms of what he has to
say about the role of moral sentiment in this sphere. Any account of
Hume's position that ignores these features of his discussion
fundamentally misrepresents not only his general account of
responsibility but also his overall effort to resolve the “free
will dispute” by means of his alternative definition of
necessity.
4. Hume's Naturalism and Strawson's “Reconciling Project”


If asked to pass quick judgment on Hume's “reconciling
project”, as interpreted along the naturalistic lines outlined in
the previous section, many contemporary philosophers would probably be
inclined to say that it appears to be, quite simply, anachronistic,
eighteenth-century psychology. So considered, it is of little or no
relevance to contemporary issues. Indeed, some philosophers
may take the view that the philosophical interest—if not the
philosophical substance—of Hume's compatibilism has been entirely
removed. Surely, any attempt to describe the circumstances in which
certain sentiments are aroused in us is hopelessly irrelevant to our
present-day concerns and based wholly on assumptions that have long
since been rejected. In particular, we can hardly take seriously an
enterprise that asks us to understand the complex issue of moral
responsibility in terms of feelings.


The first thing to be said in reply to this assessment of the
contemporary relevance of the naturalistic interpretation is that it
overlooks the limitations of the classical interpretation.
More specifically, insofar as Hume continues to be read as holding to
the classical compatibilist position, it may be argued that his views
on this subject are now somewhat dated and passé. Contemporary
compatibilist thinking has now advanced well beyond the confines of the
(familiar and basic) distinctions drawn by Hume's liberty
arguments and is now much more sensitive to the difficulties posed by
incompatibilist criticism. Moreover, few, if any, contemporary
compatibilists would accept the suggestion, as suggested by the
classical reading of Hume's necessity argument, that
incompatibilism is simply a product of conceptual confusion between
causation and compulsion.


True as these observations may be, however, none of this serves to show
that Hume's naturalistic commitments are themselves of any
greater interest or relevance from a contemporary perspective —
much less that the moral psychology and (empiricial) methodology of
Hume's naturalism is an advance on the classical strategy. In
this section I show that the best way to respond to these doubts about
the value of the naturalistic interpretation for the contemporary
debate is by way of highlighting the striking affinities between
Hume's approach and P.F. Strawson's views on this
subject.


Strawson's “Freedom and Resentment” (hereafter FR) is
arguably the most important and influential paper on free will written
in the second half of the twentieth century. The argument of this paper
is presented as a bold effort to “reconcile” the
traditional disputants in the free will problem (FR, 63–4–60).
Strawson labels the principal opponents “optimists” and
“pessimists”. Optimists take what is essentially the
classical compatibilist position. They hold that the concept of moral
responsibility, and associated practices such as punishing and blaming,
“in no way lose their raison d'etre if the thesis of determinism
is true”—indeed, they may even require the truth of this
thesis (FR, 63). The optimist, Strawson says, typically draws attention
to “the efficacy of the practices of punishment, and of moral
condemnation and approval, in regulating behaviour in socially
desirable ways” (FR, 64; cf. FR, 79). In other words, the
optimist embraces and defends an essentially forward-looking,
utilitarian conception of responsibility (FR, 79). (The only optimist
Strawson cites is Patrick Nowell-Smith, but the general position
described is shared by many prominent 20th-century, empiricist-minded
compatibilists—most notably, Schlick.)


The pessimist takes a libertarian position and finds the optimist's
account of freedom and responsibility wholly inadequate. Whereas the
optimist construes moral freedom as simply the absence of constraint or
compulsion (i.e. “negative freedom” or liberty of
spontaneity), the pessimist insists that we require the sort of freedom
that implies the falsity of determinism. We require, that is, some kind
of “contra-causal” or “metaphysical” freedom
(FR, 81; cf. FR, 64). Without this (metaphysical) freedom, the
pessimist claims, there is no adequate foundation for moral
responsibility (FR, 79). Justified punishment, blame, and
condemnation require that the person who is the object of these
practices or judgments really deserves it (FR, 65). The
optimist's narrow concern with matters of social utility, therefore,
“leaves out something that is vital” to our conception of
moral responsibility and the justification of the practices associated
with it. This gap is to be filled, according to the pessimist, with the
general metaphysical thesis of indeterminism.


Strawson rejects both optimist and pessimist accounts, but he hopes
to bring them together through “a formal withdrawal on one side
in return for a substantial concession on the other” (FR, 64).
Strawson agrees with the pessimist that something is missing in the
optimist's account. It is a mistake, however, to think that this gap
can be filled by the obscure and panicky metaphysics of
libertarianism (FR, 83). On the contrary, optimist and pessimist
alike are missing or overlooking what is really essential to moral
responsibility; a proper recognition of the role that “reactive
attitudes and feelings” play in this sphere. It is, says
Strawson, “a pity that talk of the moral sentiments has fallen
out of favour. The phrase would be quite a good name for that network
of human attitudes in acknowledging the character and place of which we
find, I suggest, the only possibility of reconciling these disputants
to each other and the facts” (FR, 81). Strawson proposes,
therefore, that we fill the “lacuna” in the optimist's
account by making appropriate reference to the essential role that the
moral sentiments play in the sphere of responsibility. In return,
however, we require that the pessimist “surrender his
metaphysics” (FR, 81).


Strawson argues that both optimist and pessimist make a similar
mistake:


Both seek, in different ways, to over-intellectualize the facts.
Inside the general structure or web of human attitudes and feelings of
which I have been speaking, there is endless room for modification,
redirection, criticism, and justification. But questions of
justification are internal to the structure or relate to modifications
internal to it. The existence of the general framework of attitudes
itself is something we are given with the fact of human society. As a
whole, it neither calls for, nor permits, an external
‘rational’ justification. Pessimist and optimist alike show
themselves, in different ways, unable to accept this. (FR,
81–79)


Strawson expands on these points in his more recent work
Skepticism and Naturalism (hereafter SN). In this context, he
draws explicitly on Hume's naturalism. He observes that all efforts to
supply a justifying ground for our moral attitudes and judgments by way
of “defending the reality of some special condition of freedom or
spontaneity or self-determination” have not been “notably
successful” (SN, 32). All such attempts, he maintains, are
misguided.


They are misguided also for the reasons for which counter-arguments
to other forms of scepticism have been to be misguided; i.e. because
the arguments they are directed against are totally inefficacious. We
can no more be reasoned out of our proneness to personal and moral
reactive attitudes in general than we can be reasoned out of our belief
in the existence of body… . What we have, in our inescapable
commitment to these attitudes and feelings, is a natural fact,
something as deeply rooted in our natures as our existence as social
beings. (SN, 32–33)


Earlier in Skepticism and Naturalism, in a passage
concerned with our “natural disposition to belief”,
Strawson suggests that we might “speak of two Humes: Hume the
sceptic and Hume the naturalist; where Hume's naturalism …
appears as something like a refuge from his skepticism” (SN, 12).
He continues,


According to Hume the naturalist, skeptical doubts are not to be met
by argument. They are simply to be neglected (except, perhaps, insofar
as they supply a harmless amusement, a mild diversion to the
intellect). They are to be neglected because they are idle; powerless
against the force of nature, of our naturally implanted disposition to
belief. This does not mean that Reason has no part to play in relation
to our beliefs concerning matters of fact and existence. It has a part
to play, though a subordinate one: as Nature's lieutenant rather than
Nature's commander. (SN, 13–14)


Although Strawson plainly has Hume prominently in mind when
discussing the relationship between scepticism and naturalism, nowhere
does he give us any indication of the exact place or role of naturalism
in Hume's writings on the subject of free will. It is left unclear,
therefore, where, according to Strawson, Hume stands in relation to the
naturalistic arguments that Strawson has advanced on the issue of
freedom and responsibility. More specifically, it is not clear whether
Strawson views Hume as one of the “optimists” whom he seeks
to refute or as a naturalistic ally from whom he is drawing his own
arguments and strategy.


If we read Hume along the lines of the classical interpretation,
then his position on these issues looks as if it accords very closely
with the typical “optimist” strategy associated with such
thinkers as Schlick. The classical interpretation, however, entirely
overlooks the role of moral sentiment in Hume's reconciling strategy.
It emphasizes the relevance of the (supposed) confusion between
causation and compulsion in order to explain the more fundamental
confusion about the nature of liberty (i.e. why philosophers tend to
confuse liberty of spontaneity with liberty of indifference). With
these features of Hume's position established, the classical
interpretation points to Hume's remarks concerning the social utility
of rewards and punishments and the way in which they depend on the
principles of necessity. From this perspective, Hume's discussion of
freedom and necessity clearly constitutes a paradigmatic and
influential statement of the “optimist's” position. So
interpreted, Hume must be read as thinker, like Schlick, who has
“over-intellectualized the facts” on the basis of a
“one-eyed-utilitarianism”; one who has ignored “that
complicated web of attitudes and feelings” which Strawson seeks
to draw our attention to. In this way, we are encouraged to view Hume
as a prime target of Strawson's attack on the
“optimist” position.


The naturalistic interpretation, by contrast, makes it plain that
any such view of Hume's approach and general strategy is deeply
mistaken. Hume, no less than Strawson, is especially concerned to draw
our attention to the facts about human nature that are relevant to a
proper understanding of the nature and conditions of moral
responsibility. More specifically, Hume argues that we cannot properly
account for moral responsibility unless we acknowledge and describe the
role that moral sentiment plays in this sphere. Indeed, unlike
Strawson, Hume is much more concerned with the detailed mechanism
whereby our moral sentiments are aroused, and thus he is particularly
concerned to explain the relevance of spontaneity, indifference, and
necessity to the functioning of moral sentiment. To this extent,
therefore, Hume's naturalistic approach is more tightly woven into his
account of the nature of necessity and moral freedom. In sum, when we
compare Hume's arguments with Strawson's important and influential
discussion, it becomes immediately apparent that there is considerable
contemporary significance to the contrast between the classical and
naturalistic interpretations of Hume's reconciling strategy.


The overall resemblance between Hume's and Strawson's strategy in
dealing with issues of freedom and responsibility is quite striking.
The fundamental point that they agree about is that we cannot
understand the nature and conditions of moral responsibility without
reference to the crucial role that moral sentiment plays in this
sphere. This naturalistic approach places Hume and Strawson in similar
positions when considered in relation to the views of the pessimist and
the optimist. The naturalistic approach shows that, in different ways,
both sides of the traditional debate fail to properly acknowledge the
facts about moral sentiment. Where Hume most noticeably differs from
Strawson, however, is on the question of the “general
causes” of moral sentiment. Strawson largely bypasses this
problem. For Hume, this is a crucial issue that must be settled to
understand why necessity is essential to responsibility and why
indifference is entirely incompatible with the effective operation of
the mechanism that responsibility depends on.
5. Voluntarism and “the Morality System”
We have noted that the classical and naturalistic interpretations
differ in how they account for the relationship between freedom and
responsibility. According to the classical interpretation
responsibility may be analysed directly in terms of free action, where
this is understood simply in terms of an agent acting according to her
own will or desires. While classical compatibilists reject the
incompatibilist suggestion that free and responsible action requires
indeterminism or any special form of “moral causation”
they are, nevertheless, both agreed that a person can be held
responsible if and only if she acts freely. On the naturalistic
interpretation, however, Hume rejects this general doctrine, which we
may call “voluntarism”.
There are two related claims that are especially relevant to this
issue. First, Hume maintains that it is a matter of “the utmost
importance” for moral philosophy that action must be indicative
of durable qualities of mind if a person is to be held
accountable for it (T, 3.3.1.4/575). This claim is part of
Hume’s more general claim that our indirect passions (including
our moral sentiments) are aroused and sustained only when the
pleasurable or painful qualities concerned (e.g. the virtues and
vices) stand in a durable or constant relation with the person who is
their object (T, 2.1.6.7/292–3; DP, 2.11). In the case of actions,
which are “temporary and perishing”, no such lasting
relation is involved unless action is suitably tied to character
traits of some kind. Second, Hume also notes that we may be able to
infer a person’s character through some medium other than their
voluntary, intentional actions. A person may, for example, reveal
their character through their “wishes and sentiments”,
gestures, mannerism, carriage and countenance, even though this is not
done voluntarily and is not intentional (T, 2.1.11.3, 3.3.1.5/317,
575; EU, 8.9, 8.15/85, 88). In these circumstances we may still find
such mental qualities pleasant or painful and they will, accordingly,
generate moral sentiments in us. On the naturalistic reading,
therefore, it is a mistake to suppose that Hume is committed to the
simple voluntarist understanding of the relationship between
responsibility and freedom. Acting freely is, in itself, neither a
sufficient nor a necessary condition for being held responsible.

 These observations regarding Hume and the doctrine of voluntarism
are of considerable relevance to the contemporary ethical debate as it
concerns what Bernard Williams has described as “the morality
system” (Williams, 1985: Chp. 10). Although Williams’
(hostile) account of the morality system is multifaceted and defies
easy summary, its core features are clear enough. The concept that
Williams identifies as fundamental to the morality system is its
special notion of obligation. Flowing from this special concept of
obligation are the related concepts of right and wrong, blame and
voluntariness. When agents voluntarily violate their obligations they
do wrong and are liable to blame and some measure of retribution. To
this extent the morality system, so conceived, involves what Williams
calls “the blame system”, which focuses on particular acts
(Williams, 1985: 194). According to Williams there is pressure within
the blame system “to require a voluntariness that will be total
and will cut through character and psychological or social
determinism, and allocate blame and responsibility on the ultimately
fair basis of the agent’s own contribution, no more and no
less” (Williams, 1985: 194).

One reason why the morality system places great weight on the
importance of voluntariness is that it aspires to show that morality
— and moral responsibility in particular — somehow
“transcends luck” (Williams, 1985: 195). This is required
to ensure that blame is allocated in a way that is “ultimately
fair”. Despite the obvious challenges this requirement poses,
compatibilists have typically tried to satisfy these aspiration of the
morality system by way of offering a variety of argument to show that
compatibilist commitments do not render us vulnerable to the play of
fate or luck in our moral lives (e.g. Dennett, 1984). Hume, however,
makes little effort to satisfy these aspirations. (A point that
Williams notes in Williams, 1995: 20n12.) Most importantly, Hume makes
clear that although our qualities of character may typically be
expressed by means of our voluntary and intentional conduct,
for the most part our character is not acquired through our
choices or decisions. This issue is addressed in the context of
Hume’s discussion of our natural abilities, where he observes
that it is “almost impossible for the mind to change its
character in any considerable article, or cure itself of a passionate
or splenetic temper, when they are natural to it (T, 3.3.4.3/608). Our
will has no more influence over our moral virtues, which include our
natural abilities, than it does over our ”bodily
endowments“ (T, 3.3.4.1/606–07). In the final analysis, Hume
claims, just as every body or material object ”is
determin’d by an absolute fate to a certain degree and direction
of its motion, and can no more depart from that precise line, in which
it moves, than it can convert itself into an angel, or spirit, or any
superior substance“ (T, 2.3.1.3/400), so too our conduct and
character is similarly subject to an ”absolute fate“ as
understood in terms of the inescapable ”bonds of
necessity“ (T, 2.3.2.2/408). In these fundamental respects,
therefore, Hume takes the view, along with Williams, that morality
does not elude either fate or luck. (It is important to note, however,
that Hume’s views on moral luck are complex and require some
further qualifications. For this see Russell, 1995: 130–33).

Many compatibilists hold, of course, that while our character may well
be mostly unchosen or involuntarily acquired, we can, nevertheless, be
properly held responsible only for what we do voluntarily. As we have
already noted, Hume explicitly rejects this view as well. Although it
is primarily through intentional actions (i.e. as guided by
forethought and design: T, 2.2.3.4/349) that we express our character
or manifest our qualities of mind, there are other ways in which our
character may be involuntarily and unintentionally
expressed. Hume’s views about the natural abilities are
particularly relevant to this issue. More specifically, Hume claims
that the voluntary/involuntary distinction does allow us to explain
”why moralists have invented“ the distinction between
natural abilities and moral qualities. Natural abilities, unlike moral
qualities, ”are almost invariable by any sort of art or
industry“ (T, 3.3.4.4./609). By contrast, moral qualities,
”or at least, the actions, that proceed from them, may be
chang’d by the motives or rewards and punishments, praise and
blame (T, 3.3.4.4/ 609). We cannot, in other words, make people
intelligent, imaginative, and so on, by the application of rewards and
punishments, but we can (in some measure) regulate their voluntary
actions and thus direct their conduct with respect to moral virtues,
such as justice. In this way, according to Hume, the significance of
the voluntary/involuntary distinction is largely limited to our
concern to regulate conduct in society. To this extent, this
distinction does serve as the relevant boundary for the appropriate
application of rewards and punishments, with a view to guiding future
conduct, but it does not serve as the relevant boundary of moral
evaluation.
6. Moral Sense and Moral Capacity
From a critical perspective, it may be argued that there remains a
significant gap in Hume’s scheme as have so far described
it. Even if we discard the aspirations of the morality system, any
credible naturalistic theory of moral responsibility needs to be able
to provide some account of the sorts of moral capacity involved in
exempting conditions, whereby we deem some individuals and
not others as appropriate targets of moral sentiments or
“reactive attitudes”. As it stands, what Hume has to say
on this subject is plainly inadequate. According to Hume, it is an
ultimate inexplicable fact about our moral sentiments (qua calm forms
of the indirect passions of love and hate) that they are always
directed at people, either ourselves or others. This account leaves us
unable say why some people are not appropriate objects of moral
sentiments (e.g. children, the insane, and so on). There are, however,
several available proposals for dealing with this gap. Perhaps the
most influential proposal is to adopt some general theory of
reason-responsiveness or rational self-control. According to accounts
of this kind, responsible agents need to have control over their
actions, where this involves performing “those actions
intentionally, while possessing the relevant sorts of normative
competence: the general ability to grasp moral requirements and to
govern one’s conduct by light of them” (Wallace, 1994:
86). While proposals of this general kind help to plug a large gap in
Hume’s theory, they also suggest a particular understanding of
moral responsibility that is not entirely in keeping with Hume’s
own account.
 There are two points of divergence that are especially significant
with respect to to issue. First, rational self-control may be
explained, as it is on Wallace’s account, in terms of
specifically Kantian conceptions of practical reason and moral agency
(Wallace, 1994: 12–17). Even if commitments of this kind are avoided,
theories of this kind are still too narrowly based on moral capacity
as it relates solely to actions and intentions. On Hume’s
account, moral capacity must be related to wider patterns and
dispositions of feeling, desire and character. The scope of moral
evaluation should not reduced or limited to concern with (fleeting and
momentary) acts of will modelled after legal paradigms. Moral capacity
must be exercised and manifest in a larger and more diverse set of
propensities and abilities that make up moral character, including the
operation of moral sentiment itself.
 Second, and related to the previous point, although Hume does not
provide any substantial or robust theory of moral capacity, it is
possible to find, within what he provides, material that suggests a
less “rationalistic” understanding of moral capacity. It
may be argued, for example, that on Hume’s system there is an
intimate and important relationship between moral sense and
virtue. Our moral sense should be understood in terms of our general
capacity to feel and direct moral sentiments at both ourselves and at
others. Hume points out that children acquire the artificial virtues,
involving the conventions of justice, by way not only of learning
their advantages but also learning to feel the relevant moral
sentiments when these conventions are violated (T,
3.2.3.26/500–01). The mechanism of the moral sentiments both
cultivates and maintains the artificial virtues. Hume has less to say
about the role of moral sentiment in relation to the natural virtues
but similar observations would seem to apply. As children grow up and
mature they become increasingly aware that their qualities of
character affect both others and themselves and that these will
inevitably give rise to moral sentiments in the people they will deal
with. This entire process of becoming aware of the moral sentiments of
others, and “surveying ourselves as we appear to others”
(T, 3.3.1.8, 3.3.1.26, 3.3.1.30, 3.3.6.6/576–7, 589, 591, 620; EM,
9.10, App. 4.3/276, 314) surely serves to develop the natural as well
as the artificial virtues. Along these lines, Hume maintains that this
disposition to “survey ourselves” and seek our own
“peace and satisfaction” is the surest guardian of every
virtue (EM, 9.10/276). Any person who entirely lacks this disposition
will be shameless and will inevitably lack all the virtues that depend
on moral reflection for their development and stability.
 If this conjecture regarding the intimate or internal relationship
between virtue and moral sense is correct, then it does much to
explain and account for the range of exemptions that are required in
this area. Hume’s understanding of the operation of moral
sentiment is not simply a matter of enjoying pleasant and painful
feelings of a peculiar kind (T, 3.1.2.4/472). On the contrary, the
moral evaluation of character involves the activity of both reason and
sentiment. The sort of intellectual activities required include, not
only learning from experience the specific pleasant and painful
tendencies of certain kinds of character and conduct, as well as the
ability to distinguish accurately among them, but also the ability to
evaluate character and conduct from “some steady and general
point of view” (T, 3.3..15/581–2; EM, 5.41–2/227–8).  Clearly,
then, insofar as the cultivation and stability of virtue depends on
moral sense, it also requires the intellectual qualities and
capacities involved in the exercise of moral sense. Given this, an
animal, an infant, or an insane person will lack the ability to
perform the intellectual tasks involved in the production of moral
sentiment. We cannot, therefore, expect virtues that are dependent on
these abilities and intellectual activities to be manifest in
individuals who lack them, or when they are damaged or
underdeveloped.
Interpreting Hume in these terms not only goes a long way to
filling what looks to be a large gap in his naturalistic program, it
also avoids distorting his own wider ethical commitments by imposing a
narrower, rationalistic conception of moral capacity into his
naturalistic framework. Beyond this, interpreting moral capacity in
these more sentimentalist terms is both philosophically and
psychologically more satisfying and plausible. On an account of this
kind, there exists a close and essential relationship between being
responsible, where this is understood in terms of being an
appropriate target of moral sentiments or reactive attitudes, and
being able to hold oneself and others responsible, where this
is understood as the ability to experience and entertain moral
sentiments. It is a merit of Hume’s system, so interpreted, that
it avoids “over-intellectualizing” not only what is
involved in holding a person responsible, but also what is involved in
being a responsible agent.
7. Free Will and Hume's Philosophy of Irreligion

In the Treatise, Hume argues that one of the reasons
“why the doctrine of liberty [of indifference] has generally
been better receiv'd in the world, than its antagonist [the doctrine
of necessity], proceeds from religion, which has been very
unnecessarily interested in this question” (T, 2.3.2.3/409). He
goes on to argue “that the doctrine of necessity, according to
my explication of it, is not only innocent, but even advantageous to
religion and morality”. When Hume came to present his views
afresh in the Enquiry (Sec. 8), he was less circumspect about his
hostile intentions with regard to “religion”. In the
parallel passage (EU, 8.26/96—97), he again objects to any
effort to refute a hypothesis “by a pretence to its dangerous
consequences to religion and morality” (my emphasis). He goes on
to say that his account of the doctrines of liberty and necessity
“are not only consistent with morality, but are absolutely
essential to its support” (E, 8.26/97; my emphasis). By this
means, he makes it clear that he is not claiming that his position is
“consistent” with religion. In the final passages of the
Enquiry discussion of liberty and necessity (EU,
8.32–6/99—103) — passages which do not appear in the
original Treatise discussion — Hume makes it plain
exactly how his necessitarian principles have “dangerous
consequences for religion”.


Hume considers the following objection:


It may be said, for instance, that, if voluntary actions be
subjected to the same laws of necessity with the operations of matter,
there is a continued chain of necessary causes, pre-ordained and
pre-determined, reaching from the original cause of all to every single
volition of every human creature… . The ultimate Author of all
our volitions is the Creator of the world, who first bestowed motion on
this immense machine, and placed all beings in that particular
position, whence every subsequent event, by an inevitable necessity,
must result. Human action, therefore, either can have no moral
turpitude at all, as proceeding from so good a cause; or if they have
any turpitude, they must involve our Creator in the same guilt, while
he is acknowledged to be their ultimate cause and author. (EU,
8.32/99–100)


In other words, the doctrine of necessity produces an awkward
dilemma for the theological position: Either the distinction between
(moral) good and evil collapses, because everything is produced by a
perfect being who intends “nothing but what is altogether good
and laudable” (EU, 8.33/101), or we must “retract the
attribute of perfection, which we ascribe to the Deity” on the
ground that he is the ultimate author of moral evil in the world.


Hume treats the first horn of this dilemma at greatest length. He
draws on his naturalistic principles to show that the conclusion
reached (i.e. that no human actions are evil or criminal in nature) is
absurd. There are, he claims, both physical and moral evils in this
world that the human mind finds naturally painful, and this affects our
sentiments accordingly. Whether we are the victim of gout or of
robbery, we naturally feel the pain of such evils (EU,
8.34/101–2). No “remote speculations” or
“philosophical theories” concerning the good or perfection
of the whole universe will alter these natural reactions and responses
to the particular ills and evils we encounter. Hence, even if we were
to grant that this is indeed the best of all possible worlds—and
Hume clearly takes the view that we have no reason to suppose that it
is (D, 113–4; EU, 11.15–22/137–42)—this would do nothing to
undermine the reality of the distinction we draw between good and evil
(i.e. as experienced on the basis of “the natural sentiments of
the human mind”: EU, 8.35/103).


What, then, of the alternative view, that God is “the ultimate
author of guilt and moral turpitude in all his creatures”? Hume
offers two rather different accounts of this alternative—although
he does not distinguish them properly. He begins by noting that if some
human actions “have any turpitude, they must involve our Creator
in the same guilt, while he is acknowledged to be their ultimate cause
and author” (EU, 8.32/100; my emphasis). This passage suggests
that God is also blameworthy for criminal actions in this world, since
he is their “ultimate author”. At this point, however,
there is no suggestion that the particular human agents who commit
these crimes (as preordained by God) are not accountable for them. In
the passage that follows this is the position taken.


For as a man, who fired a mine, is answerable for all the
consequences whether the train he employed be long or short; so
wherever a continued chain of necessary causes is fixed, that Being,
either finite or infinite, who produces the first, is likewise the
author of all the rest, and must both bear the blame and acquire the
praise which belong to them. (EU, 8.32/100)


Hume goes on to argue that this rule of morality has even
“greater force” when applied to God, since he is neither
ignorant nor impotent and must, therefore, have intended to produce
those criminal actions which are manifest in the world. Granted that
such actions are indeed criminal, it follows, says Hume, “that
the Deity, not man, is accountable for them” (EU, 8.32/100; cf.
EU, 8.33/101).


It is evident that Hume is arguing two points. First, if God is the
creator of the world and preordained and predetermined everything that
happens in it, then the (obvious) existence of moral evil is
attributable to him, and thus “we must retract the attribute of
perfection” which we ascribe to him. Second, if God is indeed the
ultimate author of moral evil, then no individual human being is
accountable for the criminal actions he performs. The second claim does
not follow from the first. Moreover, it is clearly inconsistent with
Hume's general position on this subject. As has been noted, in this
same context, Hume has also argued that no speculative
philosophical theory can alter the natural workings of our moral
sentiments. The supposition that God is the “ultimate
author” of all that takes place in the world will not, on this
view of things, change our natural disposition to praise or blame our
fellow human beings. Whatever the ultimate causes of a person's
character and conduct, it will (inevitably) arouse a sentiment of
praise or blame in other humans who contemplate it. This remains the
case even if we suppose that God also deserves blame for the
“moral turpitude” we find in the world. In general, then,
Hume's first formulation of the second alternative (i.e. that God must
share the blame for those crimes that occur in the world) is
more consistent with his naturalistic principles.


What is crucial to Hume's polemical purpose in these passages is not
the thesis that if God is the author of crimes then his human creations
are not accountable for them. Rather, the point Hume is concerned to
make (since he does not, in fact, doubt the inescapability of our moral
accountability to our fellow human beings) is that the religious
hypothesis leads to the “absurd consequence” that God is
the ultimate author of sin in this world and that he is, accordingly,
liable to some appropriate measure of blame. Hume, in other words,
takes the (deeply impious) step of showing that if God exists, and is
the creator of the universe, then he is no more free of sin than human
beings are. According to Hume, we must judge God as we judge human
beings, on the basis of his effects in the world, and we must then
adjust our sentiments accordingly. Indeed, there is no other natural or
reasonable basis on which to found our sentiments toward God. In
certain respects, therefore, we can make better sense of how we
(humans) can hold God accountable than we can make sense of how God is
supposed to hold humans accountable (i.e. since we have no knowledge of
his sentiments, or even if he has any; cf. D, 58,114,128–9; ESY, 594;
but see also LET, I/51). It is, of course, Hume's considered view that
it is an egregious error of speculative theology and philosophy to
suppose that the universe has been created by a being that bears some
(close) resemblance to humankind. The question of the origin of the
universe is one that Hume plainly regards as beyond the scope of human
reason (see, e.g., EU, 1.11–2;11.15–23;11.26–7;12.2634/11–13,
137–42, 144–47, 165; D, 36–8,88–9,107). Nevertheless,
Hume's point is plain: On the basis of the (limited) evidence that is
available to us, we must suppose that if there is a God, who is creator
of this world and who orders all that takes place in it, then this
being is indeed accountable for all the (unnecessary and avoidable; D,
107) evil that we discover in it.


Although it is evident that Hume’s discussion of free will in
the first Enquiry is part of his wider critique of the
Christian religion, it is nevertheless widely held that Hume’s
earlier discussion “Of liberty and necessity” in the
Treatise carries none of this irreligious content or
significance. This view is itself encouraged by a more general
understanding of the relationship between the Treatise and
the first Enquiry which maintains that the Treatise
lacks any significant irreligious content (because Hume
“castrated” his work and removed most passages of this
kind, perhaps including the passages at EU, 8.32–6). On this view of
things, the elements of Hume’s discussion that are common to
both Treatise 2.3.1–2 and Enquiry 8 are themselves
without any particular religious or irreligious significance. To fully
appreciate why this view is mistaken we would require a more detailed
account of Hume’s fundamental irreligious intentions throughout
the Treatise. (For this see Russell, 2008.) For our present
purposes, however, it will suffice to provide a brief summary of the
way in which Hume’s views on the subject of “liberty and
necessity”, as presented in the Treatise, are
themselves laden with irreligious significance.


According to the irreligious interpretation of Hume’s
Treatise, the constructive or “positive” side of
Hume’s thought in this work — his “science of
man” — must be understood in terms of his concern to
establish a secular, scientific account of moral and social life. Hume
models his project on the same plan as Hobbes, who had pursued a
similar project in The Elements of Law and the first two
parts of Leviathan. The structural parallels that hold
between Hobbes’s work and Hume’s Treatise are
indicative of the fundamental similarity of their projects. Both
Hobbes and Hume agree that moral and political philosophy must proceed
upon the same scientific methodology that is appropriate to the
natural sciences (although they disagree about the nature of that
methodology), and they agree that this scientific investigation of
morals and must begin with an examination of human understanding and
the passions. The metaphysical basis of this project is their shared
naturalistic and necessitarian conception of human beings.


The destructive or critical side of the philosophy of the
Treatise is simply the other side of the same irreligious,
anti-Christian coin. That is to say, in order to clear the ground to
build the edifice of a secular, scientific account of moral life, Hume
had to undertake a sceptical attack on the theological doctrines and
principles that threatened such a project. The varied and apparently
disparate sceptical arguments that he advances in the
Treatise are in fact largely held together by his overarching
concern to discredit and refute Christian metaphysics and morals. An
especially prominent target of these sceptical arguments is the
philosophy of Clarke (the best known and most influential critic of
Hobbes's “atheism”). Among the various specific doctrines
Hume was especially concerned to refute was that of (libertarian) free
will — a doctrine that most prominent Christian moralists (e.g.,
Clarke, Butler, and many of Hume's early critics, including William
Warburton, Thomas Reid and James Beattie) maintained was essential to
both religion and morality.


The irreligious account of Hume's fundamental intentions in the
Treatise puts his discussion of free will in a new
light. Hume's necessitarianism is both metaphysically and
methodologically a core part of his entire (Hobbist) project in this
work. Beyond this, one of the central lessons of Hume's discussion
“Of liberty and necerssity” in the Treatise,
along with his more extended views about the nature and conditions of
moral responsibility, is that these are issues that we can make sense
of only within the fabric of human nature and human society. The
metaphysics required by religious doctrine, Hume suggests, obscures
and misrepresents the real character of human freedom and moral
responsibility, and the way that they are grounded and structured in
human motivation and passions. It is precisely this secular
perspective and the extension of scientific naturalism to the study of
(human) moral life that Clarke and other Christian critics of Hobbes
found to be especially “dangerous” for religion and
morality.


Throughout his writings, Hume’s philosophical interests and
concerns were very largely dominated and directed by his fundamental
irreligious aims and objectives. A basic theme in Hume's philosophy,
so considered, is his effort to demystify moral and social life and
release it from the metaphysical trappings of
“superstition”. The core thesis of Hume's
Treatise — indeed, of his overall (irreligious or
“atheistic”) philosophical outlook — is that moral
and social life neither rests upon nor requires the dogmas of
Christian metaphysics. Hume's naturalistic framework for understanding
moral and social life excludes not only the metaphysics of
libertarianism (e.g., modes of “moral” causation by
immaterial agents) but also all further theologically inspired
metaphysics that generally accompanies it (i.e. God, the immortal
soul, a future state, and so on). The metaphysics of religion, Hume
suggests, serves only to confuse and obscure our understanding of
these matters and to hide their true foundation in human
nature. Hume's views on the subject of free will and moral
responsibility, as presented in the sections “Of liberty and
necessity” and elsewhere in his writings, are the very pivot on
which this fundamental thesis turns.