This entry discusses philosophical idealism as a movement chiefly in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, although anticipated by
certain aspects of seventeenth century philosophy. It examines the
relationship between epistemological idealism (the view that the
contents of human knowledge are ineluctably determined by the
structure of human thought) and ontological idealism (the view that
epistemological idealism delivers truth because reality itself is a
form of thought and human thought participates in it). After
discussing precursors, the entry focuses on the eighteenth-century
versions of idealism due to Berkeley, Hume, and Kant, the
nineteenth-century movements of German idealism and subsequently
British and American idealism, and then concludes with an examination
of the attack upon idealism by Moore and Russell.
 
1. Introduction

The terms “idealism” and “idealist” are by no
means used only within philosophy; they are used in many everyday
contexts as well. Optimists who believe that, in the long run, good
will prevail are often called “idealists”. This is not
because such people are thought to be devoted to a philosophical
doctrine but because of their outlook on life generally; indeed, they
may even be pitied, or perhaps envied, for displaying a naïve
worldview and not being philosophically critical at all. Even within
philosophy, the terms “idealism” and
“idealist” are used in different ways, which often makes
their meaning dependent on the context. However, independently of
context one can distinguish between a descriptive (or classificatory)
use of these terms and a polemical one, although sometimes these
different uses occur together. Their descriptive use is best
documented by paying attention to the large number of different
“idealisms” that appear in philosophical textbooks and
encyclopedias, ranging from metaphysical idealism through
epistemological and aesthetic to moral or ethical idealism. Within
these idealisms one can find further distinctions, such as those
between subjective, objective and absolute idealism, and even more
obscure characterizations such as speculative idealism and
transcendental idealism. It is also remarkable that the term
“idealism”, at least within philosophy, is often used in
such a way that it gets its meaning through what is taken to be its
opposite: as the meaningful use of the term “outside”
depends on a contrast with something considered to be inside, so the
meaning of the term “idealism” is often fixed by what is
taken to be its opposite. Thus, an idealist is someone who is not a
realist, not a materialist, not a dogmatist, not an empiricist, and so
on. Given the fact that many also want to distinguish between realism,
materialism, dogmatism, and empiricism, it is obvious that thinking of
the meaning of “idealism” as determined by what it is
meant to be opposed to leads to further complexity and gives rise to
the impression that underlying such characterizations lies some
polemical intent.

It nevertheless seems safe to say that within modern philosophy there
have been two fundamental conceptions of idealism:

something mental (the mind, spirit, reason, will) is the ultimate
foundation of all reality, or even exhaustive of reality, and
although the existence of something independent of the mind is
conceded, everything that we can know about this
mind-independent “reality” is held to be so permeated by
the creative, formative, or constructive activities of the mind (of
some kind or other) that all claims to knowledge must be considered,
in some sense, to be a form of self-knowledge.


Idealism in sense (1) may be called “metaphysical” or
“ontological idealism”, while idealism in sense (2) may be
called “formal” or “epistemological idealism”.
The modern paradigm of idealism in sense (1) might be considered to be
George Berkeley’s “immaterialism”, according to
which all that exists are ideas and the minds, less than divine or
divine, that have them. (Berkeley himself did not use the term
“idealism”.) The fountainhead for idealism in sense (2)
might be the position that Immanuel Kant asserted (if not clearly in
the first edition of his Critique of Pure Reason (1781) then
in his Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) and in
the “Refutation of Idealism” in the second edition of the
Critique) according to which idealism does “not concern
the existence of things”, but asserts only that our “modes
of representation” of them, above all space and time, are not
“determinations that belong to things in themselves” but
features of our own minds. Kant called his position
“transcendental” and “critical” idealism, and
it has also been called “formal” idealism. In the interest
of generality, we will call this sort of position
“epistemological idealism”. Because of the many ways in
which the term “metaphysical” is used—for example,
Kant himself used the term “metaphysics” in two different
senses, in one sense to refer to the derivation of knowledge from pure
reason that he discredited but in another to refer to his own theory
of the sources of knowledge, what we now call his
epistemology—we will call idealism in sense (1)
“ontological idealism”. If one accepts this
characterization, then ontological idealism is meant to be opposed to
both dualism, according to which reality ultimately consists not just
of mental “stuff” but also of mind-independent matter, and
to materialism, which takes matter to be all there is, while
epistemological idealism is opposed to materialism but not necessarily
to dualism. Epistemological idealism is sometimes motivated by the
simple thought that whatever we know, we must know from our own
perspective, but is sometimes motivated by further arguments. It does
not automatically imply ontological idealism without further
assumptions, although a commitment to ontological idealism obviously
includes commitment to epistemological idealism since, assuming it
allows for the possibility of knowledge at all, it allows nothing but
the mental to be known. The further assumptions that lead from
epistemological to ontological idealism can be a simple desire to
avoid the possibility of doubt or ignorance by collapsing the
distinction between knowledge and what is known, as when Berkeley
claims that only his immaterialism can defend common sense, but can
take other forms as well.

In what follows, we will concentrate mainly on the discussion of
philosophical theories of idealism rather than the popular, everyday
sense of the term. It is worth noting, however, that in its complex
history—above all in the social as well as philosophical
movement that dominated British and American universities in the
second half of the nineteenth century and through the first World
War—idealism in either of its philosophical forms was indeed
connected to idealism in the popular sense of progressive and
optimistic social thought.

The distinction between epistemological and ontological idealism that
we are making here is hardly novel, although it was not made by many
of the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century philosophers to be
discussed below. The distinction was clearly formulated only in the
nineteenth century. For example, the American philosopher Josiah Royce
made this distinction at the end of the nineteenth century (albeit
without our concern for the many possible meanings of
“metaphysics”) when he called what we are terming
ontological idealism “metaphysical” idealism. On his
straightforward definitions, epistemological idealism


involves a theory of the nature of our human knowledge; and
various decidedly different theories are called by this name in view
of one common feature, namely, the stress that they lay upon the
‘subjectivity’ of a larger or smaller portion of what
pretends to be our knowledge of things


Metaphysical idealism, he says, “is a theory as to the
nature of the real world, however we may come to know that
nature”, namely, as he says quoting from another philosopher of
the time, “‘the belief in a spiritual principle at the
basis of the world, without the reduction of the physical world to a
mere illusion’” (Royce, The Spirit of Modern
Philosophy, pp. xii–xiii). Royce’s own view was that
epistemological idealism ultimately works only on a foundation of
metaphysical idealism, in particular that “the question as to
how we ‘transcend’ the ‘subjective’ in our
knowledge”, that is, the purely individual, although it exists
for both metaphysical realists and idealists, can only be answered by
metaphysical idealists (p. xiv). We will suggest, on the contrary,
that while there are many good reasons for epistemological idealism,
indeed, that—suitably broadly understood—it has in fact
become the default epistemology of modern philosophy, many of the most
important of modern idealists have sought to avoid any inference from
epistemological to ontological idealism. This was particularly true in
the twentieth century, when tendencies toward epistemological idealism
were in fact widespread in many schools of philosophy (although for
different reasons than in the eighteenth century, reasons to be
touched upon in the final section of this entry), very few
philosophers were willing to identify themselves as idealists, even
merely epistemological idealists.

As always when philosophy must decide between alternatives, there must
be reasons or motives for deciding one way or the other. Since
philosophical idealism in either of its forms does not seem to be the
most obvious way in which to understand the nature of reality and the
conditions under which its constitution can be known, it is of
interest to look into the reasons and motives for idealism. Here one
can distinguish between two major kinds of motives: those which are
grounded in self-conceptions, i.e., in convictions about the role that
the self or the human being plays in the world, and those based on
what might correspondingly be called world-convictions, i.e., on
conceptions about the way the world is constituted objectively or at
least appears to be constituted to a human subject. Concerning motives
based on self-conceptions of human beings, idealism has seemed hard to
avoid by many who have taken freedom in one of its many guises
(freedom of choice, freedom of the will, freedom as autonomy) to be an
integral part of any conception of the self worth pursuing, because
the belief in the reality of freedom often goes together with a
commitment to some version of mental causation, and it is tempting to
think that the easiest (or at least the most economical) way to
account for mental causation consists in “mentalizing” or
idealizing all of reality, thus leading to ontological idealism, or at
least to maintain that the kind of causal determinism that seems to
conflict with freedom is only one of our ways of representing the
world, thus leading to epistemological idealism. Motives for idealism
based on world-convictions can be found in many different attitudes
towards objectivity. If one is to believe in science as the best and
only way to get an objective (subject-independent) conception of
reality, one might still turn to idealism, at least epistemological
idealism, because of the conditions supposed to be necessary in order
to make sense of the very concept of a law (of nature) or of the
normativity of logical inferences for nature itself. If one believes
in the non-conventional reality of normative facts one might also be
drawn to idealism in order to account for their non-physical
reality—Plato’s idealism, which asserts the reality of
non-physical Ideas to explain the status of norms and then reduces all
other reality to mere simulacra of the former might be considered a
forerunner of ontological idealism motivated by concern for the
reality of norms. An inclination toward idealism might even arise from
considerations pertaining to the ontological status of aesthetic
values (is beauty an objective attribute of objects?) or from the
inability or the unwillingness to think of the constitution of social
and cultural phenomena like society or religion in terms of physical
theory. In short: There are about as many motives and reasons for
endorsing idealism as there are different aspects of reality to be
known or explained.

Although we have just referred to Plato, the term
“idealism” became the name for a whole family of positions
in philosophy only in the course of the eighteenth century. Even then,
those whom critics called “idealists” did not identify
themselves as such until the time of Kant, and no sooner did the label
come into use than did those to whom it was applied or who used it
themselves attempt to escape it or refine it. As already mentioned,
Berkeley, the paradigmatic ontological idealist in the British
tradition, did not use the name for his own position, and Leibniz, at
least some versions of whose monadology might be considered idealist,
also did not call his position by that name. Rather, in contrasting
Epicurus with Plato, Leibniz called the latter an idealist and the
former a materialist, because according to him idealists like Plato
hold that “everything occurs in the soul as if there were no
body” whereas on the materialism of Epicurus “everything
occurs in the body as if there were no soul” (“Reply to
the Thoughts on the System of Preestablished Harmony contained in the
Second Edition of Mr. Bayle’s Critical Dictionary, Article
Rorarius”, 1702, PPL, p. 578), although in this text
Leibniz also says that his own view combines both of these positions.
It seems to have been Christian Wolff who first used
“idealism” explicitly as a classificatory term. Wolff,
often considered the most dedicated Leibnizian of his time (although
in fact his position was more eclectic than at least some versions of
Leibniz’s) set out to integrate the terms “idealism”
and “materialism” into his taxonomy of philosophical
attitudes of those “who strive towards the knowledge and
philosophy of things” in the Preface to the other [second]
Edition of his so-called German Metaphysics
[Vernünfftige Gedancken von Gott, der Welt und der Seele des
Menschen, auch allen Dingen überhaupt, den Liebhabern der
Wahrheit mitgetheilet (Halle: Carl Hermann Hemmerde, 1747)].
Wolff distinguishes between two basic attitudes, one of which he sees
exemplified by the skeptic, the other by what he calls “the
dogmatist”. The skeptic doubts the possibility of knowledge in
general and thus refuses to defend any positive claim at all. By
contrast, the dogmatist puts forward positive doctrines, and these can
be divided into those which posit as fundamental either one single
kind of entities [Art der Dinge] or two different kinds.
Wolff names the supporters of the first position “monists”
and the adherents of the second “dualists”. This amounts
to the division of all dogmatic doctrines, i.e., all knowledge-claims
with respect to the ultimate constitution of reality, into monistic
and dualistic theories. Here is where the term “idealist”
then makes its appearance in Wolff’s typology: he distinguishes
within the monists between idealists and materialists. Idealists
“concede only spirits or else those things that do not consist
of matter”, whereas materialists “do not accept anything
in philosophy other than the corporeal and take spirits and souls to
be a corporeal force”. Dualists, on the contrary, are happy
“to accept both bodies and spirits as real and mutually
independent things”. Wolff then goes on to distinguish within
idealism between “egoism” and “pluralism”,
depending on whether an idealist thinks just of himself as a real
entity or whether he will allow for more than one (spiritual) entity;
the first of these positions would also come to be called solipsism,
so that solipsism would be a variety of (ontological) idealism but not
all idealism would be solipsism.

Wolff’s way of classifying a philosophical system was enormously
influential in eighteenth-century Continental philosophy—for
example, it was closely followed by Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten in
his 1739 Metaphysica, which was in turn used by Kant as the
textbook for his metaphysics (and anthropology) lectures throughout
his career, and whose definition of ontological (or
“dogmatic”) idealism, as contrasted to his own
“transcendental” or “critical” idealism, would
also be that it is the position according to which there are only
minds—and so it is no surprise that almost all talk about
idealism was heavily influenced by Wolff’s characterization, at
least as far ontological idealism was concerned. This is so because it
reflects the main metaphysical disputes in seventeenth- and early
eighteenth-century philosophy on the Continent quite well. In terms of
Wolff’s distinctions, these disputes can be framed as disputes
between (a) monists and dualists and (b) idealists and materialists;
positions in this debate were often influenced by perplexities
surrounding the (ontological) question of the interaction of
substances, although they were also influenced by the
(epistemological) debate over innatism. Although neither dualism,
whose main representative was Descartes (who asserted the existence of
both res cogitans and res extensa), nor monism,
allegedly represented paradigmatically by Spinoza in its materialistic
version (substantia, deus, natura) and by Leibniz in its
idealistic form (monad, entelechy, simple substance) succeeded in
finding satisfying answers to this and related questions, in the early
modern era these disputes shaped the conception of what the object of
metaphysics (metaphysica generalis sive ontologia) was
supposed to be.
2. Idealism in Early Modern Rationalism

Prior to Wolff, neither defending nor refuting (ontological) idealism
seems to have been a central issue for rationalist philosophers, and
none of them called themselves idealists. Yet what are by later lights
idealistic tendencies can nevertheless be found among them.

While Descartes’s “first philosophy” clearly defends
dualism, he takes his target to be skepticism rather than idealism,
and thus is from our point of view concerned to resist epistemological
idealism; Spinoza defends a form of materialism, but takes his primary
target to be pluralism as contrasted to monism; and Leibniz does not
seem overly worried about choosing between ontologically idealist and
dualist forms of his “monadology”, while his famous thesis
that each monad represents the entire universe from its own point of
view might be taken to be a form of epistemological idealism, but
Leibniz does not seem to conceive of it as such. Nicolas
Malebranche’s theory of “seeing all things in God”
might be the closest we find to an explicit assertion of both
epistemological and ontological idealism in seventeenth-century
rationalism, and thus as a forerunner of the “absolute”
idealism of the nineteenth century. While from a later point of view
it may seem surprising that these rationalists were not more concerned
with explicitly asserting or refuting one or both versions of
idealism, perhaps they were more concerned with theological puzzles
about the nature and essence of God, metaphysical questions as to how
to reconcile the respective conception of God with views about the
interaction of substances of fundamentally different kinds, and
epistemological problems as to the possibility of knowledge and
cognitive certainty than they were worried about whether the ultimate
constituents of reality were mental or material elements.

However, if one were to situate their thoughts within the framework
provided by Wolff it is not that difficult to find traces of idealism
(both ontological and epistemological) in their respective positions.
With respect to their metaphysical or ontological teachings, this
claim may seem surprising. Whereas according to Wolff (ontological)
idealists are representatives of a species of metaphysical monism
Descartes is one of the most outspoken metaphysical dualists. Hence to
impute idealistic tendencies to Descartes’ metaphysics looks
like a mistake. And in the case of Spinoza one could argue that though
he definitely is a (very radical) monist and thus could count as an
idealist within Wolff’s taxonomy, he normally is considered to
be rather a materialist in Wolff’s sense. Consequently, it
appears as if already for conceptual reasons there is no basis to
burden either Descartes or Spinoza with traces of metaphysical
idealism a la Wolff. Leibniz, meanwhile, often seems unwilling to
commit himself to ontological idealism even though that is the most
natural interpretation of his monadology, while only Malebranche, as
noted, seems to come close to explicitly asserting epistemological and
perhaps ontological idealism as well.

Nevertheless, both Descartes and Spinoza provide a starting point for
their metaphysical doctrines with their conceptions of God, a starting
point that is already infected with idealistic elements if
(ontological) idealism is understood as implying a commitment to the
primacy or at least the unavoidability and irreducibility of mental
items in the constitution and order of things in general. Both agree
that in order to gain insight into the constitution of the world one
has to find out what God wants us, or maybe better: allows us to know
about it (see, e.g., Descartes: Meditations IV, 7–8 and
especially 13; Spinoza: Ethics I, XVI). They also agree that
the world is created by God although they have different views as to
what this means. Whereas Descartes thinks of God as existing outside
the world of the existing things He created (see Meditations
III, 13 and 22) Spinoza holds that whatever exists is just a
peculiar way in which God is present (see Ethics I, XXV,
Corrolarium). Of all existing things all that God permits us to know
clearly and distinctly is (again according to both Descartes and
Spinoza) that their nature consists either in thinking or in
extension. This claim can be seen as providing in the case of
Descartes the basis for his justification of ontological dualism. His
distinction between extended and thinking substances is not just meant
to give rise to a complete classification of all existing things in
virtue of their main attributes but also to highlight the
irreducibility of mental (thinking) substances to physical or
corporeal (extended) substances because of differences between their
intrinsic natures (see, e.g., Meditations VI, 19, and
Principles of Philosophy I, 51–54). In the case of
Spinoza thinking and extension not only refer to attributes of
individual things but primarily to attributes of God (s. Ethics
II, Proposition I, II, and VII, Scholium), making them the
fundamental ways in which God himself expresses his nature in each
individual thing. This move gives rise to his ontological monism
because he can claim that all individual things are just modes in
which God’s presence is expressed according to these
attributes.

Although the idea that God is the creator of the world of individual
existing things (Descartes) or that God himself is manifested in every
individual existing thing (Spinoza) might already be considered to be
sufficient as a motivating force for subsequent disputes as to the
true nature of reality and thus might have given rise to what were
then called “idealistic” positions in ontology, other
peculiarities within Descartes’ and Spinoza’s position
might well have led to the same result, i.e., to ontological idealism.
Especially their disagreement about God’s corporeality might
have been such a motive. Whereas Descartes denies vigorously the
corporeality of God (Principles of Philosophy I, 23) and
hence could be seen as endorsing ontological idealism, Spinoza
vehemently insists on God’s corporeality (Ethics I,
Proposition XV, Scholium) and thus could be taken to be in favor of
ontological materialism.

Things are different when it comes to epistemological idealism. It
seems to be very difficult to connect Descartes’ and
Spinoza’s views concerning knowledge with conceptions according
to which knowledge has something to do with a cognizing subject
actively contributing to the constitution of the object of knowledge.
This is so because both Descartes and Spinoza think of cognition as a
result of a process in which we become aware of what really is the
case independently of us both with respect to the nature of objects
and with respect to their conceptual and material relations. Descartes
and Spinoza take cognition to be a process of grasping clear and
distinct ideas of what is the true character of existing things rather
than a process of contributing to the formation of their nature.
According to Descartes the sources of our knowledge of things are our
abilities to have intuitions of the simple nature of things and to
draw conclusions from these intuitions via deduction (Rules for
the Direction of the Mind III, 4 ff.). For him the cognitive
procedure is a process of discovery (see Discourse on the
Method, Part 6, 6) of what already is out there as the real
nature of things created by God by finding out the clear and distinct
ideas we can have of them (Discourse, Part 4, 3 and 7). In a
similar vein Spinoza thinks of knowledge as an activity that in its
highest form as intuitive (or third genus of) cognition leads to an
adequate insight into the essence of things (Ethics II,
Proposition XL, Scholium II, and Ethics V, Proposition
XXV–XXVIII), an insight that gives rise to general concepts
(notiones communes) on which ratiocinationes, i.e.,
the processes of inference and deduction, are based (Ethics
II, Proposition XL, Scholium I) whose results provide the second
genus of cognition (ratio). Thus the problem for both
Descartes and Spinoza is not so much that of the epistemological
idealist, i.e., to uncover what we contribute through our cognitive
faculties to our conception of an object, rather their problem is to
determine how it comes that we very often have a distorted view of
what there is and are accordingly led to misguided beliefs and errors.
Given what they take to be a basic fact that God has endowed us with
the capacity to know the truth (albeit within certain limits), i.e.,
to know to a certain degree how or what things really are, this
interest in the possibility of error makes perfectly good sense
(Meditations IV, 3–17; Principles of Philosophy
I, 70–72; Ethics II, Proposition 49, Scholium).


In his project for a “universal characteristic”, Leibniz
can be regarded as having taken great interest in a method
for inquiry, but he does not seem to have taken much interest in the
epistemological issue of skepticism or the possibility of knowledge,
and thus did not explicitly characterize his famous
“monadology” as a form of epistemological idealism. But he
did take a great interest in the ontology of substances, God the
infinite substance and everything else as finite substances (in
contrast to Spinoza, he rejected monism). Yet while the logic of his
monadology clearly points toward ontological idealism, Leibniz
frequently attempted to avoid this conclusion. One explicitly
ontological argument for the monadology that Leibniz often deploys is
that, on pain of infinite regress, everything composite must
ultimately consist of simples, but that since space and time are
infinitely divisible extended matter cannot be simple while thoughts,
even with complex content, do not literally have parts, nor do the
minds that have them, so minds, or monads, are the only candidates for
the ultimate constituents of reality. Thus the late text entitled
“The Monadology” begins with the assertions that
“The monad which we are here to discuss is nothing but
a simple substance which enters into compounds”, that
“There must be simple substances, since there are compounds,
[and] the compounded is but a collection or an aggregate of
simples”, but that “where there are no parts, it is
impossible to have either extension, or figure, or divisibility”
and conversely where there is simplicity there cannot be extension or
figure or divisibility (§§1–3). Yet monads must have
some qualities in order to exist (§8) and to differ from one
another, as they must (§9), and if the fundamental properties of
matter are excluded, this leaves the fundamental properties of mind,
which Leibniz holds to be perception, “The passing state which
enfolds and represents a multitude in unity” (§14) and
appetition, “the internal principle which brings about change or
the passage from one perception to another” (§15; all from
PPL, pp. 643–4). This argument clearly seems to imply
that all finite substances are ultimately mental in nature (and the
infinite substance, God, is obviously mental in nature), so it seems
as if Leibniz ought to unabashedly affirm ontological idealism, from
which epistemological idealism would automatically follow, since if
there is knowledge of reality at all, which Leibniz hardly seems to
doubt, and reality is ultimately mental, then knowledge too must be of
the mental.

Yet Leibniz often seems to avert such a conclusion by appeal to his
idea of “preestablished harmony”, and this is possible
because he himself interprets this idea in two different ways. Early
in his career, in such texts as “Primary Truths”
(1680–84) and the “Discourse on Metaphysics” (1686)
(both texts unpublished in Leibniz’s lifetime and not known to
his immediate successors such as Wolff and Baumgarten), Leibniz
introduces the doctrine of preestablished harmony on truth-theoretical
grounds. His argument is that everything that is true of a substance
is so because the predicate of a true proposition is contained in the
complete concept of its subject and because that complete concept
reflects the properties or “traces” in the substance that
is that subject; that there are true propositions linking every
substance in the world to every other, thus the complete concept of
each substance must be a complete concept of the universe itself and
each substance must bear within itself as properties traces of every
other in the universe; and thus that each substance must reflect, or,
as mental, represent the entire universe. Yet since (finite)
substances are also defined as existing independently of one another
(although not existing independently from the infinite substance,
God), there is a question as to why each should truthfully represent
all the others, which Leibniz answers by appeal to the idea of a
preestablished harmony: although considered from the point of view of
the concept of substance it does not seem necessary that every
substance truly represent all the others, in his goodness, thus in his
preference for a maximally harmonious world, God has nevertheless made
it such that they do. 

In this mood, Leibniz tends to explain the existence of body as an
artifact of the fact that each monad represents the world from its own
point of view: physical locations and the bodies that occupy them are
just the way in which the difference in the points of view of the
monads is represented by them, but have no deeper reality; or, as
Leibniz often says, space, spatiality, and bodies are just
phenomena bene fundata, i.e., “well-founded modes of
our consideration” (PPL, p. 270). 

However, sometimes Leibniz writes as if space and time are not merely
the way in which the pre-established harmony among monads presents
itself to (their) consciousness, but as if the mental and physical or
extended are two separate realms, each evolving entirely in accordance
with its own laws, but with a pre-established harmony between
them creating the appearance of interaction. Perhaps Leibniz was
genuinely undecided between two interpretations of the pre-established
harmony and two conceptions of the reality of body, sometimes being a
committed idealism and sometimes a dualist. (As we will see later,
even among the most committed absolute idealists of the nineteenth
century it is not always clear whether they are actually denying the
existence of matter or only subordinating it to mind in one way or
another).

Leibniz’s monadology could thus be seen as a forerunner of both
epistemological and ontological idealism, and his conception of space
and time as phenomena bene fundata was clearly a forerunner
of Kant’s transcendental idealism. But as we have just seen, he
did not himself unequivocally affirm idealism, and as we will shortly
see subsequent Leibnizians such as Alexander Baumgarten argued for
dualism and for a corresponding interpretation of pre-established
harmony. Nicolas Malebranche was also a dualist, committed to the
existence of both mind and body, and an occasionalist, who held that
since causation is necessary connection and the only truly necessary
connection is between God’s intentions and their effects, bodies
cannot directly cause modifications of minds (or each other) but
rather there can be a causal relation between body and mind only if
God intends the mind to undergo a certain modification upon the
occasion of a certain change in a body (hence the term
“occasionalism”). His further doctrine that the mind sees
all things in God, however, depends on his particular view of what
modifications the mind undergoes in perception. He holds that
sensations are literally modifications in the mind, but that
they are highly indeterminate, or in later terminology lack
determinate intentional objects, and that genuine understanding occurs
only when and to the extent that the determinate ideas in the
perfect intellect of God are disclosed to finite, human minds, to the
extent that they are. Malebranche’s position can be considered a
theological form of Platonism: Plato held that the true Ideas or Forms
of things have a kind of perfection that neither ordinary objects nor
representations of them in human minds do, and therefore must exist
someplace else; Malebranche takes the obvious further step of
supposing that perfect ideas can exist only in the perfect intellect
of God. He then supposes that human thought is intelligible to the
extent that these ideas are disclosed to it, on the occasion of
various sensations themselves occasioned by God but not literally
through those sensations. The crucial point is that genuine
understanding consists in the apprehension of ideas, even though these
are literally in the mind of God rather than of individual human
beings, rather than of physical objects, even though the latter do
exist. Malebranche had significant influence on both Berkeley and
Hume, though neither the former and certainly not the latter accepted
his position in its entirety. His position that knowledge consists in
individual minds apprehending ideas in some greater mind would also be
recreated by idealists as late as T.H. Green and Josiah Royce in the
second half of the nineteenth century, as we will later see. 

Before we turn to British or Anglophone versions of idealism, earlier
or later, one last word about idealism within pre-Kantian rationalist
philosophy is in order. As earlier mentioned, dualism rather than
ontological idealism became the default position of the German
successors to Leibniz, the so-called “Leibnizo-Wolffians”
who dominated the teaching of philosophy in many German universities
from the second or third decade of the eighteenth century until the
time of Kant and in some cases even beyond, and they correspondingly
opted for the interpretation of the pre-established harmony as a
relation between minds and bodies rather than among minds or monads
alone. It may also be noted that defending dualism by means of an
explicit “refutation of idealism” became the norm among
these philosophers. This may be seen in Alexander Gottlieb
Baumgarten’s Metaphysica of 1739, which would become
Kant’s textbook for his lecture courses in metaphysics and
“anthropology” (empirical psychology) until the very end
of the eighteenth century. Baumgarten accepts that the ultimate
constituents of the world must be simples, hence monads of some kind.
But he does not suppose that monads are necessarily minds or
intellects, hence a dualism of monads is at least possible. Idealism
would be the position that there are only intellectual monads; he says
that 


An intellectual substance, i.e., a substance endowed with intellect,
is a spirit (an intelligence, a person)…. Whoever admits only
spirits in this world is an idealist. (Metaphysics,
§402, pp. 175–6) 


Baumgarten follows Wolff in distinguishing between two possible forms
of idealism, first egoism, which admits the existence of only one
spirit, that of the person contemplating such a doctrine, and then
idealism proper, which allows the existence of multiple spirits. But
both are refuted by the same argument. This argument builds on a
Leibnizian principle not hitherto mentioned, the principle of
plenitude, or the principle that the perfection of the most perfect
world, which is the one that God created, consists in the maximal
variety of the universe compatible with its unity or coherence (e.g.,
“Monadology”, §58, PPL, p. 648), which was
in turn the basis of one of Leibniz’s arguments for the identity
of indiscernibles. Baumgarten then argues simply that a universe that
contains not only more substances but also more kinds of
substances rather than fewer is a more perfect universe, and
necessarily exists in preference to the other; and a universe that
contains not only multiple minds rather than a single mind but also
bodies in addition to minds is therefore a more perfect universe than
either of the former would be, and is the kind that actually exists.
In his words, 


the egotistical world, such as an egoist posits, is not the most
perfect. And even if there is only one non-intellectual monad possible
in itself that is compossible with spirits in the world, whose
perfection either subtracts nothing from the perfection of the
spirits, or does not subtract from the perfection of the spirits so
much as it adds to the perfection of the whole, then the idealistic
world, such as is posited by the idealist, is not the most perfect,
(Metaphysics, §438, p. 183) 


and hence not the kind of world that exists. No one outside of the
immediate sphere of Leibnizianism would ever again proffer such a
refutation of idealism. But both Baumgarten’s recognition of
idealism and his refutation of it in a university textbook make it
clear that by the middle of the eighteenth century idealism had become
a standard topic for philosophical discussion, a position it would
retain for another century and a half or more.
3. Idealism in Early Modern British philosophy

The relation between ontological and epistemological idealism is
complex. Ontological idealism can be argued for on its own, and bring
epistemological idealism in its train. Epistemological idealism can be
argued for independently of ontological assumptions but lead to
ontological idealism, especially in the hope of avoiding skepticism.
Or epistemological idealism can be the basis for rejecting any
pretenses to ontology, including ontological idealism. The first
option may have been characteristic of some rationalists, such as
Leibniz in his more strictly idealist mood. Both of the latter two are
found within early modern British philosophy. We find considerations
pushing toward epistemological idealism in both Hobbes and Locke in
spite of the avowed materialism of the first and dualism of the
second, who therefore obviously did not call themselves idealists.
Berkeley argues for epistemological idealism and then adds ontological
idealism in order to avert skepticism, although he calls his position
immaterialism rather than idealism. Hume, by contrast, although
calling himself neither an immaterialist nor an idealist, nevertheless
adopts arguments for epistemological idealism similar to some of
Berkeley’s, but then uses that position as the basis for a
critique of traditional metaphysical pretensions, including those to
ontological idealism—while also being drawn to ontological
idealism in resistance to what he regards as the natural tendency to
dualism. Hume’s critical attitude toward metaphysics is
subsequently taken up by Kant, although Kant famously asserts on
practical grounds some of the very same metaphysical theses that he
argues cannot be asserted on theoretical grounds. 

The British philosophers were all hostile toward dogmatic metaphysics
in Wolff’s sense, although until the time of Hume, who had some
familiarity with Leibniz, the metaphysics with which they were
familiar were those of Descartes, Aristotelian scholasticism, and
Neo-Platonism, which had become domesticated in Britain through the
work of the Cambridge Platonists in the second half of the seventeenth
century. All of these movements fed into the general movement of
rationalism, while the British philosophers, typically lumped together
under the rubric of empiricism in spite of their own differences, all
believed, albeit for different reasons, that the doctrines put forward
by dogmatic metaphysicians rest on a totally unfounded conception of
knowledge and cannot survive rational scrutiny (empiricists might
themselves be considered critical rationalists). Thus the primary task
of philosophy for these philosophers became that of providing a theory
of knowledge based on an adequate assessment of the constitution of
human nature, for they were interested in knowledge only as a human
achievement. However, it is not human nature in general that is of
interest in this context but the workings of those human powers or
faculties that are responsible for our human ability to relate to the
world in terms of knowledge-claims. (Thus Kant’s attempt to
argue on practical grounds for metaphysical theses that could not be
justified on theoretical grounds would be a major departure from the
methods of the British empiricists.) These faculties were attributed
by the British as well as their Continental opponents to what was
called “the mind” (mens, consciousness,
Bewußtsein), an attribution which resulted in moving
the “operations of the mind” into the center of
philosophical attention. Reflections on the conditions of the
possibility of knowledge led Hobbes and Locke to what might be
considered forms of epistemological idealism in spite of their
ontological commitments to materialism or dualism respectively, while
Berkeley concluded that their epistemological idealism would lead to a
skepticism that could be avoided only by his own more radical
ontological idealism. Hume’s position remains complex and for
this reason controversial. His thesis that our beliefs in causation,
external objects, and even the self are all founded on
“custom” and imagination rather than “reason”
may be considered a form of epistemological idealism, but while he
sometimes seems to attempt to avoid commitment on ontological
questions altogether, at other times, as in his argument that the
existence of external objects in addition to our impressions is only a
fiction, he seems to infer ontological idealism from his
epistemological idealism. In spite of their differences, almost all
British philosophers from Hobbes up to and including Hume insisted
that the highest priority for philosophy is to give an analysis of the
conditions and the origin of knowledge, while they gave not only
somewhat different accounts of what these conditions consist in and
how they contribute to a convincing story about the origin of
knowledge but they also had to face quite interesting
“metaphysical” consequences from their respective
accounts.

This is easily confirmed by looking briefly at some of their main
convictions concerning knowledge, starting with Thomas Hobbes
(1588–1679). As Hobbes points out in the chapters Of
Philosophy and Of Method in the first part
(Computation or Logic) of the first section (Concerning
Body) of his Elements of Philosophy (1655), knowledge is
the result of the manipulation of sensory input based on the
employment of logical rules of reasoning (ratiocination) in acts of
what he calls “computation”. He describes the details of
this process most succinctly in a short passage in chapter 6 of the
first part (Human Nature) of his The Elements of Law,
Natural and Politic (1640), his first major philosophical work.
After distinguishing what he calls “sense, or knowledge
original” from “knowledge … which we call
science”, he goes on to “define” knowledge “to
be evidence of truth, from some beginning or principle of sense”
and formulates four principles that are constitutive of knowledge:



The first principle of knowledge therefore is that we have such and
such conceptions; the second, that we have thus and thus named the
things whereof they are conceptions; the third is, that we have joined
those names in such manner, as to make true propositions; the fourth
and last is, that we have joined those propositions in such manner as
they be concluding. 


The message is straightforward with respect to both the basis and the
formation of knowledge: senses (sensations) are basic to our
acquisition of knowledge in that they lead to conceptions
(representations) to which we attach names (concepts) which we then
put together into propositions which, if true, already constitute
knowledge, and from which there arise further knowledge if we draw
conclusions in an orderly way from them.

Though the account given by Hobbes of the origin and the formation of
knowledge is rightly called empiricist because it traces all knowledge
back to the senses or sensations and their non-sensory causes, i.e.,
to what he calls “things without us”, it is by no means
directly committed to any sort of ontological idealism or dualism; on
the contrary, Hobbes’s preferred ontological position is
materialism. Nevertheless, his account may lead to an early form of
epistemological idealism. This is so because although Hobbes makes no
claims as to either the constitution and the reality of what causes
sensations or to any specific contribution on the part of the subject
of knowledge to what we take to be the “accidents or
qualities” of objects, he states, again most explicitly in the
part on Human Nature in The Elements of Law, (1)
that there are causes of our sensations which by way of their motions
give rise to what we sense as qualities, but (2) that these qualities
only have the status of “seemings and apparitions”. In his
own words: “The things that really are in the world without us,
are those motions by which these seemings are caused”
(Elements of Law, Part I, chap. II, 10). While he is
confident that there are external objects, and thus has no intention
of affirming ontological idealism, nevertheless because in
Hobbes’s opinion we could have conceptions of these seemings
even if there were no objects around (ibid. chap. 1, 8) there is for
him no basis on which to found any metaphysical claims to the real
existence of an external world or any epistemological basis for
claiming knowledge of the real constitution of a subject-independent
world or its real existence. Thus, Hobbes’s position is best
described as agnosticism when it comes to metaphysics forced on him by
a form of epistemological idealism. This is nicely confirmed by a
passage from part II (The First Grounds of Philosophy) where
he declares: 


Now things may be considered, that is, be brought into account, either
as internal accidents of our mind, in which manner we consider them
when the question is about some faculty of the mind; or as species of
external things, not as really existing, but appearing only to
exist, or to have a being without us [emphasis added]. And in
this manner we are now to consider them. (chap. VII, 1)


In spite of a pre-reflective disposition toward dualism, an explicit
argument for an agnostic attitude with respect to the ultimate
constitution of reality, thus a form of epistemological idealism
without any argument for ontological idealism, is also characteristic
of John Locke (1632–1704). Already in The Epistle to the
Reader of An Essay concerning Human Understanding (1690)
he denounces rationalist metaphysics as a “Sanctuary of Vanity
and Ignorance” and declares in the first book of his
Essay right at the outset: 


I shall not at present meddle with the physical consideration of the
mind; or trouble myself to examine, wherein its essence consists, or
by what motions of our spirits, or alterations of our bodies, we come
to have any sensation by our organs, or any ideas in our
understandings; and whether those ideas do in their formation,
any, or all of them, depend on matter or no [emphasis added]:
These are speculations, which, however curious and entertaining, I
shall decline. (Book I, chap. I, 2; s. also Book II, chap. XXI, 73)



Instead he restricts his investigation to the “purpose to
enquire into the original, certainty, and extent of human
knowledge” (ibid.). Such an investigation presupposes an
acquaintance with our own minds, and thus according to Locke the most
pressing task is to understand the mind or the understanding itself.
And because for Locke the sole material the mind has the ability to
process are ideas, the most pressing task if one wants to understand
the possibility of knowledge is to give an account of “how he
[the mind] comes by them [the ideas]” (Book II, chap. I, 1).
There is no need to go into the details of Locke’s conception of
how the mind gets ideas and what the understanding does with them in
order to arrive at knowledge. Though his description of these
processes differs in some interesting ways from the model Hobbes
proposes, in the end both Hobbes and Locke share the view (1) that
whatever we can know depends on our having ideas which must be somehow
based in sensation, (2) that there must be some external cause
(Hobbes) or some source of affection (Locke) which gives rise to
sensory ideas, yet (3) ultimately we are ignorant about the real
constitution of these causes and these sources. What we know is the
content and structure of our own ideas (epistemological idealism),
although we have no reason to deny the existence of external objects
(thus to assert ontological idealism) and even assume that in some
regards external objects resemble our ideas of them (in the case of
primary qualities).

Obviously it is mainly point (3) that is of importance for the
question of how much dualism or ontological idealism is involved in
Locke’s version of the operations of the mind. Again, as in the
case of Hobbes, it seems that Locke’s position is meant to be
neutral against and compatible with all these alternatives and that he
wishes to stay agnostic with respect to them. This is indicated
especially well by his theory of substance and his remarks concerning
the limits of knowledge. Substances, Locke famously holds, “are
such combinations of simple Ideas, as are taken to represent distinct
particular things subsisting by themselves” (II, XII, 6). If one
analyzes our concept of a substance one 


will find he has no other Idea of it at all, but only a Supposition of
he knows not what support of such qualities, which are capable of
producing simple Ideas in us. (II, XXIII, 2) 


The reasons for this supposition are two: (1) we cannot make sense of
the concept of an unsupported quality or of ideas subsisting by
themselves, (2) we know from experience that “a certain number
of these simple Ideas go constantly together” or “exist
together” (II, XXIII, 2 and 3). Though Locke thinks of these
reasons as totally compelling, he sees quite well that they do not
justify any claim as to what a substance or a thing really is, what
its nature or constitution consists in. Thus he never gets tired of
emphasizing that we only have a confused idea of substance (a claim
also made by Leibniz about three-quarters of our knowledge, although
he held that we have a clear concept of what substance is), and
repeats quite often (at least three times in Book II, chap. XXIII
alone) that 


Whatever therefore be the secret, abstract nature of substance in
general, all the ideas we have of particular distinct sorts of
substances, are nothing but several combinations of simple ideas,
co-existing in such, though unknown, cause of their union, as makes
the whole subsist of itself. (II, XXIII, 6) 


He restricts this agnostic attitude not just to corporeal substances
or bodies but extends it to spiritual substances or minds as well:



It is plain then, that the idea of corporeal substance in matter is as
remote from our conceptions and apprehensions, as that of spiritual
substance or spirit; and therefore from our not having any notion of
the substance of spirit, we can no more conclude its non-existence,
than we can for the same reason deny the existence of body; it being
as rational to affirm there is no body, because we have no clear and
distinct idea of the substance of matter, as to say there is no
spirit, because we have no clear and distinct idea of the substance of
a spirit. (II, XXIII, 5) 


This criticism of any metaphysical claims concerning the ultimate
constitution of reality is accompanied by a more general warning
against the overstepping of the natural limits of our cognitive
faculties. According to Locke it is just a fact about human nature
that there are limits to the powers of the understanding. These powers
are meant to be bestowed to us by God to an extent sufficient for us
to know “Whatever is necessary for the Conveniences of Life, and
Information of Virtue” (I, I, 5; s. also II, XXIII, 12) but only
to that extent. If therefore the nature and the constitution of
substances both corporeal and spiritual are beyond our cognitive grasp
then we should take this to be a hint that God has set limits to what
we can know because he sees no reason for us to know everything. Even
if the powers He endowed on us would be magnified infinitely we still
would remain clueless as to what substances really are because we
still would be stuck in a world of qualities (this is one way of
reading II, XXIII, 12). Thus, in the end metaphysical knowledge of any
kind is meant to be beyond our reach. This, however, is nothing we
should be concerned about: 


For, though the comprehension of our understandings comes exceeding
short of the vast extent of things; yet we shall have cause enough to
magnify the bountiful author of our being, for that proportion and
degree of knowledge he has bestowed on us, so far above all the rest
of the inhabitants of this our mansion. (I, I, 5) 


For Locke, epistemological idealism combined with ontological
agnosticism is an expression of piety. Locke’s position may be
regarded as a theological expression of the most fundamental
motivation for epistemological idealism: no matter how much we know
about objects and at what level of detail, we still know them only
from our own, human point of view.

The agnosticism with respect to the ultimate constitution of
substances and things or of the fundamentum in re of
“the ideas thereof” characteristic of Hobbes and Locke is
challenged forcefully by George Berkeley (1685–1753), for whom
their agnosticism becomes a form of skepticism and even impiety. In
his Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge
(1710) he raises doubts about whether an agnostic stance along the
lines of Hobbes and Locke can be upheld consistently if one thinks
about the origin and the properties of ideas the way they do. Although
in his Treatise Berkeley does not mention Hobbes at all and
addresses Locke not by his name but by formulas like “esteemed
philosopher” and “learned author”
(Treatise, Introduction, 11) very few times, it is abundantly
clear that he wants to confront especially Locke with an ugly
alternative: either his conception of a substance or a thing has
“no distinct meaning annexed to” it (Treatise, I,
17) and is nonsense, or he has to endorse not just epistemological
idealism but ontological idealism as well. In other words,
Berkeley’s point is that Locke cannot afford to be agnostic with
respect to the metaphysical status of substances and things if he
wants us to think of ideas as the immediate objects of human
knowledge.

Berkeley’s position is thus that ontological idealism must be
accepted along with epistemological idealism. His arguments in favor
of ontological idealism based on the acceptance of ideas as the
objects of human knowledge are rather straightforward, turning on
presuppositions which he at least considered uncontroversial. Although
his taxonomy of the different kinds of ideas deviate in ways that are
not of interest here from Locke’s classification, he agrees with
Locke that ideas exist only “in the mind”
(Treatise, I, 2). He takes the mind to be a
“perceiving, active being” which itself is not “any
one of my ideas, but a thing entirely distinct from them, wherein they
exist or, which is the same thing, whereby they are perceived”
(ibid.). From these stipulations he derives his most fundamental and
famous claim (1) that “the existence of an idea consists in
being perceived” (ibid.) or that “their esse is
percipi” (Treatise, I, 3) by the perceiving,
active mind. Already here Berkeley has the means in place to cast into
doubt the meaningfulness of the assumption that there might exist
unperceived objects or things. This is due to his restriction of
existence to what is perceivable or, even narrower, to what is
perceived: If the only objects that exist for a mind—whether it
is my own mind or the mind of other human beings or the divine
mind—are ideas because there is nothing else that can exist for
the mind, then the very concept of something that exists but is not
for the mind or is unperceived is a contradiction in terms. Thus if,
as Berkeley supposes Locke does, one thinks of things as consisting of
collections of ideas, he asks how could one take a thing to be
something other than ideas and nevertheless to exist? This question
underlies Berkeley’s confidence in what is often referred to as
his “master argument”, the argument that one cannot
conceive of anything existing unconceived because in trying to do so
one is still conceiving of the object (Treatise, I,
§23). This seems open to the obvious objection that he is
confusing the content of a proposition (for example, “The earth
may still exist after the extinction of all conscious life”)
with the act of entertaining (“conceiving”) such a
proposition, which of course cannot take place except in a conscious
being; but if he is already committed to the thought that objects of
knowledge are nothing but ideas, it is at least understandable that he
should overlook this distinction.

The second conviction, also meant to be damaging to Locke’s view
about substances, on which Berkeley rests his case in favor of
idealism is the claim (2) that “an idea can be like nothing but
an idea” (Treatise, I, 8). Although this claim is
initially put forward in the context of his well-known criticism of
Locke’s primary-secondary-quality distinction, it is equally
relevant for his denial that there are things “without the
mind”. The reasoning on which this claim is based seems to be
the following: For two items to stand in the relation of likeness they
must have something in common. However, if an idea is mind-dependent
and if ideas are all there is for the mind, then what is
“without the mind” must be different in every respect from
an idea. Thus a relation of likeness cannot obtain between ideas
“in the mind” and things “without the mind”.
Berkeley puts this point quite bluntly by appealing to observation:



If we look but ever so little into our thoughts, we shall find it
impossible for us to conceive a likeness except only between our
ideas. Again, I ask whether those supposed originals or external
things, of which our ideas are the pictures or representations, be
themselves perceivable or no? if they are, then they are
ideas, and we have gained our point; but if you say they are not,
I appeal to any one whether it be sense, to assert a colour is like
something which is invisible; hard or soft, like something which is
intangible; and so of the rest. (Treatise, I, 8)


There is a third claim that is essential to both Berkeley’s
criticism of Locke and the idealistic position he is going to adopt.
This is the claim (3) that ideas are passive and causally inert, i.e.,
they can neither produce nor alter another idea (Treatise, I,
25). This claim he also bases on observation: 


whoever shall attend to his ideas, whether of sense or reflection,
will not perceive in them any power or activity; there is therefore no
such thing contained in them. A little attention will discover to us
that the very being of an idea implies passiveness and inertness in
it, insomuch that it is impossible for an idea to do any thing, or,
strictly speaking, to be the cause of any thing. (ibid.) 


Again the primary function of this claim is to discredit a Lockean
view according to which we have to think of the primary qualities of
things—which are contents of the most fundamental ideas we have
of them—as the causes of sensations or of sensory ideas. It is,
however, also meant to support the untenability of the assumption that
agnosticism with respect to the real existence of mind-independent
things is a viable option for a believer in Locke’s model of how
and by what means we acquire knowledge of objects.

Berkeley’s criticism of Locke’s theory concerning
substances is not carried out for its own sake. On the contrary, it is
meant to establish what Berkeley thinks to be the unavoidable
metaphysical consequences of a position that takes ideas “in the
mind” to be the only material for the operations of the mind in
its acquisition of knowledge. These metaphysical consequences consist
in a thoroughgoing idealism (a term, however, never used by Berkeley
himself, who preferred to call his position
“immaterialism”) with respect to the nature and
constitution of things or substances. Berkeley’s way of
establishing this result is open to many questions. However, the basic
outline of his overall argument can be sketched thus: If existence is
restricted to ideas (and minds) and if, what is undoubtedly the case,
things or substances exist, then things or substances must be ideas
(or minds) too. Now, as Locke has convincingly shown, we can have
ideas of particular things or substances, e.g., gold and lead, humans
and sheep, distinguished by our ideas of their various properties, but
we have only a confused or obscure idea of substance in general, which
we suppose to underlie whatever collection of ideas we take to be a
thing or a substance of one kind or another. But if we cannot have any
ideas of things or substances other than our ideas of their
properties, which clearly exist in minds, then the only clear ideas of
things that we have is as ideas, and in that case, if they do not seem
to exist in our own individual, human minds, then things or substances
must be ideas in some other non-human, i.e., divine mind. This divine
mind cannot be itself an idea because it must be conceived as an
active principle that can be the cause of ideas, a principle of which
we can have no idea but only a “notion”
(Treatise, I, 26, 27). Therefore, the very fact that we take
things or substances to be real commits us to the claim that things
are ideal entities perceived by the mind of God. Ontological idealism,
one could say, is the only tenable basis for a realistic stance for
Berkeley, but it leads to a realism about minds, human and divine,
rather than of what he always calls material substance. And if one is
to accept his re-interpretation of causality as a purported relation
between ideas in terms of his theory of marks and signs, in particular
his theory that what we think of as ideas of objects are signs of
(God’s plan for) future possible ideas for us (cf.
Treatise, I, 65 f.), then one also has to agree to
epistemological idealism. But again, for Berkeley epistemological
idealism without ontological idealism, the theory that all that exists
are minds and their ideas, would be a form of skepticism.

Up until the point at which he introduces the mind of God into his
argument, all of Berkeley’s considerations in behalf of
epistemological idealism might be thought of as expressions of the
basic insight that we can only conceive of reality from our own point
of view, which are then extended into ontological idealism in order to
avoid the whiff of agnosticism or skepticism and supplemented with the
existence of a divine mind in order to satisfy an ineliminable
tendency to believe in the existence of something more than
one’s own mind or even of human minds in general. We will later
see that the tendency to preserve both the impulse to idealism and the
conviction that there is something more than ordinary human minds by
positing a more than human mind is characteristic of many versions of
idealism until the end of its glory days at the beginning of the
twentieth century. This tendency is decidedly absent from the
philosophy of David Hume, however. 

David Hume (1711–1776) learned a great deal from Berkeley, above
all his empiricist epistemology, but for the most part he tried to
avoid Berkeley’s outright commitment to ontological idealism.
Hume’s view that our knowledge consists of our ideas, our
recognition of “philosophical” relations among them, such
as identity and difference, and our recognition of
“natural” relations among them such as causation, which
are established by imagination and custom, can be considered a form of
epistemological idealism—causality, in particular, which Hume
regards as the basis of all our knowledge of existence, is at the same
time reduced to a way of feeling and thinking, in other words a state
of mind. But depending on how he is read, Hume either accepts the
skepticism about possible external objects that Berkeley tries to
avoid with an ontological idealism that renders any external objects
other than other human or divine minds impossible, or else holds that
even if there are valid arguments for skepticism it is psychologically
impossible for human beings to remain in a skeptical frame of mind,
thus we naturally even if not rationally believe in the existence of
objects apart from our ideas of them. However, in those passages,
prominently in Book I, Part IV of his early Treatise of Human
Nature (1739–40), where Hume entertains a kind of monism
that sees both “minds” and “objects” as
nothing but different sets or “bundles” of one sort of
thing, namely, perceptions, impressions and their paler copies, ideas,
his position might seem much like Berkeley’s ontological
idealism, with the difference that while he reduces all reality to
mental states like impressions and ideas he does not see these as
properties that must inhere in substantial minds any more than in
substantial bodies, both of which are fictions we introduce in order
to explain continuities among those impressions or ideas (although it
may be difficult to explain who is introducing those fictions without
resorting to substantial minds after all).

Hume’s version of epistemological idealism with regard to
causation is clearly on view in his 1748 Enquiry concerning Human
Knowledge, which was quickly translated into German and would
eventually provide Kant with the stimulus for his own aprioristic
rather than empiricistic version of epistemological idealism with
regard not only to causation but to all of what he called the
categories of pure reason, including especially substance and
interaction as well as causation. But since Kant was not familiar with
the contents of Hume’s earlier Treatise of Human
Nature, he did not know that Hume too had generalized his
approach to causality to the cases of mind and body, nor did he know
that Hume may have tried to sidestep Berkeley’s commitment to
substances but not his ontological idealism altogether by his theory
of both minds and bodies as bundles of perceptions. Kant would try to
avert Berkeley’s ontological idealism by a different stratagem,
but before we come to that we must consider Hume’s position more
fully. Hume accepted from Locke and Descartes before him that the
immediate objects of consciousness are what they had called ideas,
although he reserves that word for copies or subsequently recalled
perceptions rather than the originally experienced perceptions that he
calls impressions. He also adopts the view of his predecessors that
knowledge lies in the recognition of relations among impressions,
ideas, or both, and divides those relations into two kinds,
philosophical and natural. Philosophical relations are those
immediately evident on reflection on or comparison of particular
ideas, and include resemblance, identity, spatial and temporal
relations such as above and below or before and after, number and
degree, and logical contrariety (Treatise of Human Nature,
I.I.5), while natural relations are those that are not immediately
evident on reflection on a single impression or idea or in a single
comparison of any number, but which instead become evident, or more
properly are formed, only through repeated experience. Hume’s
best known argument is then that causation is not a philosophical but
a natural relation: the causal relation is comprised by temporal
succession, spatial contiguity, and necessary connection, and while
the first two are philosophical relations that are immediately
apparent, the necessary connection between different ideas—those
of a cause and its separate effect—is, unlike the necessary
identity of two qualitatively similar ideas, not immediately apparent,
as Hume puts it, to reason (I.III.2), but instead grows only out of
repeated experience, the repeated experience of qualitatively similar
pairs of impressions which causes them to become linked in the mind,
as we would ordinarily say, or at least in consciousness, as the
careful Hume should say at most (I.III.6). In fact, Hume’s
argument is that repeated experience itself has two effects: it
creates a habit of thought such that upon the presentation of an
impression of one kind that has repeatedly been experienced in spatial
and temporal conjunction with one of another kind, a vivid version of
the idea of the kind of impression with which the first kind of
impression has been repeatedly associated immediately
occurs—this is the essence of causal inference or belief,
because a belief is nothing but an idea that is almost as vivid and
forceful as the impression of which it was once a copy
(I.III.7–8)—and further, there is an actual feeling of the
mind (as we would ordinarily say) being tugged from the one impression
to the other idea—this is the basis of the idea of necessary
connection, a connection which the mind then “spreads”
upon its objects to form the idea of a necessary connection among them
or their states (I.III.14).

Hume’s theory is a form of epistemological idealism in that it
relocates the relation of causation from the external objects where we
would ordinarily suppose it to obtain to the mind, which we would
ordinarily suppose knows but does not constitute the relation known.
In Hume’s words, 


Tho the several resembling instances, which give rise to the idea of
power, have no influence on each other, and can never produce any new
quality in the object, which can be a model of that idea [of
power or causation], yet the observation of this resemblance
produces a new impression in the mind, which is its real
model…. Necessity, then, is the effect of this observation, and
is nothing but an internal impression of the mind, or a determination
to carry our thoughts from one object to another. (I.III.14, para. 20)



Several things may be noted about this theory. For one, if it had been
Hume’s intent to raise a general skepticism about causation,
based on the famous worry about induction that he himself raises,
especially in the subsequent Enquiry, namely that an
assertion of causality claims that future impressions will occur in
the same patterns as past ones but there is no basis “in
reason” for assuming that the future will resemble the past,
then the relocation of causation from the domain of objects to the
domain of the mind should make no difference, because we have no more
reason to believe that the mind will behave the same way in the future
as it has in the past than we do to believe that about anything else.
So we must either believe that Hume is very confused, not realizing
that his skepticism about induction as applied to external objects
must undermine our confidence in his application of induction to the
mind itself, or else that he is very arch, and that he means us to do
his skeptical work for him by carrying over skepticism about induction
to the case of the mind itself, or else that he is not really worrying
about issues of justification and thus of the threat of skepticism at
all, but just means to be giving a plausible description of
the only possible basis for causal inference, namely the mind’s
experience of itself. The last possibility may well seem to be the
most plausible, leading to the “naturalist” reading of
Hume promoted by Norman Kemp Smith and Barry Stroud rather than the
“skeptical” reading of Hume accepted by his contemporaries
such as James Beattie and defended recently by Robert Fogelin.

There is a further issue with Hume’s treatment of causation that
is largely suppressed in the Enquiry but that was evident in
the Treatise, namely, that although, as we saw in the last
passage quoted, Hume sometimes presents his epistemological idealism
about causation by describing necessary connection as being displaced
from the object to the mind, on his own strict
interpretation of empiricism there is a problem in positing the
existence of either objects or minds distinct from perceptions. This
is what pushes Hume towards his own form of ontological idealism. That
is, although we naturally speak of perceptions as being of
objects and in or by the mind, on the view that all
knowledge is founded on perception and that in perception we are
immediately acquainted with nothing but perceptions, it becomes
problematic how we could have knowledge either of the mind itself or
of any object of perceptions distinct from those perceptions. Hume
puts the former point succinctly by arguing that we have no perception
of the self distinct from our perception of its perceptual states:



For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call
myself, I always stumble on some particular perception or
other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or
pleasure. I can never catch myself at any time without a
perception, and never can observe any thing but the perception.
(Treatise I.IV.6.3) 


He then argues that in fact the self is 


nothing but a bundle of different perceptions, which succeed each
other with an inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and
movement. (I.IV.6.4) 


and that the idea of a continuous self is but a fiction or illusion
created by relations of resemblance and continuity among perceptions
in the bundle, just as both the idea of and belief in causal
connection were created by repetition of pairs of impressions. Without
saying that the objects of perception are also nothing but bundles of
related perceptions, Hume presents a similar account of how the idea
of objects distinct from our perceptions of them is generated by our
impression of continuity among perceptions: although only philosophers
reflect on this, in fact we know that perceptions are fleeting and
transitory; we mistake continuity among them for enduring identity;
and we then invent something other than perceptions, something not
fleeting and transitory, to which to ascribe that enduring identity
(Treatise, I.IV.2). In neither case, however, do we actually
have a clear idea of any object or substance distinct from our
perceptions: we do not have such an idea of external objects or their
substance, but neither do we have a clear idea of the mind or its
substance. The only ideas we have are copies of our impressions, or
perceptions.

Hume’s attack on the supposition that we have an idea of the
mind as distinct from its impressions thus constitutes a rejection of
Berkeley’s commitment to the existence of mental substances, but
not of ontological idealism altogether. On Hume’s account, we
are not entitled to assert the existence of both ideas and the minds,
human or divine, that have them, but only the former. At the same
time, he does not seem to think that we are forced into skepticism
about either minds or external objects by his approach, that is, into
a position that there may really be minds and external objects but we
cannot know that fact or their real qualities; yet he still has a
lingering worry that although there are psychological mechanisms
leading us to form the fictions of minds and bodies beyond
perceptions, we do not really know what we are talking about when we
talk about such things, and thus cannot even coherently doubt whether
we have knowledge of them—our talk about them is explicable but
meaningless. Hume thus seems to end up with an uneasy compromise
between epistemological idealism and ontological agnosticism, on the
one hand, and his own form of ontological idealism on the other.
4. Kant

The first major philosopher actually to call himself an idealist was
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), although as soon as he did so he
labored to distinguish his position from Berkeley’s, not using
these terms but essentially identifying himself as an epistemological
but not ontological idealist. The sources as well as the form of
Kant’s idealism are complex. Kant was deeply impressed by what
he knew of Leibniz (many of the texts that are crucial to later
understandings of Leibniz, such as “Primary Truths”,
having been unknown in Kant’s times, or others, such as the
New Essays on Human Understanding, having been published only
when he was well into his career) and the view that space and time are
phaenomena bene fundata and by what he knew of Hume and the
view that causation is a form of thinking that we impose upon our
experience rather than something we directly experience it. He was
more generally impressed by the empiricist argument that our knowledge
of objects depends upon experience of them. However, he thought that
both the Leibnizian and the Humean approaches failed to account for
the possibility of synthetic a priori knowledge, that is,
knowledge that goes beyond the mere analysis of concepts, thus does
more than merely unpack explicit or tacit definitions, but yet
legitimately claims universal and necessary validity. But, unlike
Plato, the original apriorist avant la letter, he does not
see synthetic a priori knowledge as leading to realism about
objects having the features that we know a priori, nor, like
Malebranche, the theological Platonist, does he see such knowledge as
knowledge of the mind of God; rather, he sees it as providing the
conclusive argument for epistemological idealism through the premise
that we can only know to be necessary and therefore universally valid
the forms that we ourselves impose upon our experience. At the same
time, even though when he wrote his main works he was not
well-informed on the aporia about subjects and objects about which
Hume had ultimately thrown up his arms in the Treatise, which
has here been characterized as the tension in Hume between agnosticism
and ontological idealism, Kant recognized that we cannot talk about
what he called appearances without conceding the real existence of
subjects to which objects appear as well as the objects that appear to
such subjects. Kant was thus led to what he called
“transcendental idealism”, a position that combines
epistemological idealism about the main structures of objects, that
is, the view that we ourselves impose spatiality, temporality,
substantiality, causality, and other forms upon our experience and
precisely because we know these forms a priori cannot regard
them as also the real forms of objects independent of ourselves, with
a kind of ontological realism, the view that in some sense our selves
and our objects really do exist independently of our representations
of them. Though he identifies his own “transcendental
idealism” with “empirical realism” he does not want
to call his own position “transcendental realism”, because
for him that would be the view that objects independent of our
representations do exist with the forms that we represent
them as having, thus a form of epistemological realism rather than
idealism. Neither would he even be happy to call that part of his
position ontological idealism in the sense in which we have been using
that terminology here, because it is part of his position that, at
least from a theoretical point of view, we cannot suppose that even
our own minds are really as they appear to us, nor can we
assert that the reality that ultimately underlies the appearance of
minds is essentially different from the reality that ultimately
underlies the appearance of bodies. But he is confident that we are
entitled to assert the existence of some sort of reality underlying
the appearance of both minds and bodies, so that epistemological
idealism must be accompanied by some sort of ontology, even if only an
indeterminate one. 

Kant had already published a number of substantial scientific as well
as philosophical works before the “great light” of
transcendental idealism came to him in 1769, leading to his first
statement of it the following year in his inaugural dissertation,
On the Forms and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible
Worlds (1770). But it would then take him another decade, the
so-called “silent decade”, to publish his full argument
for transcendental idealism in the first edition of the Critique
of Pure Reason, which appeared in 1781, and even then the
relation between the epistemological idealism that he developed in
that work and ontology continued to vex him: the first substantial
review of the book in 1782 charged him with Berkeleianism, in other
words, with the addition of ontological idealism to epistemological
idealism, and Kant then tried to rebut that accusation in his
attempted popularization of the Critique, the Prolegomena
to Any Future Metaphysics of 1783, and to further defend that
rebuttal of ontological idealism in the “Refutation of
Idealism” that he added to the second edition of the
Critique of Pure Reason in 1787. Even then he was not done
with the subject, as we know from a dozen further drafts of the
“Refutation” that he composed after that second
edition of the Critique. Indeed, Kant continued to struggle
with the clarification of his own position to the end of his life,
attempting a restatement of transcendental idealism in the uncompleted
material for a final book that has come down to us under the name of
the Opus postumum. But since it was Kant’s
presentations of his position in the two editions of the
Critique and the Prolegomena that were most
influential in his own time and have been since, we shall concentrate
on those texts here.

Kant’s arguments for his transcendental idealism are distributed
across all parts of his Critique of Pure Reason. He gives a
direct argument for it in the Transcendental Aesthetic, supplemented
by the Transcendental Analytic, and he gives an indirect argument for
it in the Transcendental Dialectic by arguing that only his
transcendental idealism can allow us to avoid the paradoxes or
confusions of traditional metaphysics. We will comment first on
Kant’s direct argument for transcendental idealism and then on
his indirect argument for it through the critique of traditional
metaphysics.

The direct argument is based on Kant’s claim, substantiated in
the Transcendental Aesthetic, that we necessarily represent space and
time and objects in them by means of our a priori
representations of space and time, which are thus pure forms for the
intuition of particular objects, and we can construct proofs of
theorems about space and time by appeal to our a priori
representations or in “pure intuition”. But how does this
lead to idealism? Kant’s chief argument is that space and time
can represent 


no property at all of any things in themselves nor any relations of
them to each other, i.e., no determination of them that attaches to
objects themselves and that would remain even if one were to abstract
from all subjective conditions of intuition, 


and that space and time themselves can instead be only our
a priori representations of them and the spatial and temporal
features of objects in space and time only features of our
representations of them or of the “appearances” of
objects, because 


neither absolute nor relative determinations can be intuited prior to
the existence of the things to which they pertain, thus be intuited
a priori. (A 26/B 42) 


The decisive point of this argument is the following: although because
of our forms of intuition our particular representations
necessarily have spatio-temporal structure, any objects that
had that structure independently of our so representing them
would at best have such structure contingently, and thus the
supposedly synthetic a priori propositions about space, time,
and their mathematics would not be necessarily true
throughout their domain. Kant makes this key point several times. In
the Critique, he poses the rhetorical question, 


If there did not lie in you a faculty for intuiting a priori;
if this subjective condition were not at the same time the universal
a priori condition under which alone the object
of…intuition is possible; if the object ([e.g.,] the triangle)
were something in itself without relation to your subject: then how
could you say that what necessarily lies in your subjective conditions
for constructing a triangle must also necessarily pertain to the
triangle in itself. (A 48/B 65) 


Similarly, in the Prolegomena he writes that 


Pure mathematics, and especially pure geometry, can have objective
reality only under the single condition that it refers merely to
objects of the senses, with regard to which objects, however, the
principle remains fixed, that our sensory representation is by no
means a representation of things in themselves, but only of the way in
which they appear to us, 


for on the contrary supposition 


it absolutely would not follow from the representation of [e.g.]
space, a representation that serves a priori, with all the
various properties of space, as foundation for the geometer, that all
of this, together with what is deduced from it, must be exactly so in
nature. The space of the geometer would [or could] be taken for mere
fabrication and credited with no objective validity, because it is
simply not to be seen how things would have to agree necessarily with
the image that we form of them by ourselves and in advance. (§13,
Note I, 4:287) 


So, Kant concludes, in order to be necessarily true throughout their
domain, the synthetic a priori propositions about space and
time—and this includes not just the specific propositions of
geometry or mathematics more generally but also the general
propositions derived in the metaphysical expositions, such as that
space and time are infinite singular wholes with parts rather than
instances—must be true only of the representations on which we
impose our own forms of intuition, and cannot be true of things as
they are in themselves. This is Kant’s chief argument for
epistemological idealism, the view that the way things appear to us
essentially reflects our cognitive capacities rather anything
intrinsic to them, combined with indeterminate ontological realism,
the view that there are things independent of our representations of
them but because our most fundamental ways of representing things
cannot be true of them we cannot know anything about them other than
this fact itself. 

In a passage added to the second edition of the Critique, Kant also
points out that by arguing for the “transcendental
ideality” of spatio-temporality—that it is a necessary
feature of our representations of things but not a feature of things
as they are in themselves at all—he does not mean to degrade
space to a “mere illusion”, as did “the good
Berkeley” (B 71): his position is that it is a subjective but
necessary feature of our way of representing things, similar to
secondary qualities such as color or fragrance (B 70n) in being
subjective but unlike them in being necessary (see also A 29/B 45),
and he thinks that by failing to see that the spatiality (in
particular) of our representations is necessary, Berkeley has
unnecessarily “demoted” it to a mere illusion.
Kant’s larger objection to the charge that his position is not
different from Berkeley’s is, however, that while denying the
spatiality and temporality of things as they are in themselves, he has
provided no reason to deny that there are things distinct from our
representations of them and our own minds as representing them. But
since this larger objection is most clearly expounded and defended in
the Prolegomena and the “Refutation of Idealism”
added to the second edition of the Critique, which is
inserted into the Transcendental Analytic, discussion of it can be
deferred for now. 

Kant does not need to mount a separate argument for transcendental
idealism in the Transcendental Analytic, because while that is aimed
at showing that the use of certain concepts (the categories of pure
understanding) and principles (the principles of pure understanding)
are necessary conditions of any cognition of objects at all, indeed of
self-consciousness (apperception) itself, but also yield knowledge
only when applied to intuitions, pure intuitions in the case of pure
mathematical cognition and empirical intuitions in the case of
everything else (thus Kant’s famous statement “Without
sensibility no object would be given to us, and without understanding
none would be thought. Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions
without concepts are blind”; A 51/B 75), since empirical
intuitions have already been shown to yield appearances rather than
things in themselves, it automatically follows that the categories and
principles of pure understanding will also yield cognition only of
appearances. Nevertheless, Kant reaffirms transcendental idealism
during the course of the Transcendental Analytic.

The Transcendental Dialectic, the second half of the Critique of
Pure Reason in which Kant provides the critique of traditional
metaphysics is explicitly intended to give an indirect proof of
transcendental idealism (B xx). Specifically, the middle section of
the Dialectic, entitled “The Antinomy of Pure Reason”, is
supposed to provide this indirect proof. All three sections of the
Dialectic, thus the preceding “Paralogisms of Pure Reason”
and the following “Ideal of Pure Reason”, are supposed to
show that the faculty of reason’s inevitable conception of the
“unconditioned”, that which is a condition for everything
else but itself has no condition, can never provide knowledge of any
object because knowledge requires intuition as well as concept, and
intuition is always conditioned—the representation of any region
of space is conditioned by more surrounding it, and that of any region
of time is likewise conditioned by the representation of more time
before and after it. Reason can form “transcendental
ideas”, more properly, “transcendent concepts” (A
327/B 384), that is, the ideas of an unconditioned subject (the self
as substance), an unconditioned whole of all things and events (a
completed world-whole), and an unconditioned ground of all possibility
(God) (A 334/B 393). These ideas, according to Kant, may be useful as
guidelines for scientific research and even necessary for the purposes
of practical reason, but they outrun the limits of intuition and
therefore theoretical cognition. This general claim itself does not
entail transcendental idealism, that is, it does not identify space
and time with our own forms of intuition. However, Kant’s claim
is that the paradoxes diagnosed in the “Antinomy of Pure
Reason” can only be resolved on the basis of transcendental
idealism. In the case of the first two antinomies he argues that both
sides essentially concern space and time or the things in them, and
that since space and time as forms of intuition are
indefinitely extendable and divisible, both sides of the
debates, the theses and the antitheses, are false: space and time and
thus the totality of things and events in them (the world) are neither
bounded and finite or unbounded and infinite but indefinite (even
though particular things within space or periods within time may have
determinate boundaries). In the case of the third and fourth
antinomies, however, Kant argues that the distinction between
appearances and things in themselves that is at the heart of
transcendental idealism makes it possible for both sides to be
considered true, since they concern different objects: in the
empirical world of experience, there are only ever indefinitely
extending chains of causes and effects, each moment of which is
necessary relative to its causal laws (the third antithesis) but
contingent because no antecedent cause is absolutely necessary or
necessary considered in itself, but outside of the empirical world
there is nothing to prevent there being an absolutely necessary thing
in itself (God) nor acts of absolute spontaneity on the part of that
absolutely necessary being or even lesser beings, such as finite
agents. Again, Kant’s claim will ultimately be that we have
necessary and sufficient practical grounds for affirming both our own
freedom and the existence of God, but these do not yield theoretical
cognition (B xxx).

Kant’s antinomies led to the dialectical methods of Fichte,
Schelling, and Hegel, and were thus to prove immensely influential.
But it was clearly controversial whether the antinomies in fact
required the distinction between appearances and things in themselves;
Hegel, for example, surely thought not. For the argument that only
transcendental idealism can resolve the antinomies seems to be
circular: unless one assumes that our representations of
space and time give us not only reliable but also complete information
about the nature of space and time and all things in them, there is no
reason to assume that the limits of our representations of
space and time—their indefiniteness and the contingency of any
starting- or stopping-point in them—are also in fact true of
space and time and everything in them in themselves. Kant’s
indirect proof for transcendental idealism therefore is not
conclusive.

Kant himself did not think so, of course. He was utterly committed to
transcendental idealism. When confronted with the challenge that
transcendental idealism was nothing but Berkeleianism, however, that
is, the reduction of all reality to ideas and the minds that have
them, he recoiled. This objection was made in the first substantial
review of the first edition of the Critique, written from an
empiricist point of view by Christian Garve and then redacted by J.H.
Feder in 1782 (in Sassen 2000). Kant defended himself by a more
precise formulation of his doctrine in the Prolegomena (1783)
and further by the insertion of a “Refutation of
Idealism”, specifically “material idealism”, into
the Transcendental Analytic in the second edition of the
Critique (1787). Kant’s claim in the
Prolegomena is that his position should be called
“formal” or “critical” idealism rather than
“material” idealism because it merely identifies space and
time with our forms of intuition but does not otherwise deny the
reality of the objects in space and time. As he puts it: 


There are things given to us as objects of our senses existing outside
us, yet we know nothing of them as they may be in themselves, but are
acquainted only with their appearances, i.e., with the representations
that they produce in us because they affect our senses. Accordingly, I
by all means avow that there are bodies outside us, i.e., things
which, though completely unknown to us as to what they may be in
themselves, we know through the representations which their influence
on our sensibility provides for us, and to which we give the name of a
body—which word therefore merely signifies the appearance of
this object that is unknown to us but is nonetheless real. Can this be
called idealism? It is the very opposite of it. (4:288–9) 


At this stage, Kant’s response to the identification of his
position with traditional ontological idealism is basically
incredulity: he cannot understand it because in his view he has only
given reasons for removing space and time from things to our
representations of them, just as earlier philosophers had given
(different) reasons for relocating properties like color from object
to subject, but has provided no arguments against the existence of
those things themselves, which he, like any other sane person, takes
for granted.

By the time of the second edition of the Critique, however,
Kant must have come to see the need for a positive defense of the
assumption of the existence of things in themselves that ground our
spatio-temporal representations of body (although, since those things
in themselves are not supposed to be spatio-temporal and causality is
supposed to be a spatio-temporal relation, they cannot precisely be
said to cause our spatio-temporal representations).
Kant’s argument—which in the following years Kant would
attempt to improve a dozen times (see Guyer 1983 and Kant
2005)—is that we can only achieve “empirically determined
consciousness” of our own existence, or a determinate temporal
ordering of our own representations, by correlating them with
something enduring outside of and distinct from them: 


The perception of this persistent thing is possible only through a
thing outside me and not through the mere
representation of a thing outside me. (B 275) 


Spatiality may be acknowledged to be only my way of
representing things outside me, but insofar as anything in
space is used to determine the order of my own representations it must
be regarded as being ontologically distinct from my representations of
it even if its phenomenology is subjective, that is, even if
spatiality is only our way of representing ontological independence
(see A 22/B 37). In this way he proves, contra Berkeley who denies it
and Descartes who doubts it, that our phenomenologically spatial
representations are “grounded” in something ontologically
distinct from those representations. Kant’s
“Refutation” was intended precisely to demonstrate that
epistemological idealism, the argument that our most basic forms of
knowledge in fact reflect only our own forms of intuition and
conceptualization, could and must be combined with indeterminate
ontological realism.

It may well be asked of Kant’s “Refutation of
Idealism”, as it had already been asked of his yet-to-be-named
transcendental idealism in 1770 by such distinguished contemporaries
as Johann Heinrich Lambert, Johann Georg Sulzer, and Moses
Mendelssohn, whether it is really compatible with the transcendental
ideality of time, that is, whether it does not presuppose the
reality of the temporality of the enduring object it proposes by means
of which to determine the sequence of our own representations as well
as of the self that has that sequence of representations (isn’t
the sequence of representations, they essentially asked, really a
sequence?). But we will not further pursue that question here, because
all of Kant’s successors were more concerned with the viability
of Kant’s general distinction between appearances and things in
themselves rather than with the specifics of Kant’s argument for
transcendental idealism from a priori knowledge or of
Kant’s proof that we can assert the existence of things in
themselves in spite of that distinction. This concern began with the
famous objection of F.H. Jacobi, made in the appendix to his 1787 book
on David Hume, that without the assumption of things in themselves he
could not enter into the critical system, but that with it he could
not remain within the system; that is, he felt that once the
distinction between appearances and things in themselves was made all
ground for the assumption of the existence of things other than our
own representations was removed even if Kant had made no explicit
argument against that existence. So let us now turn to Kant’s
successors to see how they tried to save Kant’s insight into the
idea that the most fundamental forms of knowledge ultimately depend on
fundamental operations of self-consciousness—the basic insight
of epistemological idealism—without ending up with Kant’s
combination of that with indeterminate ontological realism.
5. German Idealism

Kant can thus be seen to have made two major points concerning
epistemological and ontological idealism, although again these are not
his terms. (1) As far as ontological idealism is concerned, although
he never questions the existence of something independent of our
representations of it, he can claim to have shown that when it comes
to the ultimate constitution of this reality as it may be considered
independently of the way it appears to beings endowed with reason and
(human) sensibility we can know nothing (on theoretical grounds; on
practical grounds, he insisted, we can infer, for example, that we
really are free). We neither can know whether—to use a Hobbesian
expression again—“without us” or—to
use Kant’s own term “in itself”—there
are material objects around that consist of substances and their
attributes standing in spatio-temporal or other (e.g., causal)
relations to each other and constituting a law-governed whole called
nature. Nor can we know whether whatever we experience as an object is
in the end some mental product of a divine mind having creative powers
totally different from those we can make sense of. Thus we are bound
to be agnostic with regard to any metaphysical theoretical claims as
to the real constitution of the world, and this implies that there is
no way to convince us of either ontological idealism or determinate
ontological realism. (2) However, following Kant, things are different
in the case of epistemological idealism. Whenever we talk about
objects of cognition, i.e., of objects that are addressed by us in
terms of concepts and judgments, we have to accept them as being
conceptual constructions based on our subjective forms of intuitions
and on very specific conceptual rules for bringing together or
unifying data: an object of cognition is that “in whose
concept a manifold of what is given through sensibility is
united” (Critique of Pure Reason, B 137). This means,
according to Kant, that idealism in epistemology is inescapable,
because the assumption of the conceptual constitution of objects of
cognition is unavoidable.

Kant’s Solomonic verdict was not much appreciated by the main
representatives of post-Kantian German idealism. Friedrich Heinrich
Jacobi, as already mentioned, immediately criticized Kant’s
allowance of things in themselves of unknown determinations, and
replaced it with a straightforward fideism about external existence
(which he alleged to find in Hume’s rejection of the
psychological possibility of skepticism). However, the general
tendency of the idealists, beginning with Johann Gottlieb Fichte, was
to overcome the distinction between ontological and epistemological
idealism and to show that there is no real opposition between what is
traditionally taken to be a subject-independent world that is present
to us in the mode of ‘givenness’ and ‘being’
and a world that is conceived of as subject-dependent in that it is
formed by conceptual tools or other ‘thought-ingredients’
stemming from some subjective activity or other. This led to a new
conception of idealism whose distinguishing character consists in the
endorsement of the claim of the “inseparability of being and
thinking”. This conception was realized by introducing entirely
new ways of thinking about what ultimately constitutes reality based
on a dynamic conception of self-consciousness that the German
idealists took to be at the heart of Kant’s theory of the
transcendental unity of apperception (and arrived at by Kant out of
epistemological, not: ontological, considerations!).
According to this conception, reality has to be conceived as a result
of an activity paradigmatically manifested in the unique manner in
which consciousness of oneself arises. In order to find out the true
nature of reality one has to gain insight into the operations of this
activity.

This approach to answering fundamental metaphysical questions by
casting into doubt the traditional distinction between ontology and
epistemology not only leads to a different conception of what idealism
is all about. Above all, it means that one has to sketch out the
difference between idealism and whatever is taken to be its opposite
(realism, naturalism, materialism, sensualism etc.) not in terms of
different kinds of “stuff” either material or mental;
dynamic elements like activities and forces must be the primary
constituents of reality rather than more substantial items like
material objects and (spiritual) persons. Idealism understood in this
fashion becomes the name of a “metaphysical” (in a
non-traditional sense) world-view that is opposed to what especially
Fichte and Schelling liked to call “dogmatism” and is
rooted in assumptions about dynamic processes that are operative in
the course of self- and object-constitution. There is thus a
fundamental difference between the idealism of German idealism and the
immaterialism of Berkeley: where Berkeley’s idealism focused on
ideas as the “stuff” of existence and assumed minds,
whether human or divine, as their repository, the German idealists
focused on the mind as active and largely tried to suppress the
traditional ontology of substances and their accidents within which
Berkeley still worked, which Hume questioned but for which he supplied
no alternative, and which Kant again defended by conceiving of
substance and accident as relational categories.

Although the overcoming of the distinction between ontological and
epistemological idealism by means of relying on self-relating
activities might be seen as a common goal of all the major German
idealistic thinkers, they pursued this project in very different
directions. The first post-Kantian philosopher who embarked explicitly
on the project to elaborate a dynamic idealistic conception of reality
built on a specific conception of self-consciousness was Johann
Gottlieb Fichte (1762–1814) while he was a professor at the
university of Saxe-Weimar in Jena from 1794 to 1799. In his
Doctrine of Science (1794/95) and in the First and
Second Introduction into the Doctrine of Science (1797) he
famously set out to demonstrate that the primordial act of
self-positing lies at the basis of all reality. His starting point is
an epistemological question: how does it come that we cannot help but
experience objective reality the way we do, i.e., in terms of
spatio-temporal objects standing in determinate relations? Where do
these representations of objects, of relations and especially the
belief that they exist come from? In order to answer these questions
we must, according to Fichte, accept three fundamental principles
(Grundsätze) without which we could not even make sense
of the idea that there is something real at all. The first states that
self-consciousness or the I is a spontaneous (unconditioned) act that
in taking place creates or posits the I as having existence or being
(ein Akt, der im Vollzug sein eigenes Sein schafft). The I
understood as this self-positing act that gives rise to its own being
and reality Fichte characterizes as “deed-act”
(Tathandlung), and it is through this deed-act that what we
take to be real or having being comes to the fore. The second
principle postulates a necessary act of counter-positing
(Entgegensetzen) to the self-positing activity of the I
resulting in what Fichte calls a Non-I. This principle is meant to
establish the possibility of the reality of “otherness”,
of something which is not the I. The third principle shows how to
mediate between the self-positing and the counter-positing acts of the
I by reciprocal limitation, thereby introducing a subject-object
opposition within the I. On the basis of these three principles and by
reflecting on the purported interplay between self-positing and
counter-positing in a highly original way, Fichte arrives at a
portrait of reality in which all “ordinary” objects, like
walls, trees and people, and their “normal” interactions
and dependencies, like causal, spatio-temporal, and physical force
relations, find a place. This portrait is claimed to be idealistic
because it is the outcome of an insight into the dynamics of these
fundamental and opposed positing acts and because in the end these
activities, according to Fichte, are, metaphysically speaking, all
there is: “for the philosopher there is acting, and nothing but
acting; because, as a philosopher, he thinks idealistically”
(Second Introduction, section 7; Werke I, 498).
Idealism thus starts to become what could be called from a
traditional point of view a “hybrid” position that
intimately connects epistemological and ontological elements in that
it “explains … the determinations of
consciousness”. i.e., our common sense conception of reality,
“out of the acting of the intellect
[Intelligenz]” without thinking of the intellect as
some sort of existing subject: 


For idealism the intellect is an acting and absolutely nothing else;
one should not even call it something active because by this
expression one points to something substantial which is the subject of
this activity. (First Introduction, section 7, Werke
I, 440) 


A consequence that Fichte explicitly draws from this understanding of
idealism is that one can no longer think of realism as a position that
is opposed to idealism. Rather 


realism, … i.e., the assumption that objects totally
independently of us exist outside of us, is contained in idealism
itself and becomes explained and deduced in it. (Second
Introduction, footnote at end of section 1, Werke I,
455) 


Because in Fichte’s metaphysical world everything is based on
the I as a pure activity, it is not that surprising that his idealism
very often was called “subjective idealism”, even though
he would resist any identification with Berkeley’s
substance-accident form of immaterialism. He avoids that conception by
introducing what could be called an ontology of pure action.

Fichte’s dynamic conception of idealism was adopted almost
immediately by Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775–1854),
who in the first period of his philosophical career became next to
Fichte the most outspoken defender of this hybrid variety of idealism.
In doing so he transformed Fichte’s I-centered approach to
reality into an idealistic version of a monistic ontology. In this he
was followed by Hegel. Whereas Fichte had mainly struggled to find an
adequate expression for his activity-based conception of a
self-positing I and had referred to anything outside the I only as the
non-I posited by the I itself, in his early writings on the philosophy
of nature Schelling tries to supplement Fichte’s approach by
giving a much fuller account of nature, understood as everything that
appears to be independent of us, in terms of the I-constituting
activities. Because of Schelling’s elevation of nature to a
central topic in his presentation of an idealistic worldview his
position became characterized, although somewhat misleadingly, as
“objective idealism”. On his account, we have to think of
reality as an original unity (ursprüngliche Einheit) or
a primordial totality (uranfängliche Ganzheit) of
opposites that is internally differentiated such that every particular
item within reality can be seen as a partial, incomplete, or one-sided
expression, manifestation, or interpretation of the most basic dynamic
opposition characteristic of the whole of reality. This view of
reality, which in early Schelling is quite explicitly linked to
Spinoza’s one-substance ontology, obviously does not lead
directly to any idealism whatsoever: one could just as well give it a
naturalistic reading. In order to connect a monistic ontology to
idealism, one has to somehow identify the activities at work in the
constitution of the world-whole with mental or spiritual elements that
are supposed to give conceptual structure to reality. This can be and
was done by Schelling at different stages of his philosophical career
in different ways. In the first edition (1797) of his book Ideas
for a Philosophy of Nature (Ideen zu einer Philosophie der
Natur), he set out to prove idealism by trying to show that
“the system of Nature is at the same time the system of our
mind” (IP 30, SW 1, 134). This claim is not
meant to state a reciprocal relation of dependence between nature and
mind and their characteristic features, i.e., according to Schelling,
matter and concept, thereby presupposing that nature and mind, matter
and concept nevertheless have some reality independently of each
other. He rather wants us to think of nature and mind, matter and
concept as being identical in the sense of being the same: the one is
the other and vice versa. The reason why we as finite minds have to
differentiate between them at all lies in a double perspective which
is forced on us by our natural predisposition to distinguish the
“outside us” from the “in us” (cf. IP
39; SW 1, 138) when looking at reality—thus Schelling
sees dualism as a psychological tendency but not a philosophical
option. If this disposition and its conditions were understood in the
right way, we would comprehend that, as he famously writes,
“Nature should be made Mind visible, Mind the invisible
Nature” (IP 42; SW 1, 151) thereby making room
for an idealistic conception of reality as World-Soul
(World-Soul is also the title of a 1798 publication by
Schelling).

As a systematic counterpart to the construction of the phenomena of
nature out of different dynamic factors (forces, activities), in 1800
Schelling presented his System of Transcendental Idealism.
Here he set out to demonstrate the development of mental phenomena out
of these factors which he here calls the unconscious and the conscious
activity starting with sensation (Empfindung) and intuition
(Anschauung) until he arrives via acts of willing at the
aesthetic activity manifested in works of art. He thinks of these
transcendental idealistic demonstrations as a necessary complement to
his philosophy of nature (cf. SW III, 331 f.) and describes
their mutual relation thus: 


As the philosophy of nature brings idealism forth out of realism, in
that it spiritualizes the laws of nature into laws of intelligence, or
adds the formal to the material, so does transcendental philosophy
bring realism out of idealism, by materializing the laws of
intelligence into laws of nature, or adds the material to the
form. (SW III, 352) 


On this conception both together, philosophy of nature and
transcendental idealism, exhaust the entire scope of philosophy, which
reveals itself in the end to be nothing but a “progressive
history of self-consciousness” (fortgehende Geschichte des
Selbstbewusstseins) (SW III 331).

This early approach to establishing an idealistic monism and thereby
vindicating a Fichte-inspired dynamic version of ontological idealism
was in turn given up by Schelling a couple of years later in the
second edition of the Ideas and criticized by him as
providing a basis only for what he now calls “relative
idealism” (IP 52; SW 1, 163). It is replaced
by what he now names “absolute idealism” (IP 50;
SW 1, 162). Both his criticism of his earlier World-Soul
conception and his endorsement of absolute idealism are at least to a
certain degree due to Hegel’s discussion of Schelling’s
philosophy in his Difference between Fichte’s and
Schelling’s System of Philosophy (1801). Schelling’s
new conception, which underlies what came to be known as his
“System of Identity” (Identitätssystem),
takes reality to be a dynamic whole which he describes as the
“undivorced” (ungeschieden) or undifferentiated
unity of the absolute-ideal or subjectivity and the absolute-real or
objectivity in an “eternal act of cognition” (IP
47; SW 1, 157). This eternal act is all there is, it is
“the absolute”. It is disclosed in two fundamentally
different forms, one of which is characterized by the prevalence of
subjectivity whereas in the other form objectivity prevails. These two
forms give rise to the distinction between an “ideal
world” and “Nature” (IP 49; SW 1,
161). However, according to Schelling these forms have to be
distinguished from the “eternal cognitive act” or the
absolute from which the ideal world and Nature originate. This act is
pure activity of knowing that creates its objects in the very act of
cognition by giving them a form. Because reality is conceived thus as
a dynamic self-organizing cognitive process that lies at the basis of
even the most fundamental opposition between subject and object,
Schelling thinks of his ontological monism as a version of idealism.
He writes: 


If we therefore define philosophy as a whole according to that wherein
it surveys and presents everything, namely the absolute act of
cognition, of which even Nature is again only one side, the Idea of
all ideas, then it is Idealism. Idealism is and remains, therefore,
the whole of philosophy, and only under itself does the latter again
comprehend idealism and realism, save that the first absolute Idealism
is not to be confused with this other, which is of a merely relative
kind. (IP 50; SW 1, 162) 


In the end, then, after 1800 Schelling (arguably as well as Fichte in
his post-Jena period) seems pushed toward a “non-dogmatic”
idealism that combines ontological as well as epistemological idealism
within a monistic framework.

Although Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831) too embraces
a dynamical conception of reality in the spirit of Fichte and
Schelling, he deviates from both of them by not relying on mental
activities of some subject or other or on some primordial subjectless
cognitive act as the most basic features of reality. Given his deep
distrust of irreconcilable dichotomies, of anything unmediated and
one-sided, one cannot expect Hegel to be an advocate of an idea of
idealism that is conceived of in terms of an alternative to or an
opposition against realism or materialism or whatever else. He thus
shares with Fichte and Schelling the hostility against any attempts to
privilege idealism over and against realism (or something else) or the
other way round, but avoids the suspicion of a reversion to
ontological idealism in a monistic guise better than either of his
predecessors. In the case of Hegel, this hostility towards privileging
ontological idealism shows especially well in his criticism of
reductive programs as well as of “bifurcating”
(entzweiend) or separating positions in metaphysics and
epistemology. A reductive program according to which either everything
physical/material is reducible to something mental and thus confirms
idealism or everything mental can be reduced to something
physical/material and thus gives rise to realism or materialism is in
his eyes “ridiculous” (cf. GW 6, 290 ff). A
bifurcating or separating position results from a project that is
based on the claim that one has to distinguish between a world
“for us” and a world “in itself”, where the
former is a subject-dependent and in this sense idealistic world while
the latter is the “real” world although it is essentially
totally inaccessible by any subjective cognitive means. It is because
of its one-sidedness and its putting “the real” outside of
our grasp that such a “subjective” idealism is for Hegel
unacceptable (see his criticism of Kant in Faith and
Knowledge, GW 4, 325 ff.). His objections to and his
contempt for both idealism and realism in their mutually exclusive
forms are well documented in almost all of his writings throughout his
philosophical career.

Thus, when Hegel in the second edition of his Science of
Logic (1831) nevertheless claims that in the end “[e]very
philosophy is essentially idealism or at least has it as its
principle” (GW 21, 142), he must mean by idealism
something other than ontological idealism and certainly something
other than Kant’s indeterminate ontological realism. Rather, he
must mean by idealism a philosophical outlook that is immune against
the charge of grounding a philosophical system in a conception of
reality that is committed to the acceptance of any irreconcilable
oppositions. Now, for Hegel the most fundamental opposition both from
a systematic and a historical perspective is the opposition between
thinking and being. Looked at from a systematic perspective, this
opposition is fundamental because of its apparent unavoidability,
already at a descriptive level, when it comes to an assessment of the
ultimate characteristics of reality: after all, we want to be able to
hold fast to the distinction between what is only (in) our
(subjective) thought and what is (objectively) the case. Considered
from a historical point of view it shows that—at least within
the tradition of occidental philosophy—the opposition between
thinking and being lies at the bottom of the most influential attempts
(with very few exceptions like Parmenides and possibly Spinoza) to
give a philosophical account of the essence of reality and its
multifarious ways of appearing to us. The traditional conviction of
the fundamental and irreconcilable opposition between thinking and
being finds expression in many different ways. These ways include the
belief that there is being that is totally independent of or without
any relation to thinking, or the conviction that thinking is somehow
external to being in that being is just the self-standing provider of
material on which a by itself contentless (inhaltslos)
thinking imposes a certain conceptual form, or the assumption that
even if there were no thinking there would be being and vice versa.
However, according to Hegel it can be demonstrated that to think of
thinking and being as fundamentally opposed in any of these ways leads
to inconsistencies resulting in contradictions, antinomies and other
bewildering deficiencies. Hence an idealistic philosophical system
that is to overcome these deficiencies has to get rid of the
underlying fundamental opposition and to show that thinking and being
are not opposed but ultimately the same. This claim as to the sameness
or the identity of thinking and being is the cornerstone of
Hegel’s metaphysical credo and together with some other
assumptions leads relatively smoothly to a version of ontological
monism as the only convincing shape of an idealistic system. Thus,
while accepting monism and rejecting Kantian dualism, Hegel refuses to
accept an absolute distinction between mind and non-mind and thus
refuses to make his monism mentalistic in the way that he believes
both Fichte and Schelling ultimately did, even if their mentalistic
conceptions were activity- rather than substance-based.

It is important to notice however, that an ontological monism
conceived along these lines is not meant to translate directly into
the claim according to which reality because of its
opposition-transcending nature is characterized by oneness,
individuality or singularity. Rather, Hegel’s ontological monism
and thus his idealism is meant to be a claim as to the constitution of
what is real in reality, a claim about what constitutes the essence
(the “truth”) of real objects. According to him, it makes
no sense to divorce thinking from being in our conception of objects
because every object is best understood as an original unity of both
thought-determinations and specific ways of being. His monism thus is
not founded primarily in a conviction as to the ultimate constitution
of reality conceived of as an all-encompassing totality or as a
quasi-Spinozistic substance (although in the end he will extend his
monism to apply even to traditional totalities), but relates first of
all to his belief in the ontological inseparability of thinking and
being in an individual object. For Hegel to grasp the idea of objects
as “thought-things” (Gedankensachen) or
“thing-thoughts”’ (Sachgedanken)—he
sometimes uses the expression “objective thoughts” (e.g.,
Encyclopedia, § 24; GW 20, 67)—is a
necessary condition for being able to give a systematic account of the
constitution and the organization of all the different types of
objects together with their relational characteristics both concerning
their internal states and their external connections.

In later years, Hegel seems to have been well aware that it might be a
bit confusing to call a position which refuses to draw a sharp
distinction between thinking and being an idealistic position. After
all, the connotations of the term “idealism” in the era of
Kant and the earlier post-Kantians could have led to the expectation
that in favoring or in devising an idealistic approach to what objects
and reality have to be one has to agree that there is a certain
priority to thinking in the constitution of objects and their
collective behavior. Thus it is not really surprising that, late in
life, Hegel shows some sympathy with calling a position like his own
an “Ideal-realism” (Idealrealismus), emphasizing
thereby the ontological inseparability between thinking and being.
This sympathy is documented in one of his last reviews for his
Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik, i.e., his
review of A. L. J. Ohlert: Der Idealrealismus. Erster Theil. Der
Idealrealismus als Metaphysik. In die Stelle des Idealismus und
Realismus gesetzt (GW 16, 287 ff.).

Hegel’s basic claim as to the identity of thinking and being
in the object might be said to have some initial plausibility
if one takes such a claim to be a somewhat metaphorical expression of
the view that in our ways of thinking about objects some conceptual
elements are invariably involved. Understood along these lines,
Hegel’s claim could be considered, as it often is, as nothing
but a peculiar version of Kant’s epistemological idealism. Such
an interpretation might even be suggested by the impression that Hegel
as well as Kant takes thinking to be an activity that is characterized
by operating on and with concepts and that what Hegel calls
“being” can easily be identified with what within
Kant’s epistemological framework is called
“reality”, that is, the empirical reality of intuited
objects rather than their transcendent grounds. Although this
impression is by no means entirely groundless, it is still misleading
because it does not do justice to the ontological connotations that
Hegel wants to connect with this claim. For Hegel it is indeed
essential to convince us that it is a demonstrable fact that objects
in the world are realized concepts. Obviously this view as to
what objects really are—if it is not meant to be just another
variation of either a dogmatic idealist claim in the spirit of
Berkeley or a subjective (epistemological) idealism à la
Kant—has to use the terms “concept” and
“real” in a way that is different from their traditional
or normal use in the history of modern philosophy since Descartes. And
so it is. For Hegel a concept is not a general representation in the
mind of a subject nor is the term “real” meant to be
restricted to hinting at the presence of some type of matter either
physical or mental. Rather, Hegel thinks of concepts as providing what
could be called “structure plans” for objects, and he
takes the term “real” to designate the successful
realization of a structure plan or a concept; thus Hegel attempts to
use these terms in a teleological sense without any mentalistic (i.e.,
psychological or representationalistic) ontological commitments.
Although these somewhat unconventional connotations of Hegel’s
concepts of “concept” and “real” (which have a
certain basis in a peculiar German use of these terms) might be
confusing, they are—at least in his eyes—by no means
without descriptive value. Thus, to use examples that Hegel mentions
in the Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit, it
makes perfectly good sense to describe a fully grown oak-tree as the
realization of what is contained as genetic structure in the acorn out
of which the tree has developed or to think of a political state as a
realization of what belongs to the concept of a state making the state
a realized concept or an “objective thought”. However,
although these examples can throw some light on why Hegel might think
of his approach as leading to an ideal-realistic conception of
reality, the idealistic aspect of his view strictly speaking has to do
with his theory as to what these concepts of which every object is a
realization are supposed to be. These concepts have to be taken as
themselves being determinate manifestations of different
determinations of what Hegel calls “the Concept”. Here the
Concept is conceived of as providing something like the master plan or
the universal structure that governs not only the conceptual structure
of individual kinds of objects but the structure of individual objects
as well. This universal structure comes about by means of a process of
conceptual self-determination that results in a complete exposition of
the conceptual elements contained in the Concept. This process of
self-determination is understood by Hegel as the way in which the
Concept realizes itself. After all, the Concept, being a
thought-object or an object-thought itself, must also have reality or
being and thus has to realize itself.

Although Hegel definitely wants to overcome what he takes to be
shortcomings both of Kant’s philosophy and of the positions of
his post-Kantian contemporaries Fichte and Schelling, at the same time
he does not want to give up on the post-Kantian project of
transforming Kant’s subjective epistemological idealism into a
robust new idealism based on dynamic principles of world-constitution.
He differs from Fichte and Schelling in that he does not ground these
principles either in some activity of a subject (Fichte) or in a
cognitively inaccessible primordial unity (Schelling) but in the idea
of a thoroughly conceptual organization of reality giving rise to what
he calls in the introduction to the second edition of the Science
of Logic an “intellectual view of the universe”
(Intellektualansicht des Universums) (GW 21, 34). In
this way, Hegel does try to reconcile the need for conceptual elements
constitutive of traditional epistemological idealism with (most of)
the categorical commitments characteristic of traditional ontological
idealism yet in a way that no longer requires the opposition between
epistemology and ontology.
6. Schopenhauer

Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860) heaped a great deal of invective
on Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. And indeed, nothing could be further
from Hegel’s version of absolute idealism than
Schopenhauer’s theory on which behind the realm of appearances
constructed in accordance with our own conceptions of space, time, and
causality—his form of epistemological idealism—there is a
unitary reality that is utterly irrational or at least
arational—his form of ontological realism. Schopenhauer puts
forward his theory in his main work The World as Will and
Representation (Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung),
first published in December, 1818 (with an 1819 date on its title
page), and then in a much-expanded second edition in 1844 and yet
another expanded edition in 1857. This book had been preceded by a
doctoral dissertation On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of
Sufficient Reason (1813), which Schopenhauer subsequently
regarded as the introduction to his magnum opus. The earlier work
includes Schopenhauer’s main modifications to the structure of
Kant’s epistemology, while the later work accepts Kant’s
idealist interpretation of this epistemology (Book I) and then
replaces Kant’s version of the doctrine of things in themselves
with Schopenhauer’s own version of the unitary non-rational will
underlying all appearance (Book II). 

Schopenhauer’s acceptance of Kant’s epistemological
idealism combined with his non-rational ontological realism is,
however, on display throughout The World as Will and
Representation. Schopenhauer accepts without reservation
Kant’s argument that space, time, and causality are forms of our
own representation that we know a priori and impose upon the
appearances of objects. He does precede this acceptance with a
Fichtean argument that “The world is my representation”,
where the sheer “mineness” of representation is supposed
to be a “form…more universal than any other form”,
including space, time, and causality (WWR, §1, p. 23).
Schopenhauer holds that 


no truth is more certain, no truth is more independent of all others
and no truth is less in need of proof than this one: that everything
there is for cognition (i.e., the whole world) is only an object in
relation to a subject, an intuition of a beholder. (WWR,
§1, pp. 23–4) 


This simple and perhaps inescapable thought may be regarded as the
most fundamental motivation for any form of epistemological idealism.
On the basis of this proposition, Schopenhauer then tries to
distinguish his position from what he takes to be the skepticism of
Hume, that there is a real question about whether there is either a
subject or an object in addition to representations, and from the
dogmatism of Fichte, that both of these can be proved; his own view as
initially stated is rather that 


the object as such always presupposes the subject as its necessary
correlate: so the subject always remains outside the jurisdiction of
the principle of sufficient reason. (WWR, §5, p. 35)



But, speaking of dogmatism, he simply accepts from Kant that 


space and time can not only be conceived abstractly, on their own and
independently of their content, but they can also be intuited
immediately, 


and that 


This intuition is not some phantasm derived from repeated experience;
rather, it is something independent of experience, and to such an
extent that experience must in fact be conceived as dependent on it,
since the properties of time and space, as they are known a
priori in intuition, apply to all experience as laws that it must
always come out in accordance with. (WWR, §3, p. 27)



By this remark, Schopenhauer indicates his recognition that Kant
derives his epistemological idealism from his understanding of the
implications of our a priori cognition of space and time, but
he does not attempt to explain Kant’s inference or to add any
argument of his own. Schopenhauer also does not doubt that there is
something other than the representing subject beyond what it
represents, an underlying reality beginning with its own body as it is
rather than as it merely appears.

Schopenhauer’s fundamental departure from Kant is already
suggested in this passage: 


We have immediate cognition of the thing in itself when it appears to
us as our own body; but our cognition is only indirect when the thing
in itself is objectified in other objects of intuition. (WWR,
§6, pp. 40–1) 


What Schopenhauer means is that although we have an experience of our
own bodies, as it were from the outside, through the same forms of
space, time, and causality through which we experience all other
bodies, including other animate bodies, and in this regard we
experience all bodies including our own as mere appearance through the
forms we impose on experience, we also have another experience, each
of us of his or her own body, as it were from the inside, namely we
have an experience of willing an action and of our bodies as the
instruments of our wills, with no separation between will and action
and thus no relevance of spatial separation, temporal succession, or
difference between cause and effect. However—and this is the
argument of Book II—our immediate experience of our own bodies
as instruments of our wills is an experience of our actions being
immediately determined by desire rather than by reason. “To the
pure subject of cognition as such, [his] body is a representation like
any other among objects”, but 


will…and this alone gives him the key to his own
appearance, reveals to him the meaning and shows him the inner
workings of his essence, his deeds, his movements; (WWR,
§18, p. 124) 


and what we discover when we look closely at our wills is that they
are governed not by reason but by impulse, at its most fundamental
level a “dark, dull driving” (WWR, §27, p.
174), and even at its highest, most clarified level, still desires or
apparently “creative drives” that only “seem to
perform their tasks from abstract, rational motives”
(WWR, §27, p. 182). It is not our planning and
calculating drives that best express the real nature of the will but
our genitals (WWR, §20, p. 133). Of course, it is well
known that following the lead of one’s genitals is a pretty good
formula for disappointment, and for Schopenhauer this reveals the
frustration to which a will driven by desire ultimately leads: either
one does not get what one wants, the object of one’s desire, and
is frustrated, or one does, but then one wants more, and either does
not get that, so is frustrated, or does, but then wants more, and so
on ad infinitum. Trying to truly satisfy desire is the height
of irrationality, but for Schopenhauer there is nothing else we can
will—we can at best try to escape from the clutches of will
altogether, whether through art, asceticism, or compassion.

But of course, if the underlying nature of reality, the thing in
itself, is nothing other than will, than escape from its clutches
should not really be possible but should at most be apparent. And not
only does Schopenhauer equate our experience of ourselves “from
the inside” as desire-driven will with our own ultimate reality,
our character as things in themselves; he also argues that we have no
choice but to think of the underlying reality of all
appearance in this way, because this is our only form of insight
into—or acquaintance with—anything as a thing in itself.
We can only “take the key to the understanding of the essence in
itself of things” to be the 


key provided…by the immediate cognition of our own essence, and
apply it to [the] appearances in the inorganic [and organic] world as
well, 


even appearances that are more remote from us than any others.
Ultimate reality, because, Schopenhauer assumes, 


it is everywhere one and the same,…must be called will
here as well as there, a name signifying the being in itself of every
thing in the world and the sole kernel of every appearance.
(WWR, §23, pp. 142–3) 


Schopenhauer devotes many pages to empirical descriptions of the
similarities between the forces at work throughout the rest of nature
and the merely apparently rational but really non-rational character
of our own behavior, but of course the character of things in
themselves cannot be inferred directly from any amount of empirical
data; Schopenhauer derives his conclusion not from all this empirical
illustration but rather from our allegedly immediate rather than
empirical insight into the character of our own wills and the very
problematic premise that at bottom everything is essentially one.
7. Nietzsche

It may seem far-fetched to think of Friedrich Nietzsche
(1844–1900) as an idealist. After all, he presented himself as
an almost fanatical anti-idealist throughout his life. In many of his
published and unpublished writings as well as in his letters he
expresses over and again his dislike and his disdain for what he calls
“idealism”. A telling summary of his position concerning
idealism is to be found in his letter to Malvida von Meysenburg
(October 20, 1888): 


and I treat idealism as untruthfulness that has become an instinct, a
not-wanting-to-see reality at any price: every sentence of my writings
contains contempt for idealism. 


This harsh assessment is by no means easy to understand given his
known sympathies with a perspectival approach to objects of cognition,
his insistence that falsification or tampering
(Verfälschung) is at the basis of most of our cognitive
judgments, and his claims as to the dependence of knowledge on needs.
Considerations like these suggest that in spite of his protests,
idealistic modes of thinking are not alien to Nietzsche. At least some
of his beliefs are compatible with what has been called here
epistemological idealism although Nietzsche himself would have taken
these beliefs to express a form of realism. However, before searching
for and elaborating on possible idealistic tendencies in his own
thoughts, we should find out what “idealism” meant for
Nietzsche and why he was so hostile to it.

Idealism, for Nietzsche, seems to be a particularly unappealing form
of metaphysics, and this means philosophy as it has been practiced
throughout history from the era of the ancient Greeks up to his own
time (because of his contempt for Kant’s postulate s of pure
practical reason, Nietzsche gave little credence to Kant’s
theoretical critique of traditional metaphysics). Philosophy in this
traditional shape he took to be a somewhat enigmatic endeavor to
pursue the mutually excluding tasks of (culture-forming) art and
religion on the one hand and of (cognition-focused) science on the
other (s. Notebook 19, [47], [62], [218]; KSA 7. 434). It is
doomed to failure because of two fundamental shortcomings. The first
is that it gives a privileged status to truth in that it declares
truth to be the ultimate goal at which it aims. This preoccupation
with truth is based on the implicit assumption that truth has some
overriding value. This assumption has never been justified, not even
addressed by any philosopher. Nietzsche writes in the Genealogy of
Morals (Section 24): 


Turn to the most ancient and most modern philosophies: all of them
lack a consciousness of the extent to which the will to truth itself
needs a justification, here is a gap in every philosophy—where
does it come from? Because the ascetic ideal has so far been
lord over all philosophy, because truth was set as being, as
god, as the highest authority itself, because truth was not
allowed to be a problem. Do you understand this
“allowed to be”?—From the very moment that faith in
the God of the ascetic ideal is denied, there is a new problem as
well: that of the value of truth.—The will to
truth needs a critique—let us hereby define our own
task—the value of truth is tentatively to be called into
question. (KSA 5. 401; Third Essay) 


However, it is not the problem of the value of truth but the second
shortcoming that, in Nietzsche’s eyes, leads directly to
metaphysics. It is the tendency of philosophers to deny the obvious,
to neglect surfaces in favor of what is allegedly behind them, out of
habitual weakness and anxiety to prefer the stable and immutable over
and against change and becoming. This critical sentiment Nietzsche
expresses quite often at different places in many of his published and
unpublished writings. A nice example is the following note: 


On the psychology of metaphysics. This world is
apparent—consequently there is a true world. This world is
conditioned—consequently there is an unconditioned world. This
world is full of contradiction—consequently there is a world
free from contradiction. This world is becoming—consequently
there is an existing [seiende] world. All false inferences
(blind trust in reason: if A is, there must be its opposing concept
B). It is suffering that inspires these inferences: at bottom there
are wishes that such a world might be; similarly hatred of a world
that causes suffering expresses itself through the imagination of
another world, one full of value: the ressentiment of the
metaphysicians against the actual world is here creative. (Notebook 8
[2]; KSA 12. 327) 


This tendency to “falsify” (verfälschen) or
to “re-evaluate/reframe” (umdeuten) reality out
of resentment is, according to Nietzsche, especially well documented
in the idealistic tradition in metaphysics, as is shown
paradigmatically in Plato’s idealism. It was Plato who invented
the idea of another world that is much more real, much more true than
the ever changing, always instable world in which we live; he invented
the fiction of the supreme reality of an imperishable and everlasting
ideal world inhabited by archetypal ideas and immutable forms, a
“world in itself” in comparison to which the
“Lebenswelt” of everyday experience is just a
pale shadow. Yet Nietzsche seems undecided how to evaluate the real
motives that led Plato to his idealism. Sometimes he wants to
distinguish Plato from other idealists by crediting him with some
obscure positive reason for endorsing idealism. In section 372 of
The Gay Science, entitled precisely “Why we are not
idealists”, he writes: 


In sum: all philosophical idealism until now was something like an
illness, except where, as in the case of Plato, it was the caution of
an overabundant and dangerous health, the fear of overpowerful senses,
the shrewdness of a shrewd Socratic. (KSA 3. 623) 


However, there are other passages where Nietzsche is not in such a
charitable mood and where he presents the ultimate reasons for
Plato’s strong leanings towards idealism as rooted in weakness
and resentment as is the case with all the other idealists in the
history of philosophy (e.g., Ecce Homo. 3. KSA 6.
311). His ultimate verdict on metaphysics in all its ancient and
modern forms is nicely expressed in the following note: 


On the psychology of metaphysics. The influence of fearfulness. What
has been most feared, the cause of the most powerful suffering (the
lust for domination, sexual lust, etc.) has been treated by humans
most hostile and eliminated from the “true” world. Thus
they have step by step wiped out the affects—claimed God to be
the opposite of the evil, i.e., reality to consist in the negation of
desires and affects (which is to say precisely in nothingness).
Likewise they hate the irrational, the arbitrary, the accidental (as
the cause of countless physical suffering). Consequently they negate
this element in that-which-is-in-itself, they conceive it as absolute
“rationality” and “purposiveness”. In the same
way they fear change, transitoriness: therein is expressed an
oppressed soul, full of mistrust and bad experience (The case of
Spinoza: an inverted sort of person would count this change as
charming). A playful being overladen with power would call precisely
the affects, unreason and change good in an eudaimonistic sense,
together with their consequences, with danger, contrast, dissolution,
etc.. (KSA 13. 536)


However, this thoroughly critical assessment of all forms of idealisms
as abominable expressions of intellectual weakness and vindictiveness
seems to be at odds with another of Nietzsche’s cherished
beliefs, according to which we have to take reality to be not only
dependent on but ultimately constituted by the respective perspectives
on or the respective ways of interpreting what we encounter. This
Nietzschean view can give rise to the impression that in the end he
might have been closer to endorsing some form of epistemological
idealism, maybe even some form of metaphysical idealism as he himself
realizes. This leads to the topics of perspectivism and interpretation
(Auslegung) in Nietzsche.

Although the details are far from clear, the general tendency of his
perspectivism is expressed quite well in aphorism 374 from The Gay
Science: 


How far the perspectival character of existence extends, indeed
whether it has any other character; whether an existence without
interpretation, without “sense”, does not become
“non-sense”; whether, on the other hand, all existence is
not essentially an interpreting existence—that cannot
be decided, as would be fair, even by the most studious and scrupulous
analysis and self- examination of the intellect; for in the course of
this analysis, the human intellect cannot avoid seeing itself under
its perspectival forms, and solely in these.…Rather,
the world has once again become infinite to us: insofar as we cannot
reject the possibility that it includes infinite
interpretations. (KSA 3. 626) 


This view, according to which, further, the world each of us is
experiencing is the product of an interpretation forced on us by some
unconscious overriding drive (Trieb) that is the formative
mark of the individual character of each of us, might be seen as
endorsing a version of epistemological idealism if, as it is here,
epistemological idealism is understood as the claim that what appears
to be known as it is independent of the mind is in the end inescapably
marked by the creative, formative, constructive activities of human
mind, whether individual or collective. However, it is far from clear
whether Nietzsche wants us to think of this process of interpretation
which leads to a specific perspective as a mind-dependent activity.
Sometimes it seems as if he is favoring a quasi-Humean view according
to which the intellect operates in the service of some anonymous
affective and emotional drives in such a way that it just provides a
set of necessary means to consciously realize what drives force us to
do. The following note, for example, points in this direction: 


Against positivism, which would stand by the position “There are
only facts”, I would say: no, there are precisely no facts, only
interpretations. We can establish no fact “in itself”: it
is perhaps nonsense to want such a thing. You say “Everything is
subjective”: but that is already an interpretation, the
“subject” is not anything given, but something invented
and added, something stuck behind…To the extent that the word
“knowledge” [Erkenntnis] has any sense, the world
is knowable: but it is interpretable differently, it has no sense
behind it, but innumerable senses, “perspectivism”. It is
our needs that interpret the world: our drives and their to and fro.
Every drive is a kind of domination, every one has its perspective,
which it would force on all other drives as a norm. (Notebook 7 [60].
KSA 12. 315) 


In other passages Nietzsche seems to be more in line with a by and
large Kantian view according to which the intellect provides some
rules of transformation of what is given by the senses as individual
and discrete data into more general representations. Thus we find him
claiming in section 354 of The Gay Science: 


This is what I understand to be true phenomenalism and
perspectivism: that due to the nature of animal
consciousness, the world of which we can become conscious is
merely a surface- and sign-world, a world turned into generalities and
thereby debased to its lowest common denominator,—that
everything that enters consciousness thereby becomes superficial,
thin, relatively stupid, general, a sign, a mark of the herd, that all
becoming-conscious involves a vast and fundamental corruption,
falsification, superficialization, and generalization. (KSA
3. 593) 


Be this as it may, at least as far as epistemological idealism is
concerned it is by no means obvious that either his explicit criticism
of idealism or his remarks on the ways we make up epistemic worlds
prevent Nietzsche from coming close to an idealist position himself.
This is so because in epistemology his main enemy does not seem to be
idealism but all forms of realism.

Although his proximity to epistemological idealism does not directly
imply any ontological claims, one could be tempted to see Nietzsche as
toying with some ontologically idealistic fantasies. His speculations
concerning the will to power as the ultimate dynamic foundation of all
reality fall into this category. For example, 


Perspectivism is only a complex form of specificity[.] My idea is,
that every specific body strives to become lord over all of space and
to expand its force (—its will to power) and to repel everything
that resists its own expansion. But it perpetually collides with the
equal efforts of other bodies, and ends by making an arrangement
(“unifying”) with those that are closely enough related to
it:—thus they conspire together to power. And the process goes
on…. (Notebook 14 [186]. KSA 13. 373 f.) 


This idea of conspiring forces as the supreme world-constituting
entities can look like an allusion to Kant’s physics of
attraction and repulsion, but also to a version of ontological
idealism like those of Fichte and Schelling because it too invites us
to conceive of dynamic processes as ontologically prior to (physical
or mental) objects and events. Thus, in the end there are no real
obstacles to thinking of Nietzsche as an ontological as well as
epistemological idealist, although the speculations that lead him in
the former direction may be separable from the latter.
8. British and American Idealism

Interest in ontological idealism waned in Germany in the second half
of the nineteenth century and the first decades of the twentieth,
although it remained lively in other parts of Europe (for example, in
Italy, in the person of Benedetto Croce). This had to do on the one
hand with a certain aversion against what was taken to be an excessive
and extravagant usurpation of all fields of intellectual discourse by
the classical German philosophers under the pretext of idealism and on
the other hand with the rise of Neo-Kantianism which also at least
partly came into being as a reaction against the German idealists,
although insofar as Neo-Kantianism was a reaction to absolute idealism
it could not entirely reject epistemological idealism. Things were
different in the English-speaking world, where idealism became an
important topic in a wide spectrum of philosophical discussions
ranging from metaphysics via aesthetics to moral and social theories.
In philosophical Britain, that is to say, England and Scotland, an
idealism that was ultimately both epistemological and ontological
became the dominant approach to philosophy for several decades, while
in the United States idealism could not monopolize philosophy, having
to share the stage with and ultimately reach an accommodation with
pragmatism, but it nevertheless also flourished for several decades.
The best known and most outspoken spokesmen in favor of idealistic
conceptions in metaphysics and elsewhere in Britain in these years
were T.H. Green and F. H. Bradley at Oxford and J. McT. E. McTaggart
at Cambridge, while in the United States the most prominent idealist
was Josiah Royce at Harvard (where idealism’s having to share
the stage with pragmatism was personified in Royce’s friendly
rivalry with William James). Although all of these figures are
frequently characterized as being indebted to Hegel’s writings
and advocating a Hegelian view of reality, their various positions are
at best in a somewhat indirect, almost only metaphorical, sense
informed by Hegel’s philosophy. In fact, these philosophers were
more willing to call themselves idealists than had been the earlier
German idealists who supposedly inspired them, but who as has been
argued were just as interested in escaping as in accepting the label.
This is shown most tellingly insofar as their approach to a defense of
idealism goes back to a state of the discussion characteristic of the
period prior to Hegel and German idealism in general, rather
connecting more directly to an understanding of idealism influenced by
eighteenth-century disputes in the wake of Berkeley. None of these
figures except perhaps Royce continued to explore a dynamic conception
of idealism distinctive of Hegel and the other German
idealists—Royce in fact wrote more extensively and insightfully
on Hegel and his immediate predecessors than any of the others. In
general, the late nineteenth-century idealists were more inclined to
think of idealism or, maybe more accurately, spiritualism again as a
genuine alternative to materialism and embark again on the controversy
whether matter or mind/spirit is the ultimate “stuff” of
reality. These philosophers were thus more willing to identify
themselves as ontological idealists than had been their predecessors;
our opening definition of ontological idealism from Royce may be seen
as coming from this background. However, these philosophers were not
all equally monists. Both Bradley and McTaggart, for whom a defense of
idealism consists mainly in establishing the ontological point that
reality is exclusively spirit, were, and thus their idealism could
also be called “spiritual monism”. But both Green at the
beginning of the movement and Royce towards its end strove for more
nuanced positions, not excluding the existence of matter from their
idealisms, and thus resisted monism. But all their efforts to
establish a convincing form of idealism, whether in the form of
spiritualism or in a form that allowed some role for matter as well,
became rapidly unfashionable even during the lifetimes of all these
philosophers (except for Green, who died young) due to what was called
“the revolt against idealism” staged at the turn of the
twentieth century in Britain by Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore and a
decade later in the United States by a group of “New
Realists”. However, as we will suggest in our concluding
comments at least Russell was himself pushed back in the direction of
some form of idealism, perhaps only epistemological idealism, by the
time his own thought reached the stage of his “logical
atomism”. It might even be suggested that Ludwig
Wittgenstein’s own movement from the early logical realism of
his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus to the meaning-as-use
theory of the Philosophical Investigations is itself a
movement towards a form of epistemological idealism. And it might
further be suggested that a wide variety of other paradigmatic
analytic philosophers, such as Rudolf Carnap and even nominalists such
as Nelson Goodman and W.V. Quine, incorporated some aspects of
epistemological idealism into their thought. Although the
name “idealism” became anathema after the revolt
of Russell, Moore, and the New Realists, the substance of at least
epistemological idealism may have lived on.

Thomas Hill Green (1836–82) was the first of the great Oxford
idealists. He is best remembered for a lengthy polemic with Hume that
he published in the form of an introduction to a collected edition of
Hume that he co-edited and for his posthumously published
Prolegomena to Ethics, which is a polemic against
utilitarianism from the point of view of a perfectionism inspired by
Kant as well as by Hegel. But the first of the four books of the
Prolegomena is a “Metaphysics of Knowledge”,
beginning with a statement of “The Spiritual Principle in
Knowledge and in Nature”, which argues for a form of idealism
both epistemological and ontological, and Green’s posthumous
works also included a set of lectures on Kant in which he engaged
quite directly with Kant’s form of idealism. Green also left
behind a set of Lectures on the Principles of Political
Obligation that form one of the crucial documents of the
political and social philosophy of British idealism and of idealism in
the broadest sense mentioned at the outset of this entry.

Green’s motivation in arguing for idealism in the
Prolegomena is to prepare the way for a conception of the
will as free and creative as the foundation of his ethics.
Green’s idealism is expounded in three main steps. First, and
here much influenced by Kant, he argues that knowledge never consists
in the mere apprehension of discrete items, but in the recognition of
order or relation, and that such order or relation is not given but is
constituted by and in consciousness. Thus, 


The terms “real” and “objective”…have
no meaning except for a consciousness which presents its experiences
to itself as determined by relations, and at the same time conceives a
single and unalterable order of relations determining them, with which
its temporary presentation, as each experience occurs, of the
relations determining it may be contrasted. (Prolegomena, p.
17) 


From this he infers that 


experience, in the sense of a consciousness of events as a related
series—and in no other sense can it help to account for the
knowledge of an order of nature—cannot be explained by any
natural history, properly so called, (p. 22) 


but must instead be constituted by mind itself, or, 


the understanding which presents an order of nature to us is in
principle one with an understanding which constitutes that order
itself. (p. 24) 


Thus far, Green’s position could be considered epistemological
idealism. However, he quickly moves beyond merely epistemological
idealism, because his next move is to argue that since the order of
which any individual human being is in various ways and to various
degrees aware obviously extends beyond what could plausibly be thought
to be constituted just by that individual, the order of which we are
each aware must be constituted by a mind or intelligence greater than
that of any of us, thus there must be “an eternal intelligence
realized in the related facts of the world”, and the world must
be “a system of related facts rendered possible by such an
intelligence”, which intelligence “partially and gradually
reproduces itself in us, communicating piece-meal but in inseparable
correlation” aspects of that order to each of us if not complete
knowledge of it to any of us (p. 41). Green’s insistence on a
supra-individual intelligence as the source of cosmic order in which
individual intelligences in some way participate is a decided move
beyond merely epistemological idealism, and in his own view it is also
a significant departure from Kant, whose agnosticism about the real
nature of things in themselves, at least in the theoretical mood,
“would at once withhold us” from such an inference to the
“spirituality of the real world” (43). However, and here
is the third main thesis of Green’s form of idealism, the
participation of individual human beings in the supra-individual
intelligence which constitutes the comprehensive system of relations
can be seen as an apprehension of some portion of that order by
animal organisms: 


in the growth of our experience, in the process of our learning to
know the world, an animal organism, which has its history in time,
gradually becomes the vehicle of an eternally complete consciousness;
(p. 77) 


it is the eternal consciousness, 


as so far realized in or communicated to us through modification of
the animal organism, that constitutes our knowledge, with the
relations, characteristic of knowledge, into which time does not
enter, which are not in becoming but are once for all what they are.
(p. 78) 


Green’s form of spiritualism is thus not incompatible with
ontological dualism: the object of all knowledge is the complete and
eternal order of things, which must be constituted by an intelligence
greater than that of any individual human being, but individual human
beings are in fact organisms, thus matter, to which some aspect of
that intelligence is communicated. Green’s epistemological
idealism is complete, because knowledge on the part of an individual
is understood as consisting in a grasp of an order that is itself
mental, but his ontological idealism is not exclusive, that is, it
includes the necessary existence of a supra-individual intelligence or
spirit but allows the existence of animal organisms (and thus
presumably of other forms of matter as well). 

Francis Herbert Bradley (1846–1924), however, argued for a more
exclusive spiritualism, or ontological idealism. Bradley presents his
metaphysical views on the constitution and the main characteristics of
reality most explicitly in Appearance and Reality: A Metaphysical
Essay, which was first published in 1893 and reprinted many times
during his lifetime. He famously proceeds from the claim that the
traditional and received “ideas by which we try to understand
the universe” are contradictory (11). He substantiates this
claim by examining a range of central concepts from metaphysics and
epistemology, among them the concepts of primary and secondary
qualities, of substance and attribute, of quality and relation, space
and time, of causality as well as the concept of a thing and that of
the self. The result of this examination consists in the verdict that
all attempts to capture the true nature of reality in terms of these
categories are futile because all these concepts are unintelligible,
inconsistent and in the end self-contradictory. This means that what
is designated by means of them cannot be real, but can only reflect
the way the world appears to us, not the way it really is. This
diagnosis is based on Bradley’s fundamental conviction that
“ultimate reality is such that it does not contradict
itself” (136). He takes this to be “an absolute
criterion” (ibid.). However, to be just appearance is not to be
unreal in the sense of an illusion. On the contrary, although
appearance is “inconsistent with itself”, one cannot deny
its existence or “divorce it from reality” because
“reality, set on one side and apart from all appearance, would
assuredly be nothing” (132).

Yet since appearance always proves to be an inadequate way in which
reality is present to us, the question inevitably arises whether it is
beyond our means ever to become acquainted with the true essence of
ultimate reality or whether we can avoid skepticism and claim that it
is indeed possible for us to have access to the constitutive nature of
reality. Bradley emphatically endorses the latter possibility.
According to him, the self-contradictoriness of what is appearance
already implies that there is positive knowledge of reality: reality
has to be One in the sense that it does not allow discord and it must
be such that it can include diversity (cf. 140, 144), i.e., “the
Absolute is … an individual and a system” (144). This
character of reality as an internally diversified individual system is
revealed to us in sentient experience. “Sentient experience
… is reality, and what is not this is not real” (ibid.).
According to Bradley it is this sentient experience that “is
commonly called psychical existence” (ibid.). The material basis
of sentient experience is exhausted in feeling, thought, and volition.
Thus reality consists in what has to be taken as the undifferentiated
unity of these modes of sentient experience before these modes make
their appearance as different aspects of experience. This leads
Bradley to assume that what is ultimately real is just what gives rise
to appearances where appearances have to be understood as specific
forms under which the underlying undifferentiated unity appears in
each of these different aspects of experience. In his words:
“… there is no way of qualifying the Real except by
appearances, and outside the Real there remains no space in which
appearances could live” (551). Although he concedes “our
complete inability to understand this concrete unity in detail”
he insists that this inability “is no good ground for our
declining to entertain it” (160). And although he claims at the
end of his metaphysical essay that he does not know whether his
“conclusions” are to be called Realism or Idealism (547),
at the very end he nevertheless abruptly states: “We may fairly
close this work then by insisting that Reality is spiritual”
(552). This might lead us to assume that, “in the end” (a
favorite phrase of Bradley’s), it was primarily his search for a
basis for spiritualism and not so much a defense of idealism
understood as opposed to realism that motivated him to explore the
true nature of reality; in other words, he was ultimately driven by an
impulse toward ontological idealism even though he had developed
powerful arguments for a form of epistemological idealism.

The identification of idealism with spiritualism, thus again an
ontological interpretation of idealism, is most explicit in the works
of John McTaggart Ellis McTaggart (1866–1925). His very first
published writing (“The Further Determination of the
Absolute”) starts with the following proclamation: 


The progress of an idealistic philosophy may, from some points of
view, be divided into three stages. The problem of the first is to
prove that reality is not exclusively matter. The problem of the
second is to prove that reality is exclusively spirit. The problem of
the third is to determine what is the fundamental nature of spirit.
(In: Philosophical Studies, pp. 210 f.) 


And the last of his writings published in his life time (“An
Ontological Idealism”) starts with the confession, explicitly
employing the same terminology that we have used here:
“Ontologically I am an Idealist, since I believe that all that
exists is spiritual” (ibid., 273). He takes spirit to be the sum
total of individual spirits or selves connected by the relation of
love and bases this conviction on the claim that only this conception
of what ultimate reality consists in allows us to overcome unavoidable
contradictions connected with all other attempts to reconcile unity
and diversity as the distinguishing marks of reality. Harmony between
unity and diversity can be established only on the basis of an
all-encompassing relation of love between all the characteristic
elements of reality, which in turn presupposes thinking of ultimate
reality as a community of spirits or as Spirit. These—as
McTaggart himself admits (ibid. 271 f.)—rather mystical-sounding
assertions, which he adhered to all his life, he tries to back up by a
number of different considerations. In his earliest writing he relies
heavily on views held by Bradley to the effect that we have to accept
that contradictions are a criterion for non-reality. However, he does
not employ this criterion as a logical maxim but transforms it into
some kind of ontological principle according to which everything that
prevents harmony cannot be real. In his last work, his attempt to
present an argument for his ontological idealism is based mainly on
(1) mereological considerations concerning the structure of substances
which aim to show that only spirits can claim the status of a
substance, and on (2) his theory of time, the unreality of which he
famously had proven in his magnum opus The Nature of
Existence (1921/27). It is interesting to note that McTaggart
does not believe that his metaphysical (ontological) spiritual
idealism excludes a realistic stance in epistemology. On the contrary,
he declares himself an “epistemological realist” (ibid.,
273). This is so because he characterizes epistemological realism as a
position that is based on a correspondence theory of truth according
to which a belief is true if it corresponds to a fact. Because
everything that is real is a fact and (according to McTaggart) nothing
is unreal (although it may not exist), all beliefs about something are
beliefs about facts and consequently about something that is
epistemologically real. Although this concept of epistemological
realism is vague, it suggests that McTaggart thought of idealism not
primarily in opposition to realism but much more in terms of a
doctrine that is opposed to materialism, that is, as an ontological
rather than epistemological doctrine. But his insistence that his view
is a form of realism may be taken as an extreme form of the usual
distinction between epistemological idealism and any view that our
knowledge is merely illusory, an aspect of epistemological idealism
that goes back to Berkeley and Kant (although Kant thought that
Berkeley had failed to establish it).

Idealism was also a prominent mode of philosophy in the United States
during the late nineteenth century, alongside pragmatism, but while
pragmatism remained prominent throughout the twentieth century,
whether under that name or not, the reputation of idealism was
permanently damaged by a movement toward “realism” early
in the century (which also attacked pragmatism, although without the
same effect). Earlier in the nineteenth century, the popular essayist
Ralph Waldo Emerson, the most philosophical of the New England
“Transcendentalists”, had struck many idealist themes, and
after the Civil War a school of “St. Louis Hegelians”
emerged, whose efforts were primarily exegetical. But the leading
American idealist was Josiah Royce (1855–1916). Deeply
influenced by Charles Sanders Peirce, particularly the lectures that
Peirce gave in Cambridge in 1898, Royce incorporated aspects of
Peirce’s pragmatism into his version of idealism, giving an
idealist spin to Peirce’s conception of truth as what would be
known at the end of inquiry were that ever to be reached. But
Royce’s argument always remained that epistemological idealism
must ultimately lead to ontological or as he called it metaphysical
idealism.

A prolific author who published fifteen books before his early death
at sixty, Royce launched his defense of idealism in his first book,
The Religious Aspect of Philosophy (1885). In this work he
introduced his first novel argument, for idealism, what he called the
argument from error. Royce’s claim is that skepticism begins
with insistence upon the possibility of error, but that recognition of
that possibility presupposes not just that there is
“absolute truth” (p. 385) but that in some sense we have
to know that absolute truth, or at least some aspect of it,
in order to have an object even for our erroneous claims, thus that we
must have some access to a “higher inclusive thought” even
to make an erroneous knowledge claim. In his words, 


Either then there is no error, or else judgments are true and false
only in reference to a higher inclusive thought, which they
presuppose, and which must, in the last analysis, be assumed as
Infinite and all-inclusive. (p. 393) 


Royce holds that we must have some sort of apprehension of the
“higher inclusive thought” in order to be able even to
make our errors, and then that the growth of human knowledge over time
consists in increasing apprehension of this all-inclusive truth
without any limit being prescribed by our subordinate status. This is
the epistemological optimism that pervades all Royce’s work and
his subsequent debate with Bradley.

This account does not yet make clear why Royce thought that
epistemological idealism must lead to ontological idealism; that
becomes clearer in his subsequent works. Royce’s next major
statement of his idealism came in The Spirit of Modern
Philosophy (1892). The second part of the book more fully
develops Royce’s own arguments for idealism. Here Royce gives a
clear definition of his conception of idealism and adds to the
previous argument from error a second argument, from meaning. The core
of this argument is that the intended object of an expression or
thought must itself be conceived or understood in some way, so that we
always mean what are in some sense our own ideas, although of course
at any particular moment we hardly know or understand everything about
the object to which we refer; that is why the idea that is the
ultimate object of reference may be much greater than the idea that
refers. In Royce’s words, 


The self that is doubting or asserting, or that is even feeling its
private ignorance about an object, and that still, even in consequence
of all this, is meaning, is aiming at such an
object, is in essence identical with the self for which this object
exists in its complete and consciously known truth. (Spirit of
Modern Philosophy, pp. 370–1) 


By means of this argument, any restriction of Royce’s position
to a purely epistemological idealism is eliminated: the possibility of
meaning requires an identity between what means and what is meant, and
since anything might be meant, anything at all must in some way be
identical with what means, subjects and their ideas and expressions,
even though that identity can hardly be absolute, and the ordinary
conscious subject may seem very different and more limited than the
“one Self” (p. 373) that underlies the
appearances of both ordinary subjects and ordinary objects.

Royce develops an even more systematic argument for an idealism that
is both epistemological and ontological in his magnum opus,
the two volumes of his 1899–1900 Gifford lectures published as
The World and the Individual—as the title suggests, a
major theme of that work is explicating in detail the relationship
between underlying reality and ordinary individual, conscious human
selves. In this book, Royce expounds his idealism as the last of the
four possible “conceptions of being”. The first is the
“realistic conception of Being”, which is defined by the
conception of being as completely independent of thought, so
that whatever is true of it is true quite independently of what may be
thought about it. The second conception of being is the mystical
conception. As the defining notion of the realist conception was
independence, the defining notion of mysticism is the opposite, namely
immediacy, the idea that thought and its object must be one. The third
conception of being, which Royce sometimes calls the theory of
“validity”, is that “To be real now means,
primarily, to be valid, to be true, to be in essence the standard
for ideas” (I:202). This conception of being tries to
retain realism’s recognition of independence through the thought
that “some of my ideas are already, and apart from my private
experience, valid, true, well-grounded” (I:204) and
mysticism’s identification of subject and object through the
thought that reality is itself possible experience, but adds structure
to the now unified realms of thought and being instead of eliminating
structure. 

The fourth conception of being is a fuller development of the
conception of meaning that Royce had introduced in The Spirit of
Modern Philosophy. He now links meaning to purpose, and his
thought is that the meaning of a term is an intended purpose, a
problem to be solved, for example a mathematical problem to be solved
or object to be constructed, and that in using a term the user already
has some approach to solving the problem in mind but the full solution
remains to be developed, may never be fully developed in the life of a
particular individual, but is in some sense already included in the
larger thought that constitutes reality. Reaching back to both Hegel
and Kant, Royce conceives of the progress of knowledge as making the
meaning of our ideas more determinate. In this he is also influenced
by Peirce, and his notion of meaning is clearly a version of
Peirce’s approach to truth, on which a proposition is true if it
would be affirmed at the final stage of human inquiry, with the
difference that while for Peirce the final stage of human enquiry is
essentially a regulative ideal without ontological commitment, for
Royce, the comprehensive meaning in which all ideas would be fully
determinate is actually thought, although by a sort of super-self, not
by any particular finite human self or even by all the selves thinking
at any one time. Royce makes the transition from thought to being by
stating that 


In its wholeness the world of Being is the world of individually
expressed meanings, an individual life, consisting of the individual
embodiments of the wills represented by all finite ideas.
(I:341–2) 


Royce’s arguments for idealism collectively, which in many ways
return to the basic form of modern idealism pioneered by Green, whose
Prolegomena had been published just a couple of years before
Royce’s own career began, illustrate the pressure that often
forced a move from epistemological to ontological idealism.
Epistemological idealism begins with the insight that our knowledge in
some way or another always reflects the structure of our own
consciousness and thought. But the difference between what any
particular individual believes or even knows at any particular time
and what may be true and be known as a whole, at a time or over time,
is too great to ignore, and must be modeled within epistemological
idealism. But once it has been assumed that thought or mind itself is
the proper object of knowledge, the only way to do this is to make a
contrast between individual thought and some sort of supra-individual
thought. At the outset of modern idealism, in Berkeley, that takes the
form of the infinite mind, God, contrasted to individual, human minds;
in later forms, such as those of Green and Royce, the supra-individual
mind is not always identified with God, but plays the same role. In
the cases of both Green and Royce, the union of epistemological and
ontological idealism also provided the basis for a moral idealism
based on an insistence upon the underlying commonality of individual
human selves in the larger self that Royce called the Absolute. But we
will not be able to trace that line of thought here, and will instead
conclude with the suggestion that many subsequent philosophers drew
back from the full-blooded combination of epistemological and
ontological idealism offered by Green, Bradley, McTaggart, and Royce
to what was ultimately a more purely epistemological form of idealism.
This might seem a surprising claim, since the immediate response both
to the British idealists and to Royce in the U.S. came from
philosophers who identified themselves as realists. Nevertheless, it
might be argued that even after it lost the dignity of appearing under
its own name, epistemological idealism remained a dominant mode of
philosophy in the twentieth century, even if not especially within
analytic philosophy, although not many of its practitioners would have
admitted that. A case in point would be Bertrand Russell.
9. The Fate of Idealism in the Twentieth Century

Both epistemological and ontological idealism came under massive
attack in Britain at the turn of the twentieth century by George
Edward Moore (1873–1958) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970),
while in the United States Royce’s position was attacked by a
school of younger “New Realists”, to some extent inspired
by his life-long interlocutor William James, who included E.B. Holt
and his younger Harvard colleague Ralph Barton Perry, and later Roy
Wood Sellars (the father of Wilfrid Sellars, who later moved back to a
form of Kantianism, and thus became one of the leading
crypto-epistemological idealists of the twentieth century), and Arthur
Lovejoy. But both Moore and Russell had more of an enduring influence
on the course of analytic philosophy than the American New Realists,
but also reveal the continuing impulse to idealism in spite of their
own efforts, so we will focus on them. Both of them take idealism to
be spiritualism in the spirit of Berkeley and Bradley (neither of them
mentions their Cambridge tutor McTaggart!), i.e., they think of
idealism as a position which is characterized by the claim that the
universe (Moore) or whatever exists or whatever can be known to exist
(Russell) is spiritual (Moore) or in some sense mental (Russell).
Although their attack was so influential that even more than 100 years
later, any acknowledgment of idealistic tendencies is viewed in the
English-speaking world with reservation, it is by no means obvious
that they actually thought they had disproved idealism. On the
contrary, neither Moore nor Russell claimed to have demonstrated that
the universe or what exists or can be known to exist is not spiritual
or mental. All that they take themselves to have shown is that there
are no good philosophical (in contradistinction to, e.g., theological
or psychological) arguments available to support such a claim. Moore
especially is very explicit about this point. He devotes the first
five pages of his famous piece from 1903, “The Refutation of
Idealism”, to assuring the reader over and over that 


I do not suppose that anything I shall say has the smallest tendency
to prove that reality is not spiritual. … Reality may be
spiritual, for all I know; and I devoutly hope it is. … It is,
therefore, only with idealistic arguments that I am
concerned; … I shall have proved that Idealists have no
reason whatever for their conclusion. (Philosophical
Studies, pp. 2 f.) 


And Russell in his The Problems of Philosophy (1912), in a
similar vein, warns the reader, after emphasizing the strangeness of
an idealistic position from a common sense point of view: 


[I]f there were good reasons to regard them [viz. physical objects] as
mental, we could not legitimately reject this opinion merely because
it strikes us as strange. (p. 38)


Moore and Russell found two main arguments for idealism to be
fallacious. The first concerns Berkeley’s idealistic principle
that being consists in being perceived, the second the converse claim,
attributed to Bradley, that thought entails being. Their criticism of
the first as well as their rebuttal of the second argument stems from
certain convictions they share as to the nature of knowledge, and is
meant to discredit both epistemological and ontological idealism. The
assault on Berkeley is staged by Moore most extensively in “The
Refutation of Idealism” and picked up in an abbreviated form by
Russell ten years later in the chapter on idealism in his The
Problems of Philosophy, while the attack on Bradley, although
foreshadowed in Russell’s Problems, is spelled out
rather lengthily (and a bit nastily) by Moore in “The Conception
of Reality” from 1917–18. Their main objection against the
two idealistic arguments seems to be that they rely on unjustly
presupposing that the mental act of relating to an object (perceiving,
thinking, knowing, experiencing) is a necessary condition for the
existence of this object. The fallacy involved here consists in
failing to make “the distinction between act and object in our
apprehending of things”, as Russell (ibid. 42) puts it, or, in
Moore’s terminology of The Refutation, in wrongfully
identifying the content of “consciousness” with its object
(loc. cit., 19 ff.). As soon as this identification is given up and
that distinction is made it is at least an open question whether
things exist independently of the mind, and idealism insofar it
neglects this distinction and holds fast to that identification
is refuted because based on an invalid argument.

Whether this line of criticism of idealistic positions is indeed
successful might be controversial, and even if it strikes home against
Berkeley the charge that they simply conflate knowledge and object
hardly seems to do justice to the elaborate arguments of the late
nineteenth-century idealists. However, if one is convinced of the
correctness of this criticism (as no doubt Moore and Russell were)
then it makes way for interesting new perspectives in epistemology and
metaphysics. This is so because if this criticism is taken to be
successful it permits us to explore the possibility of a theory of
knowledge that starts from the assumptions (a) that objects exist
independently of us and (b) that to know an object means to be
immediately related to the object as it is in itself (i.e., as it is
undistorted by and independent from any mental activity). Both Moore
and Russell can be understood to have embarked on this exploration in
the course of which they came to conceive a position which is aptly
called by Peter Hylton “Platonic Atomism” (“Idealism
and the Origins of Analytic Philosophy”, p. 329).

The basic idea of this Platonic atomism seems to be the following:
Knowledge consists in standing in an immediate relation to an
independent individual object (assumption b). This immediate relation
to individual objects is best known under Russell’s term
“acquaintance”. If, by stipulation, knowledge is
ultimately knowledge “by acquaintance”, then knowledge is
restricted to knowledge of individual objects. Knowledge basically is
knowledge of something or non-propositional knowledge.
However, although this rather frugal conception of knowledge might be
sufficient to give an account of the possibility of non-propositional
knowledge, it is not that easy to see how such a conception can give a
sensible explanation of propositional knowledge, i.e., of knowledge
that something is so-and-so. Moore and Russell seem to have
been acutely aware of this difficulty as is documented in their very
explicit efforts to avoid it. It might have been their different
reactions to this difficulty which in the years to come led them to
proceed on diverging routes in philosophy. As is easy to imagine,
there are two obvious reactions to the problem of propositional
knowledge provided that assumption (b) is agreed upon. The first is to
claim that propositions (Moore prefers the term “judgment”
in this context) are individual objects with which the subject is
acquainted (if he or she claims to know that something is
so-and-so). The second is to broaden the concept of knowledge by not
restricting knowledge to knowledge by acquaintance but to allow for
other forms of knowledge as well. The first reaction
apparently was the reaction of Moore and is formulated most
prominently in his early piece “The Nature of Judgment”
(Mind, NS 8, 1899), while the second can be attributed to
Russell and is documented most vividly in his The Problems of
Philosophy.

According to Moore a proposition is composed out of concepts. If we
are to be acquainted with propositions we have to take their elements,
i.e., concepts, to have independent existence (because of assumption
a). Moore points out: 


… we have approached the nature of a proposition or judgment. A
proposition is composed not of words, nor yet of thoughts, but of
concepts. Concepts are possible objects of thought; but that is no
definition of them. It merely states that they may come into relation
with a thinker; and in order that they may do anything, they
must already be something. It is indifferent to their nature
whether anyone thinks them or not. They are incapable of change; and
the relation into which they enter with the knowing subject implies no
action or reaction. It is a unique relation which can begin to cease
with a change in the subject; but the concept is neither cause nor
effect of such a change. The occurrence of the relation has, no doubt,
its causes and effects, but these are to be found only in the subject.
(“The Nature of Judgment”, para. 9) 


Moore is well aware that this analysis of the nature of a proposition
leads to some version of what could be called “conceptual
realism”, according to which that what is “really”
real are concepts because they are the ultimate objects of
acquaintance. He explicitly states: 


It would seem, in fact, …that a proposition is nothing other
than a complex concept. The difference between a concept and a
proposition, in virtue of which the latter alone can be called true or
false, would seem to lie merely in the simplicity of the former. A
proposition is a synthesis of concepts; and, just as concepts are
themselves immutably what they are, so they stand in infinite
relations to one another equally immutable. A proposition is
constituted by any number of concepts, together with a specific
relation between them; and according to the nature of this relation
the proposition may be either true or false. What kind of relation
makes a proposition true, what false, cannot be further defined, but
must be immediately recognized (ibid., para. 12) 


Moore also is very well aware that his view of the nature of concepts
commits him to the claim that the world insofar as it is an object
of propositional knowledge consists of concepts because these are
the only things one can be acquainted with if acquaintance is a
condition of knowledge. Thus he writes: 


It seems necessary, then, to regard the world as formed of concepts.
These are the only objects of knowledge. They cannot be regarded
fundamentally as abstractions either from things or from ideas; since
both alike can, if anything is to be true of them, composed of nothing
but concepts. A thing becomes intelligible first when it is analyzed
into its constituent concepts. The material diversity of things, which
is generally taken as starting-point, is only derived; and the
identity of the concept, in several different things, which appears on
that assumption as the problem of philosophy, will now, if it instead
be taken as the starting-point, render the derivation easy. Two things
are then seen to be differentiated by the different relations in which
their common concepts stand to other concepts. The opposition of
concepts to existents disappears, since an existent is seen to be
nothing but a concept or complex of concepts standing in a unique
relation to the concept of existence. (ibid., para. 16).


Moore confesses that “I am fully aware of how paradoxical this
theory must appear, and even how contemptible” (ibid., para.
14). And indeed one wonders whether such an account does not raise
more problems than it answers. Fortunately we do not have to be
concerned with this question here. However, if we ask whether
Moore’s theory really manages to avoid idealism, it is hard not
to conclude that its metaphysical commitments are precisely a form of
ontological idealism, even if he has been led to his theory by an
attempt to maintain epistemological realism! After all, to claim that
only concepts are real, that they have a mode of being outside of
space and time, that they are non-physical and completely unaffected
by any activity of a thinking subject, does not sound very different
from statements that can rightly be attributed to, e.g., Hegel, or
even ultimately Plato, and that are meant to assert ontological
idealism. The main difference in this case is that Moore’s
conception of what a concept is has virtually nothing to do with what
Hegel means by “concept”, but this does not suffice to
establish ontological anti-idealism. Although Moore might avoid
epistemological idealism by his insistence upon the metaphysical
independence of concepts, he comes dangerously close to the point
where the difference between ontological idealism and ontological
realism vanishes and this distinction becomes a question of
terminology.

Russell chooses a different path in the attempt to somehow reconcile
the idea that knowledge has to be understood as a relation of
acquaintance with objects with the phenomenon of propositional
knowledge. He is more flexible both with respect to kinds of knowledge
and with respect to kinds of objects with which we can be acquainted
than Moore is. First of all, he distinguishes between knowledge of
things and knowledge of truths. He recognizes two kinds of knowledge
of things: knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description.
Knowledge by acquaintance obtains whenever 


we have acquaintance with anything of which we are directly
aware, without the intermediary of any process of inference or any
knowledge of truths. (The Problems of Philosophy, 46) 


Knowledge by (definite) description obtains 


when we know that it [i.e., the object] is “the
so-and-so”, i.e., when we know that there is one object, and no
more, having a certain property. (ibid., 53) 


The relation between these two kinds of knowledge is the following:



[K]nowledge concerning what is known by description is ultimately
reducible to knowledge concerning what is known by acquaintance.
(ibid., 58) 


Knowledge of truths is distinguished from these two kinds of
knowledge of things. Knowledge of truths consists in pieces
of knowledge that although they cannot be proven by experience are
such that we nevertheless “see” their truth (ibid., 74).
Examples of truths that can be known this way are logical principles,
the principle of induction, and everything we know a priori.
This taxonomy of kinds of knowledge, Russell believes, can account
both for the possibility of non-propositional and propositional
knowledge and at the same time retain the claim as to the primacy of
the acquaintance-relation for knowledge.

The obvious question now is: if all knowledge is ultimately based on
acquaintance, what is it we can be acquainted with, i.e., what are the
legitimate objects of acquaintance? Because, according to Russell, the
acquaintance relation is a relation to individual things this question
translates into “what are the individual things we can be
acquainted with?” Russell’s answer to this question is
that there are exactly two kinds of things we can be acquainted with,
namely particulars, i.e., things that exist, and universals, i.e.,
things that subsist (cf. ibid., 100). Particulars comprise sense-data,
thoughts, feelings, desires and memories of “things which have
been data either of the outer senses or of the inner sense”
(ibid., 51). Universals are 


opposed to the particular things that are given in sensation. We speak
of whatever is given in sensation, or is of the same nature as things
given in sensation, as a particular; by opposition to this, a
universal will be anything which may be shared by many
particulars. (ibid., 93) 


Universals are conceptual entities: “These entities are such as
can be named by parts of speech which are not substantives; they are
such entities as qualities or relations” (ibid., 90). Because
universals and particulars alike are possible objects of acquaintance
both have to be real. However, according to Russell they are real in a
different sense. Particulars have existence in time whereas universals
have timeless being. The first ones exist, the other subsist. They
form two different worlds in that the world of particulars consists of
items that are “fleeting, vague, without sharp boundaries”
whereas the world of universals “is unchangeable, rigid,
exact” (ibid., 100).

This rough outline of Russell’s epistemic universe is meant to
emphasize only those aspects of his position that are of relevance for
an assessment of idealistic tendencies in his approach to knowledge.
As in the case of Moore it is tempting to interpret his commitment to
a timeless world of universals as pointing if not to an endorsement at
least to a toleration of a position that is difficult to distinguish
from some version of an ontological idealism. But again one has to
acknowledge that such a verdict is not very significant because one
could as well describe this position as a version of ontological
realism. It just depends on what is claimed to be the distinctive
feature of idealism. If ontological idealism is a position
characterized by taking for granted the reality of conceptual entities
that are not mind-dependent then both Moore and Russell endorse
ontological idealism. If idealism is meant to be a position which
takes conceptual items to be mind-dependent then both are realists
with respect to concepts. However, it is hard to see how Russell can
avoid epistemological idealism given his views about physical objects.
This is so because of his sense-datum theory, according to which what
is immediately present to us, i.e., what we are acquainted with when
we are acquainted with particulars, are just sense-data and not
objects in the sense of individual things with qualities standing in
relations to each other. For him “among the objects with which
we are acquainted are not included physical objects (as opposed to
sense-data)” (ibid., 52). Physical objects are constructions we
form out of sense-data together with some descriptive devices, and
only with respect to these constructions can we have knowledge by
description, i.e., propositional knowledge. If epistemological
idealism is understood (as has been done here) as involving the claim
that what we take to be objects of knowledge are heavily dependent on
some activity of the knowing subject, then the very idea of an object
as a construction guarantees the endorsement of epistemological
idealism. Thus, in contrast to their self-proclaimed revolt against
the idealism of Berkeley and Bradley, the positions of both Moore and
Russell are by no means free of traits that connect them rather
closely to well known currents in modern idealism; and these features,
above all the supposition that knowers may be immediately presented
with some sorts of informational atoms, whether properties,
sense-data, or whatever, but that all further knowledge, or all
knowledge beyond immediate acquaintance, involves constructive
activities of the mind, are common throughout a great deal of recent
philosophy. 

To trace the subterranean presence of at least epistemological
idealism throughout the remainder of twentieth-century philosophy
would exceed the brief for this entry. There is room here for just a
few hints of how such an account would go. At Oxford, some influence
of idealism continued until World War II in the person of Robin George
Collingwood, who was influenced by Hegel and the Italian philosopher
Benedetto Croce but was a very original thinker. Collingwood’s
most characteristic position might be his claim that metaphysics is
the study of the presuppositions of human knowledge, at various
historical periods, rather than of independently existing entities;
thus he might be considered an epistemological idealist. In Germany,
Neo-Kantianism, especially of the Marburg school, from Hermann Cohen
to Ernst Cassirer, thus from the 1870s to the 1940s, stressed human
conceptualization, in Cassirer’s case in the guise of
“symbolic forms”, while trying to steer clear of
traditional metaphysical questions; their position might thus also be
considered a form of epistemological rather than ontological idealism.
Neo-Kantianism in turn influenced the broader stream of analytic
philosophy through the person of Rudolf Carnap, whose Logical
Construction of the World (1928) analyzes knowledge in terms of
relations constructed on perceived similarities in qualities of
objects, thus taking a subjectivist starting-point and then adding
constructive activities of the mind to it—a form of
epistemological idealism. Nelson Goodman’s Structure of
Appearance (1951) undertook a similar project. Subsequent to the
Logical Construction, Carnap distinguished between questions
“internal” to a conceptual framework or system and
“external” questions about which conceptual framework to
adopt, which can be decided only on pragmatic or even aesthetic
grounds, and this too might be considered a form of epistemological
idealism. Thomas Kuhn’s famous conception of
“paradigms” of science which are not automatically
rejected because of refractory evidence but are given up only when an
alternative paradigm comes to seem preferable can be seen as being in
the Carnapian tradition, as can Hilary Putnam’s “internal
realism” of the 1980s, and both these positions thus reflect
some of the motives for epistemological idealism. Even W.V. Quine, who
was a committed physicalist in the sense of believing that other
sciences are in principle reducible to physics, nevertheless reflected
the impulse to epistemological idealism in his conception of the
“web of belief”, that is, the idea that knowledge consists
in a body of beliefs, from particular observation statements down to
logical principles, which faces experience only as a whole and which
can be modified at any point within it in order to accommodate
refractory experience, as seems best. A similar idea was already to be
found in Cassirer’s early work Substance and Function
(1912), which points to the underlying impulse to epistemological
idealism. Wilfrid Sellars’s conception of the “space of
reasons”, taken up in Robert Brandom’s inferentialism,
also reflects this impulse, although Sellars’s most explicitly
Kantian work, Science and Metaphysics (1968), gives what
might be regarded as a pragmatist rather than idealist spin to
Kant’s phenomena/noumena distinction, interpreting the noumenal
as what would be known if science were complete, an idea clearly
inspired by Charles Sanders Peirce rather than by Kant—although
not completely different in spirit from Royce’s idea that the
error of our particular beliefs can be understood only by comparison
to a body of complete and completely true beliefs, not to some
independent, non-belief reality. These are just a few examples of how
some of the most prominent paradigms, to borrow Kuhn’s term, of
analytic philosophy still reflect the impulse to epistemological
idealism even though the name “idealism” was anathematized
by Moore, Russell, and the New Realists.

Analytical philosophy has been overwhelmingly influenced by the
paradigm of the natural sciences, and often committed to some form of
naturalism; but as the examples of Green and Royce as well as earlier
idealists such as Schelling make clear, there is no necessary
incompatibility between idealism and some forms of naturalism. In
particular, naturalism, especially broadly understood as a methodology
rather than ontology, is not automatically committed to the kinds of
realism, especially the naïve realism of assuming that our
representations reproduce the physical constitution of external
objects, that were initially opposed to idealism. One might even get
the impression that in contemporary scientifically-oriented philosophy
idealism is no longer considered a threat. The way in which in current
discussions in the philosophy of mind some idealistic conceptions
under the general name of “Panpsychism” are taken
seriously (Nagel, Chalmers) seems to be a good indicator of this
tendency.

In fact, we might suggest in closing, the main alternative to what is
essentially the epistemological idealism of a great deal of
twentieth-century philosophy has not been any straightforward form of
realism, but rather what might be called the “life
philosophy” originally pioneered by Wilhelm Dilthey
(1833–1916), then extensively developed by Martin Heidegger
(1889–1976), and, without Heidegger’s political baggage,
by the French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961). The
central idea of this approach to philosophy is that the starting-point
of thought and knowledge is neither anything “subjective”
like sense-data or ideas nor anything simply objective like the
objects of science, but the lived experience of
“being-in-the-world”, from which both the
“subjective” such as sense-data and the
“objective” such as objects theorized by science are
abstractions or constructions made for specific purposes, but which
should not be reified in any way that creates a problem of getting
from one side to the other, let alone any possibility of reducing one
side to the other and thus ending up with a choice between idealism
and realism. Apart from all issues of style, and whether this has been
clear to the two parties or not, perhaps the deepest reason for the
on-going divide between “analytical” and
“continental” philosophy is the on-going tension between
the impulse to epistemological idealism and the attraction of the idea
that “being-in-the-world” precedes the very distinction
between subjective and objective. But then again, this underlying idea
of the Heideggerian approach to philosophy may already be suggested in
the work of Schelling, so perhaps the fundamental debate within
twentieth-century philosophy has taken place within a framework itself
inspired by a form of idealism. 

At the beginning of the twenty-first century, however, idealism,
understood as a philosophical program, may be sharing the fate of many
other projects in the history of modern philosophy. Originally
conceived in the middle of the eighteenth century as a real
alternative to materialistic and naturalistic perspectives, it may now
become sublated and integrated into views about the nature of reality
that ignore metaphysical oppositions or epistemological questions
connected with the assumption of the priority of mind over matter or
the other way round. Instead the focus may be shifting to establishing
a “neutral” view according to which “anything
goes” (Feyerabend) as long as it does not contradict or at least
is not incompatible with our favored metaphysical, epistemological and
scientific (both natural and social) methods and practices.