The laden phrase “identity politics” has come to signify a
wide range of political activity and theorizing founded in the shared
experiences of injustice of members of certain social groups. Rather
than organizing solely around belief systems, programmatic manifestos,
or party affiliation, identity political formations typically aim to
secure the political freedom of a specific constituency marginalized
within its larger context. Members of that constituency assert or
reclaim ways of understanding their distinctiveness that challenge
dominant oppressive characterizations, with the goal of greater
self-determination.
 

1. History and Scope

The second half of the twentieth century saw the emergence of
large-scale political movements—second wave feminism, Black
Civil Rights in the U.S., gay and lesbian liberation, and the American
Indian movements, for example—based in claims about the
injustices done to particular social groups. These social movements
are undergirded by and foster a philosophical body of literature that
takes up questions about the nature, origin and futures of the
identities being defended. Identity politics as a mode of organizing
is intimately connected to the idea that some social groups are
oppressed; that is, that one's identity as a woman or as a Native
American, for example, makes one peculiarly vulnerable to cultural
imperialism (including stereotyping, erasure, or appropriation of
one's group identity), violence, exploitation, marginalization, or
powerlessness (Young 1990). Identity politics starts from analyses of
oppression to recommend, variously, the reclaiming, redescription, or
transformation of previously stigmatized accounts of group membership.
Rather than accepting the negative scripts offered by a dominant
culture about one's own inferiority, one transforms one's own sense of
self and community, often through consciousness-raising. For example,
in their germinal statement of Black feminist identity politics, the
Combahee River Collective argued that 


as children we realized that we were different from boys and that we
were treated different—for example, when we were told in the
same breath to be quiet both for the sake of being
‘ladylike’ and to make us less objectionable in the eyes
of white people. In the process of consciousness-raising, actually
life-sharing, we began to recognize the commonality of our experiences
and, from the sharing and growing consciousness, to build a politics
that will change our lives and inevitably end our oppression.
(Combahee River Collective 1982: 14–15)


The scope of political movements that may be described as identity
politics is broad: the examples used in the philosophical literature
are predominantly of struggles within western capitalist democracies,
but indigenous rights movements worldwide, nationalist projects, or
demands for regional self-determination use similar arguments.
Predictably, there is no straightforward criterion that makes a
political struggle into an example of “identity politics;”
rather, the term signifies a loose collection of political projects,
each undertaken by representatives of a collective with a
distinctively different social location that has hitherto been
neglected, erased, or suppressed. It is beyond the scope of this essay
to offer historical or sociological surveys of the many different
social movements that might be described as identity politics,
although some references to this literature are provided in the
bibliography; instead the focus here is to provide an overview of the
philosophical issues in the expansive literature in political
theory.

The phrase “identity politics” is also something of a
philosophical punching-bag for a variety of critics. Often challenges
fail to make sufficiently clear their object of critique, using
“identity politics” as a blanket description that invokes
a range of tacit political failings (as discussed in Bickford 1997).
From a contemporary perspective, some early identity claims by
political activists certainly seem naive, totalizing, or unnuanced.
However, the public rhetoric of identity politics served useful and
empowering purposes for some, even while it sometimes belied the
philosophical complexity of any claim to a shared experience or common
group characteristics. Since the twentieth century heyday of the well
known political movements that made identity politics so visible, a
vast academic literature has sprung up; although “identity
politics” can draw on intellectual precursors from Mary
Wollstonecraft to Frantz Fanon, writing that actually uses this
specific phrase, with all its contemporary baggage, is limited almost
exclusively to the last thirty years. Thus it was barely as
intellectuals started to systematically outline and defend the
philosophical underpinnings of identity politics that we
simultaneously began to challenge them. At this historical juncture,
then, asking whether one is for or against identity politics is to ask
an impossible question. Wherever they line up in the debates, thinkers
agree that the notion of identity has become indispensable to
contemporary political discourse, at the same time as they concur that
it has troubling implications for models of the self, political
inclusiveness, and our possibilities for solidarity and
resistance.
2. Philosophy and Identity

From this brief examination of how identity politics fits into the
political landscape it is already clear that the use of the
controversial term “identity” raises a host of
philosophical questions. Logical uses aside, it is likely familiar to
philosophers from the literature in metaphysics on personal
identity—one's sense of self and its persistence. Indeed,
underlying many of the more overtly pragmatic debates about the merits
of identity politics are philosophical questions about the nature of
subjectivity and the self (Taylor 1989). Charles Taylor argues that
the modern identity is characterized by an emphasis on its inner voice
and capacity for authenticity—that is, the ability to
find a way of being that is somehow true to oneself (Taylor
1994). While doctrines of equality press the notion that each human
being is capable of deploying his or her practical reason or moral
sense to live an authentic live qua individual, the politics of
difference has appropriated the language of authenticity to describe
ways of living that are true to the identities of marginalized social
groups. As Sonia Kruks puts it:

What makes identity politics a significant departure from earlier,
pre-identarian forms of the politics of recognition is its demand for
recognition on the basis of the very grounds on which recognition has
previously been denied: it is qua women, qua blacks,
qua lesbians that groups demand recognition. The demand is
not for inclusion within the fold of “universal humankind”
on the basis of shared human attributes; nor is it for respect
“in spite of” one's differences. Rather, what is demanded
is respect for oneself as different (2001: 85).


For many proponents of identity politics this demand for authenticity
includes appeals to a time before oppression, or a culture or way of
life damaged by colonialism, imperialism, or even genocide. Thus for
example Taiaiake Alfred, in his defense of a return to traditional
indigenous values, argues that:

Indigenous governance systems embody distinctive political values,
radically different from those of the mainstream. Western notions of
domination (human and natural) are noticeably absent; in their place
we find harmony, autonomy, and respect. We have a responsibility to
recover, understand, and preserve these values, not only because they
represent a unique contribution to the history of ideas, but because
renewal of respect for traditional values is the only lasting solution
to the political, economic, and social problems that beset our people.
(Alfred 1999: 5)


What is crucial about the “identity” of identity politics
appears to be the experience of the subject, especially his or her
experience of oppression and the possibility of a shared and more
authentic or self-determined alternative. Thus identity politics rests
on unifying claims about the meaning of politically laden experiences
to diverse individuals. Sometimes the meaning attributed to a
particular experience will diverge from that of its subject: thus, for
example, the woman who struggles desperately to be attractive may
think that she is simply trying to be a better person, rather than
understanding her experience as part of the disciplining of female
bodies in a patriarchal culture. Making sense of such disjunctions
relies on notions such as false consciousness—the systematic
mystification of the experience of the oppressed by the perspective of
the dominant. Thus despite the disagreements of many defenders of
identity political claims with Marxism and other radical political
models, they share the view that individuals' perceptions of their own
interests may be systematically distorted and must be somehow freed of
their misperceptions by group-based transformation.

Concern about this aspect of identity politics has crystallized around
the transparency of experience to the oppressed, and the univocality
of its interpretation. Experience is never, critics argue, simply
epistemically available prior to interpretation (Scott 1992); rather
it requires a theoretical framework—implicit or
explicit—to give it meaning. Moreover, if experience is the
origin of politics, then some critics worry that what Kruks (2001)
calls “an epistemology of provenance” will become the
norm: on this view, political perspectives gain legitimacy by virtue
of their articulation by subjects of particular experiences. This,
critics charge, closes off the possibility of critique of these
perspectives by those who don't share the experience, which in turn
inhibits political dialogue and coalition-building. Nonetheless,
poststructuralist skepticism about the possibility of experience
outside a hermeneutic frame has been countered with phenomenological
attempts to articulate a ground for experience in the lived body
(Alcoff 2000; see also Oksala 2004 and 2011; Stoller 2009).

From these understandings of subjectivity, it is easy to see how
critics of identity politics, and even some cautious supporters, have
feared that it is prone to essentialism. This expression is
another philosophical term of abuse, intended to capture a multitude
of sins. In its original contexts in metaphysics, the term implies the
belief that an object has a certain quality by virtue of which it is
what it is; for Locke, famously, the essence of a triangle is that it
is a three-sided shape. In the contemporary humanities the term is
used more loosely to imply, most commonly, an illegitimate
generalization about identity (Heyes 2000). In the case of identity
politics, two claims stand out as plausibly
“essentialist”: the first is the understanding of the
subject that characterizes a single axis of identity as discrete and
taking priority in representing the self—as if being
Asian-American, for example, were entirely separable from being a
woman. To the extent that identity politics urges mobilization around
a single axis, it will put pressure on participants to identify that
axis as their defining feature, when in fact they may well understand
themselves as integrated selves who cannot be represented so
selectively or even reductively (Spelman 1988). The second form of
essentialism is closely related to the first: generalizations made
about particular social groups in the context of identity politics may
come to have a disciplinary function within the group, not just
describing but also dictating the self-understanding that its members
should have. Thus, the supposedly liberatory new identity may inhibit
autonomy, as Anthony Appiah puts it, replacing “one kind of
tyranny with another” (Appiah 1994: 163). Just as
dominant groups in the culture at large insist that the marginalized
integrate by assimilating to dominant norms, so within some practices
of identity politics dominant sub-groups may, in theory and practice,
impose their vision of the group's identity onto all its members. For
example, in his films Black Is, Black Ain't and Tongues
Untied Marlon Riggs eloquently portrays the exclusion of Black
women and gay Black men from heterosexist and masculinist
understandings of African-American identity politics.

Or, theorizing the experience of hybridity for those whose identities
are especially far from norms of univocality, Gloria Anzaldúa,
for example, famously writes of her mestiza identity as a
Chicana, American, raised poor, a lesbian and a feminist, living in
the metaphoric and literal Borderlands of the American Southwest
(Anzaldúa 1999 [1987]). Some suggest the deployment of
“strategic essentialism”: we should act as ifan
identity were uniform only to achieve interim political goals, without
implying any deeper authenticity (Spivak 1990: 1–16). Others
argue that a relational social ontology, which makes clear the
fluidity and interdependence of social groups, should be developed as
an alternative to the reification of other approaches to identity
politics (Young 2000; Nelson 2001). These accounts of subjectivity,
ontologies, and ways of understanding solidarity and relationships
have enduring importance in philosophical scholarship in identity
politics.
3. Liberalism and Identity Politics

A key condition of possibility for contemporary identity politics was
institutionalized liberal democracy (Brown 1995). The citizen
mobilizations that made democracy real also shaped and unified groups
previously marginal to the polity, while extensions of formal rights
invited expectations of material and symbolic equality. The perceived
paucity of rewards offered by liberal capitalism, however, spurred
forms of radical critique that sought to explain the persistence of
oppression. At the most basic philosophical level, critics of
liberalism suggested that liberal social ontology—the model of
the nature of and relationship between subjects and
collectives—was misguided. The social ontology of most liberal
political theories consists of citizens conceptualized as essentially
similar individuals, as for example in John Rawls' famous thought
experiment using the “original position”, in which
representatives of the citizenry are conceptually divested of all
specific identities or affiliations in order to make rational
decisions about the social contract (Rawls 1971). To the extent that group
interests are represented in liberal polities, they tend to be
understood as associational, forms of interest group pluralism whereby
those sharing particular interests voluntarily join together to create
a political lobby. Citizens are free to register their individual
preferences (through voting, for example), or to aggregate themselves
for the opportunity to lobby more systematically (e.g., by forming an
association such as a neighborhood community league). These lobbies,
however, are not defined by the identity of their members so much as
by specific shared interests and goals, and when pressing their case
the marginalized subjectivity of the group members is not itself
called into question. Finally, political parties, the other primary
organs of liberal democratic government, critics suggest, have few
moments of inclusivity, being organized around party discipline,
responsiveness to lobby groups, and broad-based electoral popularity.
Ultimately conventional liberal democracy, diverse radical critics
claim, cannot effectively address the ongoing structural
marginalization that persists in late capitalist liberal states, and
may even be complicit with it (Young 1990; P. Williams 1991; Brown
1995; M. Williams 1998).

On a philosophical level, these understandings of the political
subject and its relationship to collectivity came to seem inadequate
to ensuring representation for women, gays and lesbians, or
racial-ethnic groups (M. Williams 1998). Critics charged that the
neutral citizen of liberal theory was in fact the bearer of an
identity coded white, male, bourgeois, able-bodied, and heterosexual
(Pateman 1988; Young 1990; Di Stefano 1991; Mills 1997; Pateman and
Mills 2007). This implicit ontology in part explained the persistent
historical failure of liberal democracies to achieve anything more
than token inclusion in power structures for members of marginalized
groups. A richer understanding of political subjects as constituted
through and by their social location was required. In particular, the
history and experience of oppression brought with it certain
perspectives and needs that could not be assimilated through existing
liberal structures. Individuals are oppressed by virtue of their
membership in a particular social group—that is, a
collective whose members have relatively little mobility into or out
of the collective, who usually experience their membership as
involuntary, who are generally identified as members by others, and
whose opportunities are deeply shaped by the relation of their group
to corollary groups through privilege and oppression (Cudd 2006).
Oppression, then, is the systematic limiting of opportunity or
constraints on self-determination because of such membership: for
example, Frantz Fanon eloquently describes the experience of being
always constrained by the white gaze as a Black man: 


I already knew that there were legends, stories, history, and above
all historicity… I was responsible at the same time
for my body, my race, for my ancestors. (Fanon 1968: 112) 


Conversely, members of dominant groups are
privileged—systematically advantaged by the
deprivations imposed on the oppressed. For example, in a widely cited
article Peggy McIntosh identifies whiteness as a dominant identity,
and lists 47 ways in which she is advantaged by being white compared
with her colleagues of color. These range from being able to buy
“flesh-colored” Band-Aids that will match her skin tone,
to knowing that she can be rude without provoking negative judgments
of her racial group, to being able to buy a house in a middle-class
community without risking neighbors' disapproval (1993).

Critics have also charged that assimilation (or, less
provocatively, integration) is a guiding principle of liberalism. If
the liberal subject is coded in the way Young (1990) suggests, then
attempts to apply liberal norms of equality will risk demanding that
the marginalized conform to the identities of their oppressors. For
example, many gays and lesbians have objected to campaigns to
institute “gay marriage” on the grounds that these legal
developments assimilate same-sex relationships to a heterosexual
model, rather than challenging its historical, material, and symbolic
terms (e.g., Card 2007). If this is equality, they claim,
then it looks suspiciously like the erasure of socially subordinate
identities rather than their genuine incorporation into the polity.
This suspicion helps to explain the affiliation of identity politics
with separatism. This latter is a set of positions that share
the view that attempts at integration of dominant and marginalized
groups so consistently compromise the identity or potential of the
less powerful that a distinct social and political space is the only
structure that will adequately protect them. In Canada, for example,
Québec separatists claim that the French language and
francophone culture are persistently erased within an overwhelmingly
dominant Anglo-American continent, despite the efforts of the Canadian
state to maintain its official bilingualism and to integrate
Québec into the nation. Given their long history of conflict
and marginalization, a separate and sovereign Québec, they
argue, is the only plausible solution (e.g., Laforest in Beiner and
Norman 2001). Analogous arguments have been made on behalf of Native
American and other indigenous peoples and African Americans (e.g.,
Alfred 1999, Asante 2000). Lesbian feminist separatists have claimed
that the central mechanism for the oppression of women under
patriarchy is heterosexuality. Understanding heterosexuality as a
forced contract or compulsory institution, they argue that women's
relationships with men are persistently characterized by domination
and subordination. Only divorce (literal and figurative) and the
creation of new geographic and political communities of
woman-identified women will end patriarchal exploitation, and forge a
liberatory female identity (Rich 1980; Frye 1983; Radicalesbians 1988
[1970]; Wittig 1992).

One of the central charges against identity politics by liberals,
among others, has been its alleged reliance on notions of sameness to
justify political mobilization. Looking for people who are
like you rather than who share your political values as
allies runs the risk of sidelining critical political analysis of
complex social locations and ghettoizing members of social groups as
the only persons capable of making or understanding claims to justice.
After an initial wave of relatively uncompromising identity politics,
proponents have taken these criticisms to heart and moved to more
philosophically nuanced accounts that appeal to coalitions as
better organizing structures. On this view, separatism around a single
identity formation must be muted by recognition of the internally
heterogeneous and overlapping nature of social group memberships. The
idea of a dominant identity from which the oppressed may need to
dissociate themselves remains, but the alternative becomes a more
fluid and diverse grouping, less intent on guarantees of internal
homogeneity and more concerned with identifying “family
resemblances” than literal identity (Heyes 2000).

This trajectory—from formal inclusion in liberal polities, to
assertions of difference and new demands under the rubric of identity
politics, to internal and external critique of identity political
movements—has taken different forms in relation to different
identities. Increasingly it is difficult to see what divides
contemporary positions, and some commentators have suggested possible
rapprochements between liberalism and identity politics
(e.g., Laden 2001). A problem in sorting through such claims is the
vagueness of philosophical discussions of identity politics, which are
often content to list their rubric under the mantra of “gender,
race, class, etc.” although these three are not obviously
analogous, nor is it clear which identities are gestured toward by the
predictable “etc.” (or why they do not merit naming).
Class in particular has a distinctively different political history,
and contemporary critics of identity politics, as I'll discuss below,
often take themselves to be defending class analysis against identity
politics' depoliticizing effects. Of those many forms of identity
politics to which large academic literatures attach, however, I'll
briefly highlight key issues concerning gender, sexuality, and a
complex cluster of race, ethnicity and multiculturalism.
4. Gender and Feminism

Twentieth century feminism has consistently opposed biological
determinism: the view that shared biological features among a certain
group lead inevitably to certain social roles or functions. For
example, one early opponent of women's suffrage suggested that women
and men had different metabolic systems—katabolic (or
“energy-expending”) in men, and anabolic (or
“energy-conserving”) in women—that precluded women's
effective or informed participation in politics (see Moi 2000:
3–21 for discussion). Feminist identity politics, then, takes up
the task of articulating women's understandings of themselves (and of
men) without reducing femininity (or masculine dominance) to biology.
Whatever experiences women share will be experiences of femininity not
necessarily resulting from an immutable sexual difference but rather
from social injustice. Put less usefully, perhaps, although sex (the
features of bodies we typically aggregate as male and female) may be
biological, gender (the social roles we call femininity and
masculinity) is “socially constructed.” Claims about the
“social construction” of the identities of identity
politics permeate the field as a logical extension of its mandate,
although with tremendous philosophical vagueness attaching to the
content of the phrase, which serves primarily to emphasize the
contingency of (the content of) any particular category or concept
(see Haslanger 1995, 2005; Hacking 1999). The fear of biological
determinism has led to tremendous caution in feminist theorizing: any
invocation of features of female bodies as a basis for identity
political claims risks being seen as (inadvertently) complicit with
sexist views. Furthermore, the very idea of reclaiming women's
identities from patriarchy has been criticized as merely an
affirmation of a slave morality—a Nietzschean term describing
the attachments of the oppressed as they rationalize and valorize
their condition. Attempts from various quarters to capture and revalue
the distinctively feminine (by theorizing, for example,
“maternal thinking”, [Ruddick 1989], or écriture
féminine [Cixous 1976]) risk, critics claim, endorsing existing
power relations. Thus the heated debates surrounding the “ethic
of care” in moral psychology, for example, line up around two
constellations of positions: on the one hand, advocates of the ethic
of care as a distinctively feminine contribution to moral reasoning
point to its benefits for negotiating a human social world
characterized by webs of relationship, and to the pathologies of the
dissociation that is culturally linked to masculinities. Carol
Gilligan is the best known proponent of this position (although the
details of her complex paradigm are often glossed over or
misrepresented) (Gilligan 1993 [1982]). Her critics charge that she
reifies femininity—were women not oppressed, they would not
speak in the voice of care, thus casting doubt on the desirability of
attempts to reclaim it as part of a liberatory framework. In other
words, the current construction of femininity is so deeply imbricated
with the oppression of women that such attempts will always end up
reinforcing the very discourse they seek to undermine (Butler 1999
[1990]); this critique has strong affiliations with poststructuralism
(which are discussed below).

The narrative of feminist interpretation of gender relations most
commonly offered points to universalizing claims made on behalf of
women during the so-called “second wave” of the feminist
movement in the late 1960s and 1970s in Western countries. The most
often discussed (and criticized) second wave feminist
icons—women such as Betty Friedan or Gloria Steinem—are
white, middle-class, and heterosexual, although this historical
picture too often neglects the contributions of lesbian feminists,
feminists of color, and working-class feminists, which were less
visible in popular culture, perhaps, but arguably equally influential
in the lives of women. For some early radical feminists, women's
oppression as women was the core of identity politics, and
should not be diluted with other identity issues. For example,
Shulamith Firestone, in her classic book The Dialectic of
Sex, argued that “racism is sexism
extended”, and that the Black Power movement represented
only sexist cooptation of Black women into a new kind of subservience
to Black men. Thus for Black women to fight racism (especially among
white women) was to divide the feminist movement, which properly
focused on challenging patriarchy, understood as struggle between men
and women, the foundational dynamic of all oppressions (Firestone
1970: esp. 103–120).

Claims about the universality of gender made during the second wave
have been extensively criticized in feminist theory for failing to
recognize the specificity of their own constituencies. For example,
Friedan's famous proposition that women needed to get out of the
household and into the professional workplace was, bell hooks pointed
out, predicated on the experience of a post-war generation of white,
middle-class married women confined to housekeeping and child-rearing
by their professional husbands (Friedan 1963; hooks 1981). Many women
of color and working-class women had worked outside their homes
(sometimes in other women's homes) for decades; some lesbians
had a history of working in traditionally male occupations or living
alternative domestic lives without a man's “family wage.”
Similarly, some women from the less developed world have been critical
of Northern feminist theory for globalizing its claims. Such moves
construct “Third World” women, they argue, as less
developed or enlightened versions of their “First World”
counterparts, rather than understanding their distinctively different
situation (Mohanty 1991 [1984]); or, they characterize liberation
for Northern women in ways that exacerbate the exploitation of the
global poor: by supporting economic conditions in which increasing
numbers of western women can abuse immigrant domestic workers, for
example (Anderson 2000). The question of what a global feminism should
make of identity political claims, or how it should conceive
solidarity among women from massively different locations within the
global economic system remains open (Weir 2008).

Thus feminist claims made about the oppression of women founded in a
notion of shared experience and identity are now invariably greeted
with philosophical suspicion. Some critics have charged that this
suspicion itself has become excessive, undercutting the very
possibility of generalizations about women that gives feminist theory
its force (Martin 1994), or that it marks the distancing of feminist
philosophy from its roots in political organizing. Others suggest
alternative methods for feminist theory that will minimize the
emphasis on shared criteria of membership in a social group and stress
instead the possibilities for alliances founded on non-identical
connections (Young 1997; Heyes 2000; Cornell 2000). It is commonplace
to hear that “identity” is a term in serious crisis in
feminist thought, and that feminist praxis must move beyond identity
politics (Dean 1996). Nonetheless, sex-gender as a set of analytical
categories continues to guide feminist thought, albeit in troubled and
troubling ways.
5. From Gay and Lesbian to Queer

Nowhere have conceptual struggles over identity been more pronounced
than in the lesbian and gay liberation movement. The notion that
sexual object choice can define who a person is has been profoundly
challenged by the advent of queer politics. Visible early lesbian and
gay activists emphasized the immutable and essential natures of their
sexual identities. For some, they were a distinctively different
natural kind of person, with the same rights as heterosexuals (another
natural kind) to find fulfillment in marriage, property ownership, and
so on. This strand of gay organizing (perhaps associated more closely
with white, middle-class gay men, at least until the radicalizing
effects of the AIDS pandemic) with its complex simultaneous appeals to
difference and to sameness has a genealogy going back to pre-Stonewall
homophilic activism (see discussion in Terry, esp. 353–7). While
early lesbian feminists had a very different politics, oriented around
liberation from patriarchy and the creation of separate spaces for
woman-identified women, many still appealed to a more authentic,
distinctively feminist self. Heterosexual feminine identities were
products of oppression, yet the literature imagines a utopian
alternative where woman-identification will liberate the lesbian
within every woman (e.g., Radicalesbians 1988 [1970]).

The paradigm shift that the term “queer” signals, then, is
a shift to a model in which identities are more self-consciously
historicized, seen as contingent products of particular genealogies
rather than enduring or essential natural kinds (Phelan 1989 and 1994;
Blasius 2001). Michel Foucault's work, especially his History of
Sexuality, is the most widely cited progenitor of this view:
Foucault famously argues that 


homosexuality appeared as one of the forms of sexuality when it was
transposed from the practice of sodomy onto a kind of interior
androgyny, a hermaphrodism of the soul. The sodomite had been a
temporary aberration; the homosexual was now a species. (Foucault
1980: 43) 


Although Foucault is the most often cited as the originator of such
genealogical arguments about homosexuality, other often neglected
writers contributed to the emergence of this new paradigm (e.g., M.
McIntosh 1968). In western popular culture such theories co-exist
uneasily with biologically essentialist accounts of sexual identity,
which look for a particular gene, brain structure, or other biological
feature that is noninteractive with environment and that will explain
same-sex sexual desire. At stake are not only epistemological and
metaphysical questions about how we can know what kind of thing
“sexual orientation” might be, but also a host of moral
and political questions. If sexual identity is biologically caused,
then it is as hard to hold an individual morally responsible for being
homosexual as it is to blame someone for being Black (which may not be
as hard as some would like to think). Some gay activists thus see
biological explanations of sexuality as offering a defense against
homophobic commentators who believe that gays can voluntarily change
their “immoral” desires. Indeed, much of the intuitive
hostility to genealogical or social constructionist accounts of
sexuality within gay and lesbian communities seems to come from the
dual sense of many individuals that they could not have been other
than gay, and that anything less than a radically essentialist view of
sexuality will open the door to further attempts to “cure”
them of their homosexuality (through “ex-gay ministries”,
for example).

Whatever the truth of these fears, Eve Sedgwick is right, in my view,
to say that no specific form of explanation for the origins of sexual
preference will be proof against the infinitely varied strategies of
homophobia (Sedgwick 1990: esp. 22–63). That sexual orientation
takes on a metaphysical life of its own, for example, elides the fact
that it is generally sexual behavior—not an abstract
“identity”—that is the object of moral
disapprobation. Queer politics, then, works to trouble the
categories “gay” and “lesbian”, as well as
“heterosexual” (or indeed other categories of social
thought in general), and eschews a genetic quest for the origins of
homosexuality. In addition to historicizing and contextualizing
sexuality, including the very idea of sexual identity, the shift to
queer is also characterized by deconstructive methods. Rather than
understanding sexual identities as a set of discrete and independent
social types, queer theorists adduce evidence and read to emphasize
their mutual implication: for example, such thinkers love to point out
that the word “homosexuality” first appears in English in
1897, but the term “heterosexuality” is back-formed, first
used some years later (Garber 1995: 39–42). Heterosexuality
comes into existence as a way of understanding the nature of
individuals after the homosexual has been diagnosed;
homosexuality requires heterosexuality as its opposite,
despite its self-professed stand-alone essence. Queer theorists point
out that the homo/hetero dichotomy, like many others in western
intellectual history that it arguably draws on and reinforces, is not
only mutually implicated, but also hierarchical (heterosexuality is
superior, normal, and originary, while homosexuality is inferior,
deviant, and derivative) and masquerades as natural or descriptive.
The task of a more radical “identity politics”, on this
vision, is to constantly denaturalize and deconstruct the identities
in question, with a political goal of their subversion rather than
their accommodation.

An exemplary conflict within the identity politics of sexuality
focuses on the expansion of gay and lesbian organizing to those with
other queer affiliations, especially bisexual and transgendered
activists. Skepticism about inclusion of these groups in
organizational mandates, community centers, parades, and festivals has
origins in more traditional understandings of identity politics that
see reclaiming lesbian and/or gay identity from its corruption in a
homophobic society as a task compromised by those whose identities are
read as diluted, treacherous, ambiguous, or peripheral. Some lesbian
feminist critiques of transgender, for example, see male-to-female
transsexuals in particular as male infiltrators of women's space,
individuals so intent on denying their male privilege that they will
modify their bodies and attempt to pass as women to do it; bisexual
women dabble in lesbian life, but flee to straight privilege when
occasion demands (see Heyes 2003 for references and discussion). These
arguments have been challenged in turn by writers who see them as
attempts to justify purity of identity that merely replace the old
exclusions with new dictatorships (Stone 1991; Lugones 1994) and inhibit
coalitional organizing against conservative foes.
6. Race, Ethnicity, and Multiculturalism

Similar debates in philosophy of race highlight the contingent and
historical nature of “race” as a category of identity.
Despite a complex history of biological essentialism in the
presentation of racial typologies, the notion of a genetic basis to
racial difference has been largely discredited; the criteria different
societies (at different times) use to organize and hierarchize
“racial formations” are political and contingent (Omi and
Winant 1986). While skin color, appearance of facial features, or hair
type are in some trivial sense genetically determined, the grouping of
different persons into races does not pick out any patterned
biological difference (although see the debate “Is Race
Real?” in the internet resources. What it does pick out is a set
of social meanings with political ramifications (Alcoff 1997, 2006).
The most notorious example of an attempt to rationalize racial
difference as biological is the) U.S. “one-drop rule”,
under which an individual was characterized as Black if they had
“one drop” or more of “Black blood.” Adrian
Piper points out that not only does this belief persist into
contemporary readings of racial identity, it also implies that given
the prolonged history of racial mixing in the US—both coerced
and voluntary—very significant numbers of nominally
“white” people in the U.S. today should be re-classified
as “Black” (Piper 1996). In those countries that have had
official racial classifications, individuals' struggles to be
re-classified (almost always as a member of a more privileged racial
group) are often invoked to highlight the contingency of race,
especially at the borders of its categories. And a number of histories
of racial groups that have apparently changed their racial
identification—Jews, Italians, or the Irish, for
example—also illustrate social constructionist theses (Ignatiev
1995). The claim that race is “socially constructed”,
however, does not in itself mark out a specific identity politics.
Indeed, the very contingency of race and its lack of correlation with
categories that have more meaning in everyday life (such as ethnicity
or culture) may circumscribe its political usefulness: just as
feminists have found the limits of appeals to “women's
identity”, so Asian-Americans may find with ethnicities and
cultures as diverse as Chinese, Indian, or Vietnamese that their
racial designation itself provides little common ground. That a US
citizen of both Norwegian and Ashkenazi Jewish heritage will check
that they are “white” on a census form says relatively
little (although nonetheless something) about their experience of
their identity, or indeed of their very different relationship to
anti-Semitism. Tropes of separatism and the search for forms of
authentic self-expression are related to race via ethno-cultural
understandings of identity: for example, the U.S. Afro-centric
movement appeals to the cultural significance of African heritage for
Black Americans (Asante 2000).

Racial categories are perhaps most politically significant in their
contested relation to racism. Racism attempts to reduce members of
social groups to their racial features, drawing on a complex history
of racial stereotypes to do so. Racism is arguably analogous to other
forms of oppression in being both overt and institutionalized,
manifested both as deliberate acts by individuals and as unplanned
systemic outcomes. The specific direction of US discussion of the
categories of race has been around color-blind versus color-conscious
public policy (Appiah and Gutmann 1996). Color-blindness—that
is, the view that race should be ignored in public policy and
everyday exchange—has hegemony in popular discourse. Drawing
attention to race—whether in a personal description or in
university admissions procedures—is unfair and racist. Advocates
of color-consciousness, on the other hand, argue that racism will not
disappear without proactive efforts, which require the invocation of
race. Thus affirmative action, for example, requires statistics about
the numbers of members of oppressed racial groups employed in certain
contexts, which in turn requires racial identification and
categorization. Thus those working against racism face a paradox
familiar in identity politics: the very identity they aim to dispel
must be invoked to make their case.

The literature on multiculturalism takes up questions of race,
ethnicity, and cultural diversity in relation to the liberal state.
Some multicultural states—notably Canada—allegedly aim to
permit the various cultural identities of their residents to be
preserved rather than assimilated, despite the concern that the
over-arching liberal aims of such states may be at odds with the
values of those they claim to protect. For example, Susan Moller Okin
argues that multiculturalism is sometimes bad for women, especially
when it works to preserve patriarchal values in minority cultures. If
multiculturalism implies a form of cultural relativism that prevents
judgment of or interference with the “private” practices
of minorities, female genital mutilation, forced marriage, compulsory
veiling, or being deprived of education may be the consequence. Okin's
critics counter that she falsely portrays culture as static,
internally homogeneous, and defined by men's values, allowing
liberalism to represent a culturally unmarked medium for the defense
of individual rights (Okin et al. 1999). For many commentators on
multiculturalism this is the nub of the issue: is there an
inconsistency between defending the rights of minority cultures, while
prohibiting those (allegedly) cultural practices that the state judges
illiberal (Eisenberg and Spinner-Halev 2005; Phillips 2007)? Can
liberalism sustain the cultural and value-neutrality that some
commentators still ascribe to it, or to what extent should it embrace
its own cultural specificity (Taylor 1994; Habermas 1994;
Foster and Herzog 1994; Kymlicka 1995; Deveaux 2000)? Defenders of the
right to cultural expression of minorities in multicultural states
thus practice forms of identity politics that are both made possible
by liberalism and sometimes in tension with it (see Laden and Owen
2007).
7. Contemporary philosophical engagement with identity politics

Since its 1970s vogue, identity politics as a mode of organizing and
set of political philosophical positions has undergone numerous
attacks by those motivated to point to its flaws, whether by its
pragmatic exclusions or more programmatically. For many leftist
commentators, in particular, identity politics is something of a
bête noire, representing the capitulation to cultural
criticism in place of analysis of the material roots of oppression.
Marxists, both orthodox and revisionist, and
socialists—especially those who came of age during the rise of
the New Left in western countries—have often interpreted the
perceived ascendancy of identity politics as representing the end of
radical materialist critique (see discussions in Farred 2000 and McNay
2008: 126–161). Identity politics, for these critics, is both
factionalizing and depoliticizing, drawing attention away from the
ravages of late capitalism toward superstructural cultural
accommodations that leave economic structures unchanged. For example,
while allowing that both recognition and redistribution have a place
in contemporary politics, Nancy Fraser laments the supremacy of
perspectives that take injustice to inhere in “cultural”
constructions of identity that the people to whom they are attributed
want to reject. Such recognition models, she argues, require remedies
that “valorize the group's ‘groupness’ by
recognizing its specificity”, thus reifying identities that
themselves are products of oppressive structures. By contrast,
injustices of distribution require redistributive remedies that aim
“to put the group out of business as a group” (Fraser
1997: 19).

More recent scholarship challenges the politics of recognition from
other directions. For example, Glen Coulthard argues that the shift in
colonial state-indigenous relations in present-day Canada from
unabashed assimilationism to demands for mutual recognition
(especially of cultural distinctiveness) cannot be an adequate
decolonization strategy. Reading the intellectual history of the
politics of recognition through Hegel to Sartre to Fanon to Benhabib,
Coulthard argues that this discourse is a reiteration (and sometimes a
cover-up) of the patriarchal, racist, and colonial relations between
indigenous people and the Canadian state that it purports to
ameliorate. Instead, he defends a paradigm of critical indigenous
resurgence that draws on cultural history and economic practices that
are neither essentialized nor romanticized, but that also do not rest
on concession-oriented relation building with the existing Canadian
state (2014).

The reasons given for the alleged turn away from economic oppression
to themes of culture, language, and identity in contemporary politics
differ. First, the institutionalization of North American radicalism
in the middle-class bastion of academia creates incentives for
intellectuals to minimize the political importance of their own class
privilege, and focus instead on other identities (in turn divorced
from their economic inflections). Second, as Wendy Brown suggests,
capitalist suffering may have been displaced onto other identities,
interpreted through the lens of class aspiration (Brown 1995:
59–60). Third, the turn away from economic analysis may be less
dramatic than some critics believe. Global capitalism is widening the
gap between the over- and less-developed countries, and working to
further marginalize women, ethnic or indigenous minorities, and the
disabled in the so-called Third and Fourth
 Worlds.[1]
 A now longstanding anti-global-capital movement has grappled with
identity political issues for some time (see Lott 2000). How is
twenty-first century anti-capitalist activism imbricated with identity
politics (Upping the Anti 2005)? The enormous tangible
consequences of the 2008 economic crisis, subsequent public outrage
about economic inequalities, and the 2011 “Occupy”
movement motivate a widespread and growing return to left economic
critique that signals a resurgent class politics. There is discussion
of the relationship between popular protest against inequalities of
wealth and other political movements: What does Occupy owe to feminist
and civil rights organizing and consciousness-raising tactics, and why
should worsening economic disparities be understood as feminist and
anti-racist struggles as well as struggles of class? Has Occupy in
North America reckoned with its implication with the history of
settler colonialism? More radically, does contemporary political
engagement with local and global inequality indicate a radical
departure from old understandings of ideology versus identity, and
refocus political attention on “meaning, action, and
feeling” (Protevi 2011) or on the significance of embodied
action in shared space (Butler 2011)?

More general debates about the philosophical adequacy of a politics of
recognition continue: for example, in her 2008 book Against
Recognition, Lois McNay argues that identity claims that are at
the heart of many contemporary social movements are represented as
demands for recognition in the context of an over-simplified account
of power. Although theorists of recognition typically start from a
Hegelian model of the subject as dialogically formed and necessarily
situated, they too quickly abandon the radical consequences of such a
view for subject formation, McNay argues. The subject of recognition
becomes both personalized and hypostatized—divorced from the
larger social systems of power that create conditions of possibility
for particular “identities” (2008: esp. 1–23). In
this way, the debates around subject-formation that are at the heart
of philosophical discussions of identity politics parallel debates
between Habermasians and Foucauldians about the possibility of a
transcendental subject that can ground practices of critique (see
Allen 2008).

The problems that motivated identity political movements are not gone
in 2012: Aboriginal cultures are often ignored in mainstream
educational systems, violence against women still permeates our lives,
“equality” for queer people is still typically premised on
sameness to privileged heterosexual subjectivity, and so on.
Nonetheless, the very term “identity politics” seems in
many ways hopelessly outmoded. Models premised on categorical
identification seem increasingly inadequate to the complexities of our
becomings, and intra-group sameness as the basis of political
solidarity feels not only exclusionary but also too heavily predicated
on negation and loss.

In particular, poststructuralist challengers charge that identity
politics rests on a mistaken view of the subject that assumes a
metaphysics of substance—that is, that a cohesive,
self-identical subject is ontologically (if not actually) prior to any
form of social injustice (Butler 1999). This subject has certain core
essential attributes that define her or his identity, over which are
imposed forms of socialization that cause her or him to internalize
other nonessential attributes. This position, they suggest,
misrepresents both the ontology of identity and its political
significance. The alternative view offered by poststructuralists is
that the subject is itself always already a product of discourse,
which represents both the condition of possibility for a certain
subject-position and a constraint on what forms of self-making
individuals may engage. There is no real identity—individual or
group-based—that is separable from its conditions of
possibility, and any political appeal to identity formations must
engage with the paradox of acting from the very subject-positions it
must also oppose. Central to this position is the observation that any
claim to identity must organize itself around a constitutive
exclusion:


An identity is established in relation to a series of differences that
have become socially recognized. These differences are essential to
its being. If they did not coexist as differences, it would not exist
in its distinctness and solidity. Entrenched in this indispensable
relation is a second set of tendencies, themselves in need of
exploration, to conceal established identities into fixed forms,
thought and lived as if their structure expressed the true order of
things. When these pressures prevail, the maintenance of one identity
(or field of identities) involves the conversion of some differences
into otherness, into evil, or one of its numerous surrogates. Identity
requires differences in order to be, and it converts difference into
otherness in order to secure its own self-certainty. (Connolly 2002:
64)


The dangers of identity politics, then, are that it casts as authentic
to the self or group an identity that in fact is defined by its
opposition to an Other. Reclaiming such an identity as one's own
merely reinforces its dependence on this dominant Other, and further
internalizes and reinforces an oppressive hierarchy. While the charge
that identity politics promotes a victim mentality is often a facile
pot-shot, Wendy Brown offers a more sophisticated caution against the
dangers of ressentiment (the moralizing revenge of the
powerless). She argues that identity politics has its own genealogy in
liberal capitalism that relentlessly reinforces the “wounded
attachments” it claims to sever: 


Politicized identity thus enunciates itself, makes claims for itself,
only by entrenching, restating, dramatizing, and inscribing its pain
in politics; it can hold out no future—for itself or
others—that triumphs over this pain. (Brown 1995: 74) 


This challenge has been met with more intense discussion of the
temporality of identity politics: can an identification be premised on
a forward-looking solidarity rather than a ressentiment-laden
exclusion (see Zerilli 2005; Weir 2008; Bhambra and Margee 2010)? Further, what
political alternatives does the poststructuralist model imply?
Proponents of identity politics have suggested that poststructuralism
is politically impotent, capable only of deconstruction and never of
action (Hartsock 1998: 205–226). Yet there are political
projects motivated by poststructuralist theses. For example, Judith
Butler's famous articulation of performativity as a way of
understanding subject-development suggests to her and others the
possibility of disarticulating seamless performances to subvert the
meanings with which they are invested (Butler 1999 [1990]). Drag can
constitute such a disarticulation, although other critics have
suggested other examples; Adrian Piper's conceptual art seeks to
disrupt the presumed self-identity of race by showing how it is
actively interpreted and reconstituted, never determinate and
self-evident. Linda Zerilli discusses the “world-building”
work of the Milan Women's Bookstore Collective—a feminist group
that rejects a subject-centred view of women's injured status in favor
of a protensive practice of freedom (2005: chapter 3).

The continuing intellectual crisis surrounding identity politics
paradoxically marks its importance to contemporary political
philosophy and practice. Both flexible and extensible, identity
political tropes continue to influence new political claims: an
extensive literature approaches disability, for example, as a diverse
and dynamic set of experiences of social injustice that sediment
self-understandings among the disabled and motivate a politics that
insists dominant cultures change their exclusionary social practices
(Wendell 1996; Davis 1997 [2006]; Silvers 1998, Siebers 2008). Perhaps
most important for philosophers, any idea of identity itself appears
to be in a period of rapid evolution. Changing technologies are having
a profound impact on our philosophical understandings of who we are.
Attempts to decode human genetics (Abu El-Haj 2007) and possibly shape
the genetic make-up of future persons (Wald 2000), to clone human
beings, or to xeno-transplant animal organs, and so on, all raise deep
philosophical questions about the kind of thing a person is. We are
capable of changing our bodies in ways that dramatically change our
identities, including through sex change or cosmetic surgeries, with
immediate consequences for the kinds of identities I have been
discussing in this essay. As more and more people form political
alliances using disembodied communications technologies, the kinds of
identities that matter seem also to shift (Turkle 1995). Behaviors,
beliefs, and self-understandings are increasingly pathologized as
syndromes and disorders, including through the identification of new
“types” of person (in turn generating possibilities for
new forms of identity politics) (Elliott 2003a and 2003b; Rose
1997).

Increasingly, this long list of confounding variables for identity
political thought is finding philosophical cohesion in anti-identarian
models that take somatic life, affect, time, or space as organizing
concepts. For example, both new materialisms and neo-vitalist
philosophies, in their political contexts, share an emphasis on
becoming over being, a “posthumanist”
reluctance to award ontological priority to any shared characteristics
of human beings (Wolfe 2010), a skepticism about discourses of
authenticity and belonging, and a desire to focus on generative,
forward-looking political solutions (Bhambra and Margee 2010; Coole
and Frost 2010; Connolly 2011). The lines between humans and other animals (Haraway
2007), between the living and the non-living (Sharp 2011), and between
objects and subjects (Bennett 2009) are radically challenged. To
varying degrees these emphases are echoed in other process ontologies
within contemporary “continental” thought—whether
the ethics of self-transformation organized around Foucault's last
work (Heyes 2007), the reintroduction of bodies as socially and
biologically dynamic and intra-active forces in forming political
subjectivities (Protevi 2009), or the ways indirect, technologically
mediated experience shapes so much of our contemporary
“identities” (Turkle 2011). This mass of shifts and
contradictions might be thought to mark the end of the era of identity
politics. Whatever limits are inherent to identity political
formations, however, the unfashionableness of the phrase itself belies
the deep implication of questions of power and legitimate government
with demands for self-determination that are unlikely to fade
away.