Values, such as liberty and equality, are sometimes said to be
incommensurable in the sense that their value cannot be reduced to a
common measure. The possibility of value incommensurability is thought
to raise deep questions about practical reason and rational choice as
well as related questions concerning topics as diverse as
akrasia, moral dilemmas, the plausibility of utilitarianism,
and the foundations of liberalism. This entry outlines answers in the
contemporary literature to these questions, starting with questions
about the nature and possibility of value incommensurability.
 
1. Value Incommensurability 

Incommensurability between values must be distinguished from the kind
of incommensurability associated with Paul Feyerabend (1978, 1981,
1993) and Thomas Kuhn (1977, 1983, 1996) in epistemology and the
philosophy of science. Feyerabend and Kuhn were concerned with
incommensurability between rival theories or paradigms — that
is, the inability to express or comprehend one conceptual scheme, such
as Aristotelian physics, in terms of another, such as Newtonian
physics.

In contrast, contemporary inquiry into value incommensurability
concerns comparisons among abstract values (such as liberty or
equality) or particular bearers of value (such as a certain
institution or its effects on liberty or equality). The term
“bearer of value” is to be understood broadly. Bearers of
value can be objects of potential choice (such as a career) or states
of affairs that cannot be chosen (such as a beautiful sunset). Such
bearers of value are valuable in virtue of the abstract value or
values they instantiate or display (so, for example, an institution
might be valuable in virtue of the liberty or equality that it
engenders or embodies).
1.1 Measurement and Comparison 

The term “incommensurable” suggests the lack of a common
measure. This idea has its historical roots in mathematics. For the
ancient Greeks, who had not recognized irrational numbers, the
dimensions of certain mathematical objects were found to lack a common
unit of measurement. Consider the side and the diagonal of a square.
These can be compared or ranked ordinally, since the diagonal is
longer. However, without the use of irrational numbers, there is no
way to specify with cardinal numbers exactly how much longer the
diagonal is than the side of a square. The significance of this kind
of incommensurability, especially for the Pythagoreans, is a matter of
some debate (Burkert 1972, 455-465). Hippasus of Metapontum, who was
thought by many to have demonstrated this kind of incommensurability,
is held by legend to have been drowned by the gods for revealing his
discovery (Heath 1921, 154; von Fritz 1970, 407).

Given these historical roots, some authors reserve the term
“incommensurable” for comparisons that can be made, but
not cardinally (Stocker 1980, 176; Stocker 1997, 203) or not precisely
(Chang 1997b, 2). Others interpret the idea of a common measure more
broadly. On this broader interpretation, for there to be a common
measure, all that is required is that ordinal comparisons or rankings
are possible. Values are then incommensurable only when not even an
ordinal comparison or ranking is possible. Unless stated otherwise,
this entry adopts this latter interpretation.
1.2 Incommensurable or Incomparable? 

Because the idea of comparison is closely tied to the topic of value
incommensurability, this has led to use of the term
“incomparable” alongside “incommensurable” in
the literature.  Some authors use the terms interchangeably
(e.g., Raz 1986). Others use them to refer to distinct concepts (e.g.,
Chang 1997b).  This entry distinguishes between the two concepts
in the following manner.

Joseph Raz defines two bearers of value as incommensurable if it is
false that of the two “either one is better than the other or
they are of equal value” (1986, 342). Raz offers an example in
which a person faces the choice between two equally successful
careers: one as a lawyer and one as a clarinetist. Neither career
seems better than the other, and they also do not appear to be equally
good. If they were of equal value, then a slightly improved version of
the legal career would be better than the musical career, but this
judgment appears incorrect. The legal career and the musical career,
according to Raz, are incommensurable.

Ruth Chang has proposed use of the term “incomparable” to
describe the legal career and the musical career (1997b, 4). Two
bearers of value are held to be incomparable if no positive
comparative judgment of their value is true. Positive comparative
judgments of value specify the way in which two items compare (e.g.,
“better than”) rather than the way in which two items do
not compare (e.g., “not better than”) in virtue of some
value.

Drawing on Chang’s proposal, this entry uses the term
“incomparable” ordinarily to describe two or more concrete
bearers of value of which no positive comparative evaluative judgment
is true. In contrast, this entry uses the term
“incommensurable” to describe the way in which two or more
abstract values stand in relation to one another. Subsection 3.1
considers in greater detail the relationship between the
incomparability of bearers of value and the incommensurability of
values. The remainder of section 1 considers ways in which to conceive
of incommensurable values.
1.3 Conceptions of Value Incommensurability 

This section outlines three conceptions of value incommensurability,
each one capturing some sense in which incommensurable values lack a
common measure.

The first conception characterizes value incommensurability in terms
of restrictions on how the further realization of one value outranks
realization of another value. James Griffin has proposed forms of
value incommensurability of this sort. One form involves what he calls
“trumping.” In a conflict between values A and
B, A is said to trump B if
“any amount of A, no matter how small, is more
valuable than any amount of B, no matter how
large” (Griffin 1986, 83). A weaker form of value
incommensurability involves what Griffin calls
“discontinuity.” Two values, A and B,
are incommensurable in this sense if “so long as we have enough
of B any amount of A outranks any further amount of
B; or that enough of A outranks any amount of
B” (Griffin 1986, 85).

If values are incommensurable in this first sense, there is no
ambiguity whether the realization of one value outranks realization of
the other. Ambiguity as to whether the realization of one value
outranks realization of the other, however, is thought by many
theorists to be a central feature of incommensurable values. The
second and third conceptions of value incommensurability aim to
capture this feature.

According to the second conception, values are incommensurable if and
only if there is no true general overall ranking of the realization of
one value against the realization of the other value. David Wiggins,
for example, puts this forward as one conception of value
incommensurability. He writes that two values are incommensurable if
“there is no general way in which A and B trade off in the whole
range of situations of choice and comparison in which they
figure” (1997, 59).

This second conception of value incommensurability denies what Henry
Richardson calls “strong commensurability” (1994,
104-105). Strong commensurability is the thesis that there is a true
ranking of the realization of one value against the realization of the
other value in terms of one common value across all conflicts of
value. A denial of such a singular common value, however, does not
rule out what Richardson calls “weak commensurability”
(1994, 105). Weak commensurability is the thesis that in any given
conflict of values, there is a true ranking of the realization of one
value against the realization of the other value in terms of some
value. This value may be one of the values in question or some
independent value. This value also may differ across value conflicts.
The denial of strong commensurability does not entail a denial of weak
commensurability. Even if there is no systematic or general way to
resolve any given conflict of values, there may be some value in
virtue of which the realization of one value ranks against realization
of the other. Donald Regan defends the thesis of strong
commensurability (Regan 1997). Depending on how the relationship
between value incommensurability and incomparability is construed
(subsection 3.1), Ruth Chang could be considered a defender of weak
commensurability. She argues that “nameless values”
combine values in a way that allows for the comparability of
alternatives in virtue of these nameless values (Chang 2004).

The third conception of value incommensurability denies both strong
and weak commensurability (Richardson 1994, Wiggins 1997, Williams
1981). This conception claims that in some conflicts of values, there
is no true ranking of values.

This third conception of value incommensurability is sometimes said to
be necessary to explain why, in conflicts of value, a gain in one
value does not always cancel the loss in another value. This view
assumes that, whenever there is a true ranking between the realization
of one value and the realization of another value, the gain in one of
the values cancels the loss in the other. Many commentators question
that assumption. This entry leaves open the possibility that when
there is a true ranking between the realization of one value and the
realization of another value, the gain in one of the two values need
not cancel the loss in the other.

If we accept this possibility, a number of questions arise. One
question is what a ranking of realizations of values means if a gain
in one value does not cancel the loss in the other. A second question
is whether the first and second conceptions of value
incommensurability each admit of two versions: one version in which
the gain in one value cancels the loss of the other and one version in
which it does not. A third question concerns the relation between
value incommensurability and tragedy. It may be thought that what
makes a choice tragic is that, no matter which alternative is chosen,
the gain in value cannot cancel the loss in the other value. Not all
authors, however, regard all value conflicts involving incommensurable
values as tragic (Richardson 1994, 117). Wiggins, for example,
reserves the second conception of value incommensurability for what he
calls “common or garden variety incommensurable” choices
and the third conception for what he calls “circumstantially cum
tragically incommensurable” choices (1997, 64).
2. Incomparability 

Rather than focus on commensurability between abstract values, a
number of authors focus on the comparability between concrete bearers
of value, often in the context of choice (Broome 1997, 2000; Chang
1997, 2002; Griffin 1986; Raz 1986). Bearers of value sometimes appear
incomparable in cases like Joseph Raz’s example of the choice
between careers (described above in subsection 1.2).

The case for incomparability in such examples relies in part on what
Ruth Chang calls the “Small Improvement Argument” (Chang
2002b, 667). As noted in the initial discussion of the example, if the
legal and musical careers were of equal value, then a slightly
improved version of the legal career would be better than the musical
career, but this judgment appears incorrect. The Small Improvement
Argument takes the following general form: “if (1) A is
neither better nor worse than B (with respect to V),
(2) A+ is better than A (with respect to
V), (3) A+ is not better than B (with
respect to V), then (4) A and B are not
related by any of the standard trichotomy of relations (relativized to
V)” where V represents the relevant set of
considerations for purposes of the comparison (Chang 2002b, 667-668).
In addition to Raz, Ronald de Sousa and Walter Sinnott-Armstrong are
among those who have advanced the Small Improvement Argument (De Sousa
1974; Sinnott-Armstrong 1985).

Focusing on the incomparability of bearers of value has given rise to
two lines of inquiry in the literature. The first concerns the
relation between incomparability and vagueness. The second concerns
the range of comparative relations that can hold between two items.
This section summarizes debate within each line of inquiry. The
relation between incomparability of bearers of value and
incommensurability of values will be addressed in subsection 3.1.
2.1 Vagueness

Raz distinguishes incomparability from what he calls the
“indeterminacy” of value. Recall that Raz defines two
bearers of value as incomparable if and only if it is not true that
“either one is better than the other or they are of equal
value.” The indeterminacy of value is a case of vagueness: it is
neither true nor false of two items that “either one is better
than the other or they are of equal value.” Raz regards the
indeterminacy of value to result from the “general indeterminacy
of language” (1986, 324).

In contrast, other philosophers argue for interpreting incomparability
as vagueness (Griffin 1986, 96; Broome 1997, 2000). For example,
Broome introduces what he calls a “standard configuration”
(1997, 96; 2000, 23). Imagine the musical and legal careers from
Raz’s example. Fix the musical career as the
“standard.” Now imagine variations in the legal career
arranged in a line such that in one direction, the variations are
increasingly better than the standard and in the other direction, the
standard is increasingly better than the variations. There is an
intermediate zone of legal careers that are not better than the
standard and such that the standard is not better than the legal
careers. If this zone contains one item, Broome defines this legal
career to be equally good with the standard. If this zone contains
more than one item, the zone is either one of “hard
indeterminacy” or one of “soft indeterminacy.” A
zone cannot be both one of hard indeterminacy and one of soft
indeterminacy. In a zone of hard indeterminacy, it is false that the
legal careers are better than the standard and false that the standard
is better than the legal careers (1997, 73, 76). In a zone of soft
indeterminacy, it is neither true nor false that the legal careers are
better than the standard and neither true nor false that the standard
is better than the legal careers (1997, 76). The latter is a zone of
vagueness. Broome argues that indeterminate comparatives, including
“better than” are softly indeterminate, thereby arguing
for interpreting incomparability in terms of vagueness.

By understanding incomparability to entail vagueness, Broome disagrees
with Raz (Broome 2000, 30). Raz defines incomparability so that it is
compatible with vagueness, but not so that it entails vagueness.
Griffin also argues that incomparability entails vagueness (1986, 96).
Where Broome disagrees with Griffin is with regard to the width and
significance of the zone of soft indeterminacy. Broome takes Griffin
to suggest that if there is a zone of soft indeterminacy, it is narrow
and unimportant. Broome argues that vagueness need not imply either
narrowness or lack of importance (2000, 30-31). Erik Carlson (2004)
provides one response to Broome’s account.
2.2 “Roughly Equal” and “On a Par”

The second line of inquiry concerns the set of possible comparative
relations that can obtain between two items. The small improvement
argument for the incomparability of the musical career and the legal
career in Raz’s example assumes what Chang calls the
“trichotomy thesis.” The trichotomy thesis holds that if
two items can be compared in terms of some value or set of values,
then the two items are related by one of the standard trichotomy of
comparative relations, “better than,” “worse
than,” or “equally good” (2002b, 660). A number of
authors have argued that these three comparative relations do not
exhaust the space of comparative relations. If they are correct, the
musical career and the legal career may, in fact, be comparable.

James Griffin and Derek Parfit argue that items may in fact be
“roughly equal” and hence comparable (Griffin 1986, 80-81,
96-98, and 104; 1997, 38-39; 2000, 285-289; Parfit 1987, 431). As an
illustration, Parfit imagines comparing two poets and a novelist for a
literary prize (1987, 431). Neither the First Poet nor the Novelist is
worse than the other and the Second Poet is slightly better than the
First Poet. If the First Poet and the Novelist were equally good, it
would follow that the Second Poet is better than the Novelist. This
judgment, according to Parfit, need not follow. Instead, the First
Poet and the Novelist may be roughly equal. The intuition is that even
though three items display the respects in virtue of which the
comparisons are made, some comparisons are inherently rough so that
even though two alternatives are not worse than one other, they are
not equally good. In turn, the musical and legal careers in
Raz’s example may be roughly equal.

“Roughly equal,” as used here, is to be distinguished from
two other ways in which the term has been used: (1) to refer to a
small difference in value between two items and (2) to refer to a
choice of little significance (Raz 1986, 333). As used here, two items
A and B are said to be roughly equal if neither is worse than the
other and C’s being better than B does not imply that C is
better than A when the comparisons are all in virtue of the same set
of respects.

There is some debate as to whether “roughly equal” is in
fact a fourth comparative relation to be considered in addition to the
three standard relations, “better than,” “worse
than,” and “equally good.” One way to conceive of
“roughly equal” is as a “roughed up” version
of “equally good.” On this interpretation, the trichotomy
thesis basically holds; there are simply precise and rough versions
(Chang 2002b, 661, fn. 5). Furthermore, “roughly equal” is
a relation that can be defined only in virtue of three items, and as
such, appears to be something distinct from a standard comparative
relation. The standard comparative relations are binary; transitivity
with respect to them is a separate condition (Hsieh 2005, 195).

A separate proposal for a genuine fourth relationship is Ruth
Chang’s argument for “on a par” (Chang 1997; Chang
2002b). Two items are said to be on a par if neither is better than
the other, their differences preclude their being equally good, and
yet they are comparable. Whereas “roughly equal” is
invoked to allow for comparability among alternatives that display the
same respects (e.g., literary merit), “on a par” is
invoked to allow for comparability between alternatives that are
different in the respects that they display. Imagine comparing Mozart
and Michelangelo in terms of creativity. According to Chang, neither
Mozart nor Michelangelo is less creative than the other. Because the
two artists display creativity in such different fields, however, it
would be mistaken to judge them to be equally creative. Nevertheless,
according to Chang, they are comparable with respect to creativity.
Something can be said about their relative merits with respect to the
same consideration. According to Chang, they are on a par.

Chang’s argument relies on invoking a continuum that resembles
Broome’s standard configuration. Chang asks us to imagine a
sequence of sculptors who are successively worse than Michelangelo
until we arrive at a sculptor who is clearly worse than Mozart in
terms of creativity. Chang then brings to bear the intuition that
“between two evaluatively very different items, a small
unidimensional difference cannot trigger incomparability where before
there was comparability” (2002b, 673). In the light of this
intuition, because Mozart is comparable to this bad sculptor, Mozart
is also comparable to each of the sculptors in the sequence, including
Michelangelo.

Whether “roughly equal” or “on a par” imply
comparability is a matter of some debate. “Roughly equal”
and “on a par,” for example, are intransitive, so to
recognize them as distinct comparative relations would require us to
reconsider the transitivity of comparative relations (Hsieh 2007).
Some authors suggest that one of the three standard comparative
relations obtains between all items that are claimed to be
incomparable, roughly equal, or on a par (Regan 1997). In the case of
“on a par,” Joshua Gert has argued that it can be defined
in terms of the three standard comparative relations (2004). Another
view is that values can be “clumpy,” meaning that the
values sort items into clumps. According to this view, once we
recognize the way in which the relation “equally good”
functions in the context of clumpy values, items that appear to
require “roughly equal” or “on a par” can be
judged equally good (Hsieh 2005).
3. Arguments for Value Incommensurability

After determining what incommensurability and incomparability are, the
next step is to assess the arguments for and against these
possibilities. That is the task of this section.

The most direct argument against the possibility that values are
incommensurable is based on value monism (e.g., Mill 1979 and Sidgwick
1981). Donald Regan, for example, argues that “given any two
items (objects, experiences, states of affairs, whatever) sufficiently
well specified so that it is apposite to inquire into their
(intrinsic) value in the Moorean sense, then either one is better than
the other, or the two are precisely equal in value” (Regan 1997,
129).

This argument has been questioned. Ruth Chang, for example, points
out, with reference to John Stuart Mill, that values may have both
qualitative and quantitative aspects such that a single value may have
qualitative dimensions that give rise to incomparability (Chang 1997b,
16-17).

For purposes of this entry, it will not be assumed that value monism
rules out incomparability of bearers of value. The additional
assumption required for value monism to rule out incomparability is
that the single value serves as a complete common measure for
comparing any two bearers of value. A common measure is complete if
and only if for any two alternatives that display the respects that
comprise the common measure, it is true that some positive value
judgment holds true in virtue of that list of respects.

In any case, many philosophers argue for some form of value pluralism
(Berlin 1969, Finnis 1981, Nagel 1979, Raz 1986, Stocker 1990, Taylor
1982, Williams 1981). Although this entry will not assume value
pluralism, most philosophers who argue for incommensurability or
incomparability are value pluralists, so it will be simpler to present
their views by talking of separate values.
3.1 Does Incomparability Imply Incommensurability?

In the choice between the musical and legal careers in Raz’s
example, each career appears to be favored by different
considerations. In the case of the musical career, such considerations
may include those of aesthetic value, whereas in the case of the legal
career, such considerations may include the value in serving
one’s fellow citizens. If these values were commensurable, it
seems that the careers would be comparable. In this manner, the
incomparability of bearers of value has been taken to support the
possibility that values are incommensurable.

Three sorts of objections have been raised against this line of
reasoning. First, as noted in subsection 2.2, some authors object on
epistemic grounds to the case for incomparability (e.g., Regan 1997).
These authors point out that the evaluative judgments involved in
proposed examples of incomparability are complex, involving multiple
considerations. In turn, we may be mistaken when we make the judgment
of two items that neither is better than the other nor are they
equally good. Instead, it may be that one of the three standard
comparative relations obtains between the items in question.

The second objection begins with the claim that one can always specify
a set of relevant considerations in virtue of which a comparison can
be made. Chang, for example, writes “in choosing between two
careers, various considerations are relevant … if, indeed,
there is no further single consideration that combines those
considerations, we can simply stipulate one, for example,
‘goodness of career,’ which is nothing more than a list of
the various relevant considerations” (2002b, 667). In turn, if
we acknowledge the possibility that items thought incomparable are, in
fact, comparable by way of “roughly equal” or “on a
par,” then it would appear that “goodness of career”
serves as a common measure against which to compare the musical and
legal careers in Raz’s example. There is no lack of a common
measure.

One response to this objection is to distinguish between the way in
which people rank bearers of value when they judge them to be
“roughly equal” or “on a par” and the way in
which people rank bearers of value when they judge them to be
“equally good.” In the case of equally good items, the
choice of either is justified because the gain involved in choosing
one item is supposed to fully cancel the loss in not choosing the
other item. In the case of “roughly equal” or “on a
par,” however, it is not clear that this must be the case. Items
that are “roughly equal” or “on a par” are
valuable in virtue of different respects; the value realized in
choosing one item may not cancel the loss in not choosing the other.
Bearers of value may be “roughly equal” or “on a
par” with respect to some set of values even though the values
display a central feature of incommensurable values—namely, that
the gain in one value does not cancel the loss in another.

The question then arises whether bearers of value can be comparable
even though the values they bear are incommensurable. If so, it may be
said that what distinguishes a list of respects, such as
“goodness of career,” from a common measure is that it is
only in the case of a common measure that the gain in one value
cancels the loss in another. In a comparison with regard to a list of
respects, it may be said, the gain in one respect need not cancel the
loss in another respect.

The third objection points out that even if we do not accept the
comparability of the musical and legal careers in Raz’s example,
some versions of the musical career and legal career appear
comparable. In John Broome’s account discussed in subsection
2.1, the initial musical career is comparable with particularly bad
legal careers. The comparison between the initial musical career and a
bad legal career is an example of what Chang refers to as a
“nominal-notable comparison”—a comparison between a
fine exemplar of a value and a poor exemplar of a value (1997b, 14).
Given that the comparisons involve the same set of considerations,
does the ability to rank some careers suggest that the values involved
in the initial comparison are in fact commensurable so there is, in
fact, a common measure?

This question arises in part because the way in which the musical
career is judged better than the bad legal career does not appear to
be a case of dominance. In a case of dominance, one alternative is
better than another with respect to at least one of the values against
which the comparison is made and worse with respect to none. Insofar
as dominance is not thought to rely on there being a common measure,
ranking by way of dominance need not rule out the incommensurability
of values. The judgment that the musical career is better than the bad
legal career, however, does not appear to be a case of dominance. The
musical career may be judged better than the bad legal career even
though the bad legal career is better than the musical career in some
respects. For example, the bad legal career may be better than the
musical career with respect to the value of protecting the legal
rights of fellow citizens. This suggests that the judgment is in
virtue of a common measure. Regan, for example, uses an argument along
these lines to challenge the possibility that values are
incommensurable (1997, 135).

One response to this third objection is that comparability in the case
of nominal-notable comparisons need not rule out the
incommensurability of values. As noted at the outset of this section,
the incomparability of bearers of value is taken to suggest that the
values they bear are incommensurable. As long as there are some cases
in which bearers of value are incomparable, even if bearers of value
are comparable in the case of nominal-notable comparisons, the
conditions for value incommensurability are satisfied.

It may be objected that just because some careers are incomparable
with respect to “goodness as a career” in Raz’s
example, we should not rule out “goodness as a career” as
a common measure. According to this view, it is a mistake to assume
that for a list of respects (e.g., “goodness of career”)
to serve as a common measure, it must be
“complete”—meaning that for any two alternatives
that display those respects, it is true that some positive value
judgment holds true in virtue of that list of respects.

In response, it is not clear what is gained for the analysis of value
incommensurability by calling “goodness as a career” a
common measure. First, calling “goodness as a career” a
common measure for comparing the legal and musical careers would
change neither the judgment that one career is not better than the
other nor the judgment that they are not equally good. The general
phenomenon remains the same. Second, lack of completeness can arise
for a number of different reasons. The concept of value
incommensurability aims to capture what underlies the lack of
completeness in comparisons between alternatives such as the legal and
musical careers. Also, there might be other ways to capture the lack
of completeness.
3.2 Constitutive Incommensurability

A second argument for incommensurable values is grounded in the idea
that value incommensurability is constitutive of certain goods and
values. In keeping with the usage in this entry, in some instances,
“constitutive incomparability” is perhaps a more
appropriate term than “constitutive incommensurability.”
The reason for this is that the case for constitutive
incommensurability of values often relies on the apparent
incomparability of specific bearers of value. Two versions of this
second argument will be discussed here.

One version of this argument comes from Joseph Raz. Consider being
offered a significant amount of money to leave one’s spouse for
a month. The indignation that is typically experienced in response to
such an offer, according to Raz, is grounded in part in the symbolic
significance of certain actions (1986, 349). In this case, “what
has symbolic significance is the very judgment that companionship is
incommensurable with money” (1986, 350). Although this form of
value incommensurability looks like trumping, Raz does not see this as
a case of trumping. He rejects the view that companionship is more
valuable than money. If such a view were correct, then those who forgo
companionship for money would be acting against reason (1986, 352).
Instead, Raz takes the view that a “belief in incommensurability
is itself a qualification for having certain relations” (1986,
351). Someone who does not regard companionship and money as
incommensurable simply has chosen a kind of life that may be
fulfilling in many ways, but being capable of having companionship is
not one of them.

In Raz’s account, the symbolic significance of judging money to
be incommensurable with companionship involves the existence of a
social convention that determines participation in that convention
(e.g., marriage) that requires a belief in value incommensurability.
This conventional nature of belief in value incommensurability in
Raz’s account raises a question for some authors about its
robustness as an account of value incommensurability. For example,
Chang objects that incommensurability appears to become relative to
one’s participation in social conventions (2001, 48). It remains
an open question how much of a problem this point raises. Raz’s
account appears to illustrate a basic sense in which the values of
money and companionship can be incommensurable. Insofar as it is not
against reason to choose money over companionship, there is no general
way to resolve a conflict of values between money and companionship.
In Raz’s account, the resolution depends upon which social
convention one has chosen to pursue.

Elizabeth Anderson advances a second argument for constitutive
incommensurability. Her account is grounded in a pragmatic account of
value. Anderson reduces “‘x is good’ roughly to
‘it is rational to value x,’ where to value something is
to adopt toward it a favorable attitude susceptible to rational
reflection” (1997, 95). She argues that in virtue of these
attitudes there may be no good reason to compare the overall values of
two goods. Pragmatism holds that if such a comparison serves no
practical function, then the comparative value judgment has no truth
value, meaning that the goods are incommensurable (1997, 99). Because
the favorable attitudes one adopts toward goods help to make them
good, Anderson’s account can be seen as an argument for
constitutive incommensurability (Chang 2001, 49).

Anderson advances three ways in which there may be no good reason to
compare the overall values of goods. First, it may be boring or
pointless to engage in comparison. To illustrate, “the project
of comprehensively ranking all works of art in terms of their
intrinsic aesthetic value is foolish, boring, and stultifying”
(1997, 100). Second, Anderson points to instances in which “it
makes sense to leave room for the free play of nonrational motivations
like whims and moods” as in the choice of what to do on a
leisurely Sunday afternoon (1997, 91). Third, Anderson argues that the
roles that goods play in deliberation can be so different that
“attempts to compare them head to head are incoherent”
(1997, 91). Imagine that the only way to save one’s dying mother
is to give up a friendship. Rather than compare their overall values,
argues Anderson, ordinary moral thinking focuses on what one owes to
one’s mother and one’s friends (1997, 102). This focus on
obligation recognizes mother and friend each to be intrinsically
valuable and yet valuable in different ways (1997, 103). There is no
good reason, according to Anderson, to compare their overall values
with regard to some common measure.

Chang argues against each of the three points raised by Anderson
(Chang 2001). In response to the first point, Chang notes there are
occasions in which comparisons do need to be made between goods for
which Anderson argues there is no good reason to make comparisons. In
response to the second point, Chang argues that the range of instances
for which the second argument applies is small. In response to the
third point, Chang contends that Anderson’s argument assumes
that if goods are comparable then they have some value or evaluative
property in common. Chang points out that this need not be the case.
As discussed above in subsection 3.1, the comparability of goods need
not entail value commensurability.
3.3 Moral Dilemmas

Value incommensurability has also been invoked to make sense of a
central feature of supposed moral dilemmas—namely, that no
matter which alternative the agent chooses, she fails to do something
she ought to do. Although moral dilemmas involve choices between
concrete bearers of value, the apparent value conflicts involved in
these choices have led some philosophers to relate moral dilemmas to
the incommensurability of values. Henry Richardson, for example, takes
the situation confronting Sophie in the novel Sophie’s
Choice—that one of her two children will be spared death,
but only if she chooses which one to save—to point to the
incommensurability of values (1994, 115-117).

It has been argued that the mere fact of a moral dilemma does not
imply value incommensurability. James Griffin, for example, argues
that the feature of “irreplaceability” in moral dilemmas
often may be mistaken as evidence for value incommensurability (1997,
37). Irreplaceability is the feature that what is lost in choosing one
alternative over another cannot be replaced by what is gained in
choosing another alternative. Although a conflict of incommensurable
values displays this feature, not all instances of irreplaceability
need involve plural values. Some moral dilemmas, for example, may
involve not a conflict of values, but a conflict of obligations that
arises from the same consideration. Consider forced choices in saving
lives. If there is a dilemma, it need not involve conflicting values,
but rather conflicting obligations that arise from the same
consideration. Walter Sinnott-Armstrong calls such dilemmas
“symmetrical” (1988, 54-58). The dilemma encountering
Sophie, it may be said, does not point to the incommensurability of
values.

Richardson acknowledges that the moral considerations underlying
Sophie’s dilemma are not incommensurable. Nonetheless, he takes
value incommensurability to be essential to understanding the tragedy
of the dilemma that Sophie encounters. “It is a distinguishing
feature of love, including parental love,” he writes,
“that it cherishes the particular and unique features of the
beloved” (115). He concludes, “the fact that she cannot
adequately represent each child’s value on a single scale is
what makes the choosing tragic” (116). By locating the
incommensurability of values at the level of what is valuable about
each of her children, Richardson argues that the tragedy of the
dilemma points to value incommensurability.

Another common approach to argue for value incommensurability is with
reference to “non-symmetrical” dilemmas. As the name
suggests, in non-symmetrical dilemmas, the alternatives are favored by
different values (Sinnott-Armstrong 1988). If these values are
incommensurable in the third sense as discussed in subsection 1.3,
there is no systematic resolution of the value conflict. Consider
Jean-Paul Sartre’s well-known example of his pupil who faced the
choice between going to England to join the Free French Forces and
staying at home to help his mother live (Sartre 1975, 295-296). No
matter which alternative he chooses, certain values will remain
unrealized. An idea along these lines is considered, for example, by
Walter Sinnott-Armstrong (1988, 69-71) and Bernard Williams (1981,
74-78) in their discussions of moral dilemmas.
3.4 Akrasia

Value incommensurability also features in debates about
akrasia (Nussbaum 2001, 113-117). David Wiggins, for example,
invokes the idea of value incommensurability to suggest “the
heterogeneity of the psychic sources of desire satisfaction and of
evaluation” (1998, 266). This heterogeneity, according to
Wiggins, allows for a coherent account of the agent’s attraction
to what is not best. It allows for a divergence between desire and
value such that the akratic individual can be attracted to a value
that should not be sought at that point in time. Wiggins invokes value
incommensurability to capture the idea that a gain in the value that
should not be sought does not reduce the loss in choosing what is not
best.

In contrast, Michael Stocker denies that value incommensurability is
required for a coherent account of akrasia (1990, 214-240).
For Stocker, coherent akrasia is possible with a single value
in just the way that it is possible to be attracted to two objects
that differ with respect to the same value (e.g., “a languorous
lesser pleasure and a piquant better pleasure” (1990, 230)).
Recall the discussion of quantitative and qualitative aspects of a
single value at the outset of section 3.
4. Deliberation and Choice 

As suggested by the discussion of moral dilemmas and akrasia,
much of the inquiry into value incommensurability is motivated more
generally by theories of practical reason and rational choice. Some
authors have argued that the possibility of value incommensurability
raises problems for the possibility of justified choice in conflicts
between incommensurable values. Even if a conception of justified
choice can accommodate value incommensurability, questions remain
about how to justify choice on the basis of incommensurable values and
how to reason about incommensurable values. This section considers
these issues as they have been discussed in the contemporary
philosophical literature.

It is worth noting the potential for drawing connections between the
philosophical literature and the literature in psychology and the
social sciences on decision-making. One area for such potential is the
psychological literature on the difficulty of making decisions (Yates,
Veinott, and Patalano 2003). Jane Beattie and Sema Barlas (2001), for
example, advance the thesis that the observed variation in the
difficulty of making trade-offs between alternatives can be explained
in part by the category to which the alternatives belong. The authors
consider three categories: commodities (“objects that are
appropriately bought and sold in markets”), currencies
(“objects that act as stand-ins for commodities”), and
noncommodities (“objects that either cannot be transferred
(e.g., pain) or that lose some of their value by being traded in
markets (e.g., friendship)”) (Beattie and Barlas 2001, 30). The
authors’ experimental findings are consistent with participants
holding normative commitments about exchanging currencies and
noncommodities similar to those considered in the discussion of
constitutive incommensurability in subsection 3.2. For example,
Beattie and Barlas report that participants “had a significant
tendency to choose noncommodities over commodities and
currencies” and that choices between noncommodities and
currencies were the easiest for participants (2001, 50-51). The
authors interpret these results to support the view that people choose
noncommodities over currencies on the basis of a rule without engaging
in a calculation of trade-offs (2001, 51-53).
4.1 Optimization and Maximization

At a minimum, for the choice of an alternative to qualify as
justified, there must not be an overriding reason against choosing it.
Beyond that, conceptions of justified choice differ in what is
required for the choice of an alternative to qualify as justified.

Ruth Chang defines “comparativism” as the view that
“a comparative fact about the alternatives determines which
alternative one is justified in choosing” (1998, 1572). A common
form of comparativism is “optimization.” According to
optimization, the fact that an alternative is at least as good as each
other alternative is what justifies its choice. If one accepts the
trichotomy thesis (subsection 2.2), an alternative is at least as good
as another if and only if it is equally good or better than it. If one
accepts the possibility of “on a par” as a genuine fourth
relation (subsection 2.2), then an alternative that is at least as
good as another is also on a par with it. Optimization is most
frequently associated with an economic conception of rational choice
and decision theory. Chang associates optimization even more widely
with “most forms of consequentialism, some versions of virtue
theory, and, arguably, certain forms of deontology” (1998,
1577-1578). If value incommensurability gives rise to the
incomparability of alternatives as discussed in subsection 3.1, then
value incommensurability precludes the possibility of justified choice
under optimization.

One response has been to argue that apparently incomparable
alternatives are, in fact, comparable. As discussed in subsection 2.2,
judgments of incomparability frequently involve comparisons that are
difficult and it may be that judgments of incomparability are mistaken
(Regan 1997). In addition, as discussed, alternatives that appear
incomparable by way of “better than,” “worse
than,” or “equally good” may be comparable by way of
some fourth comparative relation, such as “roughly equal”
or “on a par.” It also has been argued that
“nameless values” combine values in a way that allows for
comparability of alternatives in virtue of these nameless values
(Chang 2004).

Another line of response, one from within the economics literature,
has been to distinguish between “optimization” and
“maximization” as theories of justified choice (Sen 1997,
746; Sen 2000, 486). According to the theory of optimization as
justified choice, the choice of an alternative is justified only if
the alternative is at least as good as each other alternative. In
contrast, the theory of maximization as justified choice only requires
the choice of an alternative that is not worse than other
alternatives. Because incomparable alternatives are not worse than one
another, the choice of either is justified according to the theory of
maximization as justified choice. If proponents of comparativism have
no reason to reject maximization as an account of justified choice, as
has been argued (Hsieh 2007), then incomparability, and value
incommensurability, need not pose a problem for the possibility of
justified choice.
4.2 Cyclical Choice

One objection voiced against accounts that permit justified choice
between alternatives that are roughly equal or on a par or between
incomparable alternatives is that such accounts may justify a series
of choices that leaves a person worse off. Consider Raz’s
example of career choice. Suppose the person chooses the musical
career over the legal career. At a future time, she has the
opportunity to pursue a legal career that is slightly worse than the
initial legal career. Suppose this slightly worse legal career and the
musical career are judged roughly equal or on a par. If justified
choice permits her to choose either of two alternatives when they are
roughly equal or on a par, then she would be justified in choosing the
slightly worse legal career. Similarly, if justified choice does not
require the comparability of alternatives, she could be justified in
choosing the slightly worse legal career. Through a series of such
apparently justified choices, she would be left significantly worse
off in a manner analogous to a “money pump” (Chang 1997,
11).

One response is to question whether the problem posed by choices of
this sort is serious. John Broome, for example, notes that after
having chosen one kind of career, a person may change her mind and
choose the kind of career she previously rejected. According to
Broome, there would be a puzzle only if she did not repudiate her
previous choice (2000, 34).

Another line of response is that the considerations that make some
alternatives worthy of choice count against the constant switching
among alternatives envisioned in this objection. First, the constant
switching among alternatives is akin to not choosing an alternative.
If the alternatives are such that choosing either is better than
choosing neither, then the considerations that make the alternatives
worthy of choice count against constantly switching among them.
Second, to switch constantly among careers appears to misunderstand
what makes the alternatives worthy of choice. Not only is pursuing a
career the kind of activity that depends upon continued engagement for
its success, but it is also the kind of activity that is unlikely to
be judged truly successful unless one demonstrates some commitment to
it. Third, for a career to be considered successful, it may require
the chooser to adopt a favorable attitude toward the considerations
that favor it over other careers. In turn, when subsequently presented
with the choice of a legal career, the considerations favoring it may
no longer apply to her in the same way as they did before (Hsieh
2007).
4.3 Rational Eligibility

The idea expressed in the distinction between optimization and
maximization in subsection 4.1 can be expressed more generally in
terms of the idea of rational eligibility. To say that an alternative
is rationally eligible is to mean that choosing it would not be an
unjustified choice. Which alternatives are judged rationally eligible
may vary with the theory of justified choice. According to
maximization as a theory of justified choice, an alternative is
rationally eligible if and only if there is no better alternative.

Issac Levi (1986; 2004) argues for
“v-admissibility” as a criterion of justified
choice. For v-admissibility, value incommensurability does
not pose a problem for the possibility of justified choice. An
alternative is v-admissible if and only if it is optimal
according to at least one of the relevant considerations at hand. In
some conflicts of value, maximization and v-admissibility
specify the same alternatives as rationally eligible. Suppose that
alternative X is better than alternative Y with
respect to consideration A and alternative Y is
better than alternative X with respect to consideration
B. According to maximization as a theory of justified choice,
both X and Y are rationally eligible; neither
alternative is better than the other with respect to A and
B taken together. Both alternatives are also rationally
eligible according to v-admissibility; X is optimal
with respect to A and Y is optimal with respect to
B. 

In some conflicts of value, maximization and v-admissibility
specify different sets of alternatives as rationally eligible.
V-admissibility is more restrictive than maximization (Levi
2004). Add to the above example alternative Z. Suppose that
X is better than Z, which is better than Y,
all with respect to A. Suppose also that Y is better
than Z, which is better than X, all with respect to
B. According to maximization as a theory of justified choice,
X, Y, and Z are rationally eligible; no
alternative is better than the other with respect to A and
B taken together. However, Z is not rationally
eligible according to v-admissibility. Z is not
optimal with respect to A. Nor is it optimal with respect to
B. Only X and Y are rationally eligible
according to v-admissibility. According to Levi,
v-admissibility captures what he takes to be a plausible
judgment—namely, that it would be unjustified to choose the
alternative that is second worse on all relevant respects (Levi 2004).
The plausibility of this judgment might be questioned. Suppose that
Z is only slightly worse than X with respect to
A and Z is only slightly worse than Y with
respect to B. Does the judgment still hold?

For Joseph Raz, value incommensurability also does not pose a problem
for the possibility of justified choice (1997). If incommensurable
values give us reasons to choose both alternatives, they are both
rationally eligible from the perspective of justified choice. As such,
the choice of either alternative is justified on the basis of
reason.

One question that arises is this. If an agent has reason to choose
either alternative and they are not equally good, what makes her
choice of one alternative over another intelligible to her? For Raz,
what explains the choice of one alternative over the other is the
exercise of the will. By the will, Raz has in mind “the ability
to choose and perform intentional actions” and “the most
typical exercise or manifestation of the will is in choosing among
options that reason merely renders eligible” (1997, 111).

John Finnis advances a similar view in response to the question of
intelligibility. Finnis writes, “in free choice, one has reasons
for each of the alternative options, but these reasons are not
causally determinative. … No factor but the choosing itself
settles which alternative is chosen” (1997, 220). In a
choice between alternatives each favored by different, incommensurable
values, even though there are reasons to choose both alternatives,
because reasons are not causally determinative, the lack of a reason
to choose one alternative over another need not render the choice
unintelligible.

Donald Regan challenges this view. According to Regan, unless grounded
in an adequate reason, “a decision to go one way rather than
another will be something that happened to the agent rather than
something she did” and hence be unintelligible to the agent
herself (1997, 144). Suppose the agent has no more reason to choose
one alternative over another and the choice, as suggested above, is
settled by her wants. On Regan’s view, if the agent’s
choice is to be intelligible to her, her wants must be grounded in
reasons. Because she has no more reason to choose one alternative over
another initially, the reasons grounding her wants must be available
to her only after the initially relevant reasons are exhausted. This
strikes Regan as implausible (1997, 150). Regan concludes that no
choice between incommensurable values or incomparable bearers of value
is intelligible in the ways suggested by Raz or Finnis.
4.4 External Resources

A number of authors have argued that practical reason has available to
it the resources to accommodate value incommensurability in ways that
would appear to address the concern raised by Regan.

Charles Taylor outlines two such sets of resources. First, we are able
to appeal to “constitutive goods that lie behind the life
goods” our sense of which is “fleshed out, and passed on,
in a whole range of media: stories, legends, portraits of exemplary
figures and their actions and passions, as well as in artistic works,
music, dance, ritual, modes of worship, and so on” (1997, 179).
Second, we cannot escape the need to live an integrated life or to
have this, at a minimum, as an aspiration (1997, 180). Given that a
life is finite, leading a life involves an articulation of how
different goods fit into it relative to one another. More generally,
our lives take on a certain “shape” and this shape
provides guidance in making choices in the face of value
incommensurability (1997, 183). Michael Stocker similarly points out
that alternatives are rarely considered in the abstract (1997).
Instead, they are usually considered in concrete ways in which they
are valuable—for example, as part of one’s life. Once
considered in such concrete contexts, there are considerations
according to which alternatives can be evaluated for purposes of
justified choice. In his analysis of incommensurability, Fred
D’Agostino discusses the role of social institutions in
resolving value conflicts (2003).

Another resource that has been invoked is morality. Recall Elizabeth
Anderson’s discussion of the example of the choice between
saving the life of one’s mother and maintaining a close
friendship. Anderson regards the attempt to invoke a comparison of
values as incoherent from the perspective of practical reason.
Instead, ordinary moral thinking focuses on the obligations one has to
one’s mother and one’s friends. In turn, Anderson suggests
that the obligations themselves will provide guidance (1997, 106). The
availability of such resources to reason is independent of her
theories of value and rationality. John Finnis also points to
principles of morality as guiding reason in a way that does not depend
upon comparing incommensurable values (1997). It remains an open
question as to how wide a range of cases it is in which morality can
provide such guidance.

One worry that may arise in appealing to such external resources is
that they address the problem of value incommensurability by simply
denying it. The shape of one’s life or the “constitutive
goods that lie behind the life goods,” for example, would appear
to be sources of value. Insofar as they provide a value against which
to resolve the initial value conflict, it might be said that there was
no problem of value incommensurability in the first place.

Two responses to this worry can be given. First, even if these
external resources are a source of commensurating value, it does not
follow that they provide a systematic resolution to value conflicts.
Insofar as the shapes of people’s lives differ, the way in which
two individuals resolve the same value conflict may be different. The
fact that it may be consistent with reason to resolve the same value
conflict in different ways points to the possibility of value
incommensurability.

Second, in the case of moral considerations, there may not be any
denial of value incommensurability. Moral considerations may provide
guidance without comparing alternative courses of action with respect
to a common measure (Finnis 1997, 225-226). Furthermore, some
philosophers argue that the moral wrongness of certain actions is
intelligible only in virtue of the incommensurability of values. For
example, Alan Strudler argues that to deliberate about the
permissibility of lying in terms of commensurable values is to
misunderstand the wrong in lying (1998, 1561-1564).
4.5 Non-Maximizing Choice

Recall that value incommensurability was thought to pose a problem for
justified choice in part because it gives rise to the possibility of
incomparability among alternatives. In this light, it would appear
that conceptions of justified choice that do not rely on comparisons
avoid the problems posed by value incommensurability. Stocker aims to
provide one such account of justified choice (1990; 1997). Two
features help to distinguish his account. First, he argues for
evaluating alternatives as “the best” in an absolute,
rather than a relative, sense. Optimization and maximization rely on
choosing “the best” in a relative sense: given the
relevant comparison class, there is no better alternative. To be
“the best” in an absolute sense, an alternative
“must be, of its kind, excellent—satisfying, or coming
close to, ideals and standards” (1997, 206). This is the sense,
for example, in which a person can be the best of friends even if we
may have even better friends. More generally, an alternative can be
absolutely best even if there are better alternatives, and even if an
alternative is relatively best, it may not be absolutely best. The
second distinctive feature of Stocker’s account is his appeal to
a good life, for example, or part of a good life or project. This
appeal does not require the alternative to be the best for that life
or project. Instead, the alternative need only be good enough for that
life or project to qualify as a justified choice.

Stocker’s account of justified choice differs from the concept
of “satisficing” as used in the economics and rational
choice literature. Introduced into the economics literature by Herbert
Simon (1955), satisficing is the process of choosing in which it is
rational to stop seeking alternatives when the agent finds one that is
“good enough” (Byron 2004). Where satisficing differs from
Stocker’s account is that satisficing is instrumentally rational
in virtue of a more general maximizing account of choice. In
situations in which finding the best alternative is prohibitively
costly or impossible, for example, satisficing becomes rational. In
contrast, on Stocker’s account, choosing the alternative that is
“good enough” is non-instrumentally rational (Stocker
2004).

Objections discussed in previous sections may be raised with respect
to Stocker’s account. Suppose two alternatives are both good in
an absolute sense and incommensurable. According to Stocker’s
account, insofar as both alternatives are good enough for an
agent’s life, the choice of either alternative appears
justified. As discussed in subsection 4.2, Regan and others may object
that the choice of either alternative is not intelligible to the
agent. Also, the appeal to a good life may raise the worry discussed
in subsection 4.4 that Stocker’s account addresses the problem
of value incommensurability by simply denying it.
4.6 Deliberation about Ends

The topic of value incommensurability also arises in accounts that
concern deliberation about ends. This section discusses two
accounts.

The first account is by Henry Richardson (1994). Richardson argues for
the possibility of rational deliberation about ends. According to
Richardson, if value commensurability is a prerequisite for rational
choice, choices involving conflicting values could be made rationally
if each of the values were expressed in terms of their contribution to
furthering some common end. This conception of choice treats this
common end as the one final end relevant for the choice. According to
Richardson, the idea that value commensurability is a prerequisite for
rational choice seems to rule out rational deliberation about ends
(1994, 15).

Richardson defends an account of rational deliberation about ends that
does not depend upon value commensurability. In his account, rational
deliberation involves achieving coherence among one’s
ends.  Briefly, coherence is “a matter of finding or
constructing intelligible connections or links or mutual support among
them and of removing relations of opposition or conflict”
(Richardson 1994, 144). For Richardson, coherence among ends need not
result in their being commensurable (1994, 180).

The second account is by Elijah Millgram (1997). Like Richardson,
Millgram argues that value commensurability is not a prerequisite for
deliberation. However, in contrast to Richardson, Millgram argues that
practical deliberation results in the commensurability of ends (1997,
151). By this he means that through deliberation, one develops a
coherent conception of what matters and a “background against
which one can judge not only that one consideration is more important
than another, but how much more important” (1997, 163).
For Millgram, commensurating one’s ends is a “central part
of attaining unified agency” (1997, 162).

Millgram proposes two ways in which deliberation results in the
commensurability of ends. The first proposal is that one can learn
what is important and how it is important through experience (1997,
161). The second proposal is that deliberation about ends is
“something like the construction by the agent of a conception of
what matters … out of raw materials such as desires, ends,
preferences, and reflexes” (1997, 168).  Millgram
identifies an objection to each proposal and briefly responds to
each.

The objection to the first proposal is this. If the incommensurability
of ends can be resolved by experience, this suggests that the judgment
of incommensurability reflects incomplete knowledge about the values
expressed in these ends. In other words, experience seems to help only
if the values expressed in these ends are themselves commensurable
(1997, 168). Millgram responds as follows. The agent who uses her
experience to develop a coherent conception of what matters is like
the painter who uses her experience to paint a picture that is not a
copy of an existing image. Even if the ends are commensurable in her
conception of what matters, the values they reflect need not be
commensurable just as the painting need not be an exact copy of an
existing image.

The objection to the second proposal is this. The second proposal
suggests that deliberation is not driven by experience, which places
it in tension with the first proposal. Millgram responds by continuing
the analogy with the painter. Imagine a painter who paints a picture
that is not a copy of an existing image. Just because the painting is
not a copy of an existing image does not mean there is no source of
correction and constraint on it. Similarly, deliberation may involve
the construction by the agent of a conception of what matters, but
this does not imply that it is not informed or constrained by
experience (1997, 168-169).

This discussion points to two areas of further inquiry that bear on
the topic of incommensurability. First, does coherence among ends
entail their commensurability? Second, leaving aside the issue of the
commensurability of ends, more needs to be said about what is required
to deliberate rationally about what matters when that deliberation
involves incommensurable values.
5. Social Choices and Institutions 

As discussed above, social practices and institutions play a role in
the inquiry into value incommensurability. They are claimed by some
philosophers to ground the possibility of value incommensurability, as
in the case of constitutive incommensurability (subsection 3.2), and
to help resolve value conflicts, as in the case of providing external
resources for practical reason (subsection 4.4). This section
discusses additional areas in which considerations about social
institutions intersect with the inquiry into value
incommensurability.

To begin, some philosophers have pointed to a structural similarity
between a single individual trying to choose in the face of
incommensurable values and the process of incorporating the varied
interests and preferences of the members of society into a single
decision. The preferences of different individuals, for example, may
be taken to reflect differing evaluative judgments about alternatives
so that combining these different preferences into a single decision
becomes analogous to resolving value conflicts in the individual case.
Given this analogy, Fred D’Agostino has applied methods of
decision-making at the social level from social choice theory and
political theory to consider the resolution of value conflicts at the
individual level (2003).

At the same time, Richard Pildes and Elizabeth Anderson caution
against wholeheartedly adopting this analogy. The analogy, according
to them, assumes that individuals already have rationally ordered
preferences. Given value incommensurability, however, there is no
reason to make such an assumption. In turn, Pildes and Anderson argue
that “individuals need to participate actively in democratic
institutions to enable them to achieve a rational ordering of their
preferences for collective choices” (1990, 2177).

Value incommensurability also has been considered with respect to the
law. Matthew Adler discusses the variety of ways in which legal
scholars have engaged the topic of value incommensurability (1998).
One question is whether the possibility of value incommensurability
poses a problem for evaluating government policy options and laws,
more generally. Some authors respond that it does not. Cass Sunstein,
for example, argues that recognition of value incommensurability helps
“to reveal what is at stake in many areas of the law”
(1994, 780). According to Sunstein, important commitments of a
well-functioning legal system are reflected in recognizing value
incommensurability.

More generally, a number of scholars have focused on the relation
between value incommensurability and the structure of social and
political institutions. John Finnis, for example, takes the
open-endedness of social life to render it impossible to treat legal
or policy choices as involving commensurable alternatives (1997,
221-222). Michael Walzer’s account of distributive justice also
relates value incommensurability to the structure of social and
political institutions. According to Walzer (1983), different social
goods occupy different “spheres,” each one governed by a
distinct set of distributive norms. What is unjust is to convert the
accumulation of goods in one sphere into the accumulation of goods in
another sphere without regard for that second sphere’s
distributive norms. Underlying Walzer’s account, it seems, is a
commitment to a kind of constitutive incommensurability. Given its
connection to the possibility of plural and incompatible ways of life,
the concept of value incommensurability also plays a role in many
accounts of political liberalism, including Joseph Raz’s account
(1986) and Isaiah Berlin’s account (1969). It is the
latter’s inquiry into the relation between incommensurable
values and political institutions that can be credited with motivating
much of the contemporary inquiry into value incommensurability.