International distributive justice has become a prominent
topic within political philosophy. Philosophers have, of course,
long been concerned with the wealth and poverty, and how the
inequalities between persons might be justified. They have,
however, tended to focus only upon inequalities between inhabitants of
the same state. In recent years, though, a sustained
philosophical dialogue has emerged on how these ideas might be applied
to the relationships and institutions holding at the global
level. This dialogue has been prompted by issues of philosophy,
but also by the realities of globalization and global poverty; in a
world as connected as our own, is it justifiable that some have so much
while others have so little? 


This entry is an introduction to the recent development of this
dialogue. It is, perhaps, appropriate to start with some
limitations. This entry will discuss only the distributive
aspects of international justice, rather than on all aspects of
international relations and institutions that might be morally
important. Philosophical discussion of global justice has become
sufficiently rich and complex that it is no longer possible to discuss
all the various threads of this discussion in one entry (see Chatterjee
(2011) for a more encyclopedic discussion of the various debates within
global justice). This entry will, accordingly, leave to one side
such important topics as fairness in trade (James 2012; Wenar 2009;
Kurjanska and Risse 2008); immigration (Wellman and Cole 2011;
Carens 1995); and gender (Kristof and WuDunn 2010; Jaggar 2005;
Nussbaum 2001). The fact that we do not discuss these topics
should not be read as implying their irrelevance; on the contrary, they
are enormously important for any adequate theory of global justice, and
deserve more attention than we can provide here. This entry will,
moreover, discuss writings primarily within the tradition of liberal
egalitarianism. Thinkers of a radical or a Marxist bent have had
things to say about international justice, too, but these writings are
here largely ignored (see Kohn, Humphrey, and Goto-Jones in Bell 2010,
for discussions of these topics.) The entry is, finally, focused
almost exclusively on fairly recent writings. The reason for this
is the simple fact, noted above, that international justice has been a
central research topic only in recent years. This is emphatically
not to say that less recent philosophers have not had important things
to say about international justice: Immanuel Kant's idea of a
foedus pacificum continues to exert a strong
influence over modern philosophical thought, for example, as does
Mill's liberal nationalism (Kant, 1795; Mill, 1859.) The
modern period, too, has seen some sustained discussion of global wealth
and poverty, most notably in Peter Singer's discussion of the
ethics of global famine relief (Singer 1972; see also Singer
2002). Nevertheless, the modern dialogue about international
distributive justice can be largely traced to the initial publication
of John Rawls's A Theory of Justice in 1971, and the
prehistory of these ideas can be largely omitted in the present
context.
 
1. Early Cosmopolitanism


We can begin, then, with John Rawls's A Theory of
Justice. The influence of this work on modern political
philosophy can hardly be overstated. It shifted the assumptions
with which political philosophers have operated—in part by
resuscitating the social contract tradition, and in part by giving a
sustained and analytically robust argument regarding the injustice of
particular forms of resource inequality. A full analysis of
Rawls's work is beyond the scope of this entry; readers can see
the related entries in this encyclopedia for more detail. Rawls
introduces two principles of justice, which he argues represent the
principles of justice we would accept as governing the “basic
structure” of our society were we to bargain with one another
under fair conditions. These principles of justice deal with
political justice, and with what fairness would demand of the rules
allocating persons to positions within the basic structure, but they
also constrain inequality. In particular, the only inequalities
of “primary goods” that could be justified are those that
can be shown to be to the advantage of the least advantaged
representative position. This idea—called the difference
principle—represents a significant block to the exercise of the
market, in that individuals are no longer entitled to obtain whatever
share of resources their talents might obtain in a standard capitalist
model of the labor market.


It is not part of our current project to criticize or defend the
difference principle. We are, instead, simply going to highlight
two facts about this principle. The first is that the principle
does seem to place a significant constraint on the types and degrees of
inequality that might be justifiable. The difference principle
requires that all such inequalities of social primary goods must be
justifiable to the representative worst off party within society;
appeals to utility, or to efficiency, or to other forms of social value
simply will not suffice. The second thing to note is that this
principle seems to apply only within the context of the domestic
state. Rawls is explicit, in his theory, that his principles
should be taken as only describing the nature of justice within the
political society represented by a territorial state. When Rawls
does deal with the issue of international justice, it is in a manner
markedly less reformist than that with which he approaches domestic
justice. Rawls argues that a just international regime would
involve states agreeing to treat one another fairly in their mutual
interaction—but that this fairness would not involve any sort
of distributive consideration, or demand for economic justice. 
Indeed, Rawls argues that the principles to which states would agree
would largely resemble those found in contemporary 20th
century international law. In contrast with the radical (or at
least surprising) conclusions drawn domestically, Rawls argues that in
international justice, there would be “no surprises” in the
principles we ought to select (Rawls 1971, 378).


This difference in treatment between the domestic and the
international context was immediately troubling to many
philosophers. One way of highlighting this is by noting the
apparent contradiction between the universalism of Rawls's moral
theory and the localism of its realm of application. The first
argues that what is morally arbitrary should not be taken as
legitimately grounding an inequality of wealth or income. If
liberalism means anything, after all, it means an aversion to inherited
caste privilege and other forms of feudal birthright privilege (Carens
1992). The second, however, applies this universal guarantee only
within the very local context of the nation-state, ignoring the fact
that membership in that state was, itself, morally arbitrary. The
net result was, for many commentators, a sort of internal inconsistency
in Rawls's theory; if Rawls was to regard income inequality above
that permitted by the difference principle as unjust, he should do so
in a thoroughgoing way, and condemn the inequalities between the
wealthy and the impoverished internationally (see Pogge 1989, 1992,
1994; Beitz 1973, 1979, 1983; Scanlon 1973).


Rawls can, on this account, be taken as the originator of the modern
dialogue on global distributive justice—not because he was the
first to speak out against international inequality, but because he did
not do so. Many of those who first did speak about international
inequality, though, used Rawlsian ideas and concepts to do so. We
can therefore proceed to examine some representative arguments used by
these thinkers, to see how their cases were constructed.


Many initial commentators on Rawls's work argued that the
proper interpretation of Rawls's principles was one in which the
difference principle was applied at the global level. These
authors are often referred to as “cosmopolitans”; this
term, however, is often less than illuminating (see the accompanying
entry on cosmopolitanism for more detail.) We will instead refer
to these authors as Left Institutionalists, for reasons we hope will
become clear. Left Institutionalists agree on the following
conclusion: that Rawls's own limitation of his two principles of
justice to the circumstances of a domestic society was a morally
illegitimate constraint on his theory, so that a consistent liberalism
taking off from Rawls's arguments must apply its liberal principles at
the global level—and, therefore, the well-being of the worst-off
representative member of the global society, rather than the domestic,
ought to be our starting-point for the justification of inequality. In
this way, liberalism is made coherent once again; rather than seeking
some arbitrary fact to serve as a limitation on the liberal theory of
justice, the cosmopolitans argue that we ought to live up to the
globalism inherent in liberalism's self-understanding. See, for
instance, Thomas Pogge's analysis of liberalism's domestic focus:


Nationality is just one further deep contingency (like genetic
endowment, race, gender, and social class), one more potential basis of
institutional inequalities that are inescapable and present from birth.
Within Rawls's conception, there is no reason to treat this case
differently from the others. And so it would seem that we can justify
our global institutional order only if we can show that the
institutional inequalities it produces tend to optimize (against the
backdrop of feasible alternative global regimes) the worst social
position. (Pogge 1989, 247.)


Rawls, of course, had reasons to resist this interpretation of his
work. His own view—made more explicit in his The Law
of Peoples, but present even in A Theory of Justice—is that what counts as justice within a given context must make
reference to what that context is, and how we should understand its
function and its rules. Thus, Rawls argues that his theory does
not have application to such private institutions as churches or
universities; it is only to be applied to the basic structure of a
society—which is understood by Rawls as the major social
institutions, and the ways in which they structure the rules of
association and allocate the advantages of cooperation (Rawls 1971,
7). The first task of the Rawlsian cosmopolitan, then, is to analyze
the notion of the basic structure, and demonstrate that such an entity
is found internationally as well as domestically. Charles Beitz
and Thomas Pogge both argue that the modern system of international
trade has all the indicia given by Rawls to explain what makes the
basic structure so central: international institutions allocate the
advantages of trade, and their rules set the basic framework for the
specific interactions taken among international agents. They
argue, in short, that the international institutional set is indeed
akin to a basic structure, in that this set is a site of cooperation,
to which the principles of justice given in A Theory of
Justice ought to apply. As Beitz has it:


[I]f evidence of global economic and political interdependence shows
the existence of a global scheme of social cooperation, we should not
view national boundaries as having fundamental moral significance.
Since boundaries are not coextensive with the scope of social
cooperation, they do not mark the limits of social obligation. Thus the
parties to the original position cannot be assumed to know that they
are members of a particular national society, choosing principles of
justice primarily for that society. The veil of ignorance must extend
to all matters of national citizenship, and the principles chosen will
therefore apply globally. (Beitz 1979, 151)


Rawlsian principles must therefore apply to the set of persons in
the world as a whole, so that global institutions should be arranged to
maximize the expectations of the globally worst-off representative
individual.


The early Rawlsian cosmopolitans were enormously influential, and
can be credited with forcing the attention of the philosophical
community towards the issue of global underdevelopment and
inequality. The theories, of course, were subject to enormous
criticism, and Rawls himself rejected their conclusions, as we shall
see. For the moment, we might note only that many theorists were
skeptical of the conclusion that Rawls's principles could apply
as easily to the global community as to the domestic community. 
Two strands of criticism here deserve note: the first starting with
coercion, and the second with the issue of nationality.


Some thinkers, then, have questioned whether or not the simple act
of exchanging goods—even a great many goods—places
people in a relationship that is morally akin to that shared by people
who are liable to the same territorial state. Something like this
point was noticed early by Brian Barry, who notes that


[T]rade, however multilateral, does not constitute a cooperative
scheme of the relevant kind. Trade, if freely undertaken, is
(presumably) beneficial to the exchanging parties, but it is not, it
seems to me, the kind of relationship giving rise to duties of fair
play.…Trade in pottery, ornamentation, and weapons can be traced
back to prehistoric times, but we would hardly feel inclined to think
of, say, the Beaker Folk as forming a single cooperative enterprise
with their trading partners. No more did the spice trade unite East and
West. (Barry 1982, 233)


Barry's intuition, here, is that there seems to be something
normatively distinct between what is shared by trading partners and
what is felt by fellow citizens. One way of noticing this is to
notice that some left Rawlsians seem to sever the distributive
component of Rawls's theory from the other aspects of that theory—in particular, from the parts of the theory dealing with
political rights and political justification. There is, of
course, a reason for this dismembering: there is, internationally, no
polity, and the very concept of having (for example) democratic rights
within that polity might seem misplaced. But many have thought
that something has been missed that is morally relevant, and that we
might better regard Rawls's distributive conclusions and his
political conclusions as more tightly linked than that. Some
thinkers, in particular, have argued that Rawls's conclusions are
best read as principles intended to justify the coercive acts of a
territorial state, rather than as principles applicable to cooperative
ventures more generally (Blake 2001; Nagel 2005). These
theorists have suggested that the state stands in need of
justification, and that the justification we offer makes distributive
principles applicable here—but not everywhere.


A second critical strand, as above, begins with the notion of
nationality. The idea here is that the relationships that are
most central to human flourishing and human creativity are always
specific relationships, with specific persons and with specific
cultural contexts. As such, the use of abstract principles like
Rawls's to determine what we owe to one another generally is
either suspect or outright self-destructive. This critical
posture, of course, can end up being a criticism of the liberal project
itself (see Sandel 1982). But it can also end up being a simple
criticism of the attempt to do justice without looking at the messiness
of nations, of cultures, and of communities. These latter
entities, it might be felt, are in need of support—and, in
particular, are in need of support by individuals who are taken as
duty-bound to prefer the good of that community to the abstract rights
of foreign citizens (Miller 1995; Kymlicka 1995). What is
missed in the cosmopolitan argument, on this account, is not the
presence of the coercive state, but the presence of the cultural
nation. The nationalists, it should be noted, are not hostile to
all notions of global justice; they are, instead, committed only to the
relatively modest conclusion that nationality has some moral relevance—and that the principles of distributive justice that are right
within the nation may not be right at the global level (Miller
2012).


There are a variety of ways of arguing for such a conclusion. 
Some theorists begin with dissatisfaction at the deracinated and
abstract forms of philosophy practiced by cosmopolitans (Walzer
1983). Some theorists begin with the need for communities to
preserve themselves, if they are to provide individuals with the goods
needed to live decent lives (MacIntyre 1984). More generally,
these theorists argue that the needs of community are such that the
cosmopolitan does damage to what is needed by actual humans, by
considering individuals without considering the communities within
which they live:


[P]atriotism requires me to exhibit peculiar devotion to my nation and
you to yours. It requires me to regard such contingent social facts as
where I was born and what government ruled over that place at that
time, who my parents were, who my great-grandparents were, and so on,
as deciding for me what the question of virtuous action is—at
least insofar as it is the virtue of patriotism which is in question.
Hence the moral standpoint and the patriotic standpoint are
systematically incompatible. (MacIntyre 1984, 5)


Both of these criticisms seem, to some degree, to be accepted by
Rawls himself, in his fuller explanation of his own international
theory in The Law of Peoples. Rawls is more explicit in
this work—as he is in his 1993 volume Political 
Liberalism—that he takes the political dimension of the state as of
primary importance, and that his principles of justice apply only
within the state for that reason. He is, further, more explicit
about his debt to the liberal nationalist idea in this volume, writing
approvingly that these ideas help guide his vision of a just
international regime. We may, then, proceed to examine
Rawls's Law of Peoples directly.
2. Justice and respect for nations


The trend towards greater and more sophisticated theorizing about
international justice was both exemplified and encouraged by the
publication of Rawls' The Law of Peoples. This work—an
extensive elaboration and revision of an earlier essay (Rawls 1993b)—discusses and, has influenced the subsequent discussion of, a variety
of issues of international and global import, including and especially
the obligations of distributive justice in the international realm.
Before we turn to Rawls's account of international distributive
justice, we should acknowledge some salient features of how he
conceives of his project. Rawls' perspective is unabashedly
international rather than global. Unlike the early
left institutionalists who conceive of the world as a single
cooperative unit and seek a single principle of distributive justice to
govern everyone, Rawls explicitly seeks principles that will regulate
the interactions among territorially defined political, corporate
agents that have a monopoly on the legitimate use of force, called
peoples—and, only indirectly, govern individuals (Rawls
1999a, 6).


Second, and partly as a consequence of this conceptualization of
international justice, Rawls does not attempt to derive complete
principles of international and global justice. Rather, he describes
principles that ought to regulate the foreign policy of a liberal
people (Rawls 1999a, 9–10). Thus, when Rawls says, for example, that
some non-democratic peoples are sufficiently well-ordered to be worthy
of full membership in the society of peoples, he is arguing that
democratic peoples may not use political power or pressure to change
them—not that non-democratic but well-ordered peoples are ideal or
beyond moral criticism. Furthermore, he argues that the ideal case of
international justice is a world composed entirely of well-ordered
peoples whose interactions are governed by a set of moral principles.
The account is then extended to cover various non-ideal cases:
societies burdened by poverty and failing institutions or rogue states
that wage aggressive war. What constitutes a minimally just or
well-ordered people is a matter of immense controversy, but the broader
conceptual point is unchanged: Rawls conceives of international justice
as being ideally about the interactions of morally justified,
centralized territorial polities.


Third, his account of the law of peoples is constrained by the need
that it describe a ‘realistic utopia’ (Rawls 1999a, 11–12) that
follows Rousseau's dictum to take ‘people as they are and laws as they
might be.’ As a consequence, there are at least three distinct
instances where Rawls appeals to empirical facts as a way of
‘realistically’ grounding particular normative claims. First, an
international system composed of well-ordered peoples with
representative governments will be peaceful (Rawls 1999a, 44–54);
second, cultural, transportation, and communication difficulties will
make a world state fundamentally unworkable (Rawls 1999a, 36); and,
lastly, the primary causal component of national wealth and prosperity
is the political culture and the corresponding effectiveness of their
political institutions (Rawls 1999a, 108–110).


With the above normative and descriptive picture in view, Rawls
presents a provisional list of principles that peoples could reasonably
endorse:

Peoples are free and independent, and their freedom and
independence are to be respected by other peoples.
Peoples are to observe treaties and undertakings.
Peoples are equal and are parties to the agreements that bind
them.
Peoples are to observe a duty of non-intervention.
Peoples have the right of self-defense but no right to instigate
war for reasons other than self-defense.
Peoples are to honor human rights.
Peoples are to observe certain specified restrictions in the
conduct of war.
Peoples have a duty to assist other peoples living under
unfavorable conditions that prevent their having a just or decent
political and social regime. (Rawls 1999a, 37)



Notably absent from this list is the difference principle or
anything like it. When deciding on these principles, peoples do not
know how big, rich, prosperous, or powerful they will be. Yet, unlike
individuals in the first original position, the peoples represented in
this second, international original position will not demand that
inequalities among them be justified by improving the lives of the
least well-off person or people. The peoples in the second original
position know that they have sufficient resources to be well-ordered,
and they need no more. So, in the ideal case, where international
society is fully composed of well-ordered states that follow the law of
peoples, there are no distributive requirements at all. Some peoples
may be very rich and others quite poor and, correspondingly, there
could be large differences in wealth among individuals of different
countries, but there is no principled reason—on Rawls' view—to find
that objectionable.


The Law of Peoples does include some possibly distributive elements.
We shall mention three. First, inequalities that undermine the
instantiation, enforcement, and maintenance of other
principles will violate the Law of
Peoples: 

The Law of Peoples, on the other hand, holds that inequalities are not
always unjust, and that when they are, it is because of their unjust
effects on the basic structure of the Society of Peoples, and on
relations among peoples and among their members. (Rawls 1999a,
113)


So, if one could show that a deep material inequality among peoples
undermined their ability to, say, be considered equals in the
negotiation of treaties or tempted peoples to inappropriately intervene
in the domestic affairs of other peoples, then that would be a
reason—from the standpoint of international justice—for eliminating
that inequality. However, this principle must be moderated in light of
Rawls suggestions that even rich well-ordered peoples will be
‘satisfied’ with their political and economic position within the
Society of Peoples (Rawls 1999a, 27–30), and that the most important
determinant of wealth is the political culture and institutions of a
people. Well-ordered peoples—rich or poor—will generally act
according to the principles that make up the law of peoples and even
poor peoples will have fairly strong political institutions, so Rawls
would argue that it is unlikely that mere inequality will be a problem
among well-ordered states. Second, all members of the Society of
Peoples must respect human rights that guarantee that every person,
regardless of society, a minimum level of material prosperity and
physical security, though this minimum level will fall far short of
distributive equality (Rawls 1999a, 65). Third, Rawls writes:

Burdened societies, while they are not expansive or aggressive, lack
the political and cultural traditions, the human capital and know-how,
and, often, the material and technological resources needed to be
well-ordered.  The long term goal of (relatively) well-ordered
societies should be to bring burdened societies, like outlaw states,
into the Society of well-ordered Peoples. Well-ordered peoples have
a duty to assist burdened societies.  (Rawls 1999a,
106)


Some societies are sufficiently poor or have sufficiently weak
institutions that they are unable to become and remain well-ordered on
their own. In those cases, the Society of Peoples must produce the
material, human, and institutional support to help these burdened
societies become minimally just. This could very well include some
wealth transfers from richer nations to burdened ones, but Rawls is
skeptical that this will be the primary tool of assistance. 


It is important to see that the duty of assistance to burdened
societies is structurally dissimilar from the difference principle.
First, the difference principle is meant to continuously apply, via
the basic structure, to the flow of social and economic interactions,
but the duty of assistance has a target and a cutoff point: once all
societies are well-ordered, no people has any further obligation to
distribute resources to burdened nations. Second, while the difference
principle is explicitly about the distribution of primary goods, the
duty of assistance might, in the end, have very little to do with
actual wealth; burdened societies might be quite wealthy in terms of
resources but have failing or deeply embedded non well-ordered
institutions while well-ordered nations may be quite
poor. Furthermore, when confronted with consistently failing
institutions, well-ordered peoples will probably do more to assist
burdened societies by providing technical know-how, information, and
institutional assistance than financial support. So, Rawls argues for
a two-tiered theory of distributive justice. The respect for the free
and equal status of each citizen in domestic context demands an
egalitarian distribution of primary goods, but equality in the
international context requires that each person find themselves in a
well-ordered people and that those peoples are respected within
international society. Economic inequalities are inherently
problematic—and require justification—at the domestic
level but not at the international. In other words, the distributive
outcomes of international trade and the global economy are
only indirectly relevant to international justice.


But why this strong distinction between domestic and international?
Rawls's response has several themes. First, Rawls suggests that
limitations on distributive justice are a consequence of tolerating and
respecting the economic decisions of peoples (Rawls 1999a, 117–118).
Insofar as peoples are well-ordered, they have made decisions about
savings rates, education, and population policy that essentially
determine national prosperity, and it would be disrespectful of the
decisions made by richer and poorer nations—who presumably adopted
these policies for what they took to be good reasons—to require one
people to compensate another. This argument is especially controversial
because Rawls argues that non-democratic ‘decent consultation
hierarchies’ are well-ordered and ought to be accepted into the ranks
of the Society of Peoples (Rawls 1999a, 62–78). This leaves open the
possibility that individuals will become impoverished as a consequence
of public policies and choices that they had no hand in deciding. Kok
Chor Tan, for example, has argued that Rawls has improperly stretched
his argument for toleration of reasonable, but illiberal, comprehensive
doctrines within a generally liberal political culture into an argument
for respecting illiberal political cultures (Tan 1998).


Rawls further seems to suggest that the ‘basic structure’ of
international realm is quite different from the basic structure of the
domestic state. In the domestic case, the basic structure is composed
of powerful and effective institutions to which the principles of
justice apply. In the international case, Rawls suggests that
the basic structure simply is the principles by which
well-ordered peoples govern themselves—there are no
institutions distinct from the acts and decisions of the peoples
themselves. In other words, the interactions among peoples are not—and
need not be—regulated by a robust set of political, economic, and
social institutions that would constitute an independent basic
structure. As a consequence of this lack of an international basic
structure, Rawls argues that the moral objections to inequality in the
domestic case do not apply (Rawls 1999a 114–115). Inequality among
individuals of different peoples does not, for example, undermine the
fair value of the political liberties or fair equality of opportunity
since they are not co-members of economic and political systems, and
peoples will treat other peoples as equals insofar as they are
well-ordered and reasonable. Since the political culture and
institutions of a people are primary cause of wealth and its
distribution, the criterion of reciprocity does not demand equal
distributive shares among members of different polities.


Rawls's arguments should not be taken as a defense of the status
quo in international relations. Many states—especially
authoritarian, weak, and failing ones—are not well-ordered, and the
principles informing current foreign policies are not those described
in the The Law of Peoples. Neither Rawls nor his
critics would defend the justice of the world today. The theoretical
difference between these perspectives, though, is profound. The real
point of dispute between them is this: once well-ordered nations have
ensured that every person lives in a well-ordered state and are thereby
guaranteed certain minimum protections against starvation and poverty,
does the international order represent a basic structure of the right
type, and robustness, so that the fact that some peoples are much
wealthier than others ought to be considered an affront to justice?
Rawls himself will answer in the negative, while his critics will
answer in the affirmative. 
3. Varieties of Institutionalism

Despite the fact that almost no element of The Law of Peoples
has escaped controversy, it served as a well-spring of additional
theorizing (Martin and Reidy 2006) and has structured the subsequent
debate concerning international distributive justice. Rawls's
two-tiered account strongly influenced those theorists who
were unsatisfied with both cosmopolitan and nationalist accounts of
distributive justice. Much of the ensuing discussion has pitted two
groups of theorists who both purport to be building upon what they take
to be the key insights of Rawls's view. One group—we will
call them right institutionalists—has followed the
general contours of Rawls's two-tiered account, developing more
detailed accounts of why we should sharply distinguish between the
international and domestic. They aim to justify Rawls's fundamental
position that egalitarian distributive justice only operates at the
state level, even if they disagree with Rawls as to the rationale
Left institutionalists, on the other hand, have argued that
international politics is characterized by a sufficiently robust set of
institutions as to ‘trigger’ principles of distributive justice that
are more robust and that, pace the duty of assistance, operate
directly on the distributive consequences of international economic
regimes. As a consequence, left institutionalists generally argue for
more robust distributive obligations and more radical institutional
changes than right institutionalists even though the extent and nature
of those obligations varies from thinker to thinker.


Before we go deeper into the divide between left and right
institutionalism, it's important to note what the two sides agree on
and to see where the actual disagreements between the two sides lie.
The important point of agreement lies in their mutual focus on
institutions or rule-governed practices as the trigger of genuinely
egalitarian distributive obligations. Both right and left
institutionalists accept that principles of distributive justice only
apply or are activated in particular institutional contexts or when
people mutually participate in practices that are distributionally
relevant. So, both right and left institutionalists would deny that we
have obligations of distributive justice to, say, the lost city of
Atlantis (should it appear) since Atlanteans have not participated with
us in shared institutions or practices. In other words, principles of
distributive justice apply to, and are activated by, a basic structure
that mostly determines the distributive shares the participants
receive. Right and left institutionalists disagree, then, concerning
which institutions activate obligations of distributive
justice among participants.
3.1 The Basic Structure as Coercive Legal System

Right institutionalists have generally adopted Rawls's two-tiered
approach, arguing for a sharp distinction between domestic and
international distributive justice. While Rawls himself did not say
much about why international politics was so different, much
of the subsequent work by right institutionalists has been to find some
morally salient feature that distinguishes the domestic from the
international which justifies such strong differences in distributive
principles in the face of growing globalization, increasing economic
interdependence, and strengthening international civil society. In
order to do so, right Rawlsians have argued that the international and
domestic realms differ fundamentally in terms of political structure.
Kenneth Waltz describes the difference nicely:

The parts of domestic political systems stand in relations of super-
and subordination. Some are entitled to command; others are required
to obey.  Domestic systems are centralized and hierarchic. The parts
of the international-political systems stand in relations of
cooperation.  Formally, each is the equal of all the others. None is
entitled to command; none is required to obey. International
structures are decentralized and anarchic.  (Waltz 1979,
88)


 More specifically, domestic politics is characterized by the
existence of a superior political authority that claims—and
possesses—sovereign judicial, legislative, and executive
powers.  No such shared, coercive legal system exists in the
international realm. Since the world state is, at best, a distant
possibility, this is unlikely to change. Domestic legal systems define
the very terms of economic activity and represent a kind of
fundamental political power over individuals. Samuel Freeman
writes:


When Rawls says that the political constitution is part of the basic
structure, he does not just mean the procedures that specify how laws
are enacted and that define offices and positions of political
authority. He means more or less the entire legal system, including
most public and private law, that is the product of the constitution in
this procedural sense. Modern legal systems, such as the federal system
of the United States, are made up of countless acts of legislation,
administration, judicial precedent, and other legal rulings that are
issued by multiple legal bodies with lawmaking authority. An economic
system that is regulated by the legal norms that are issued by the
political constitutions is also part of the basic structure. Here, of
course, the legal norms of property, contract, commercial law,
intangibles, and so on that are essential for economic production and
exchange are to be included in the basic structure. What makes possible
the incredibly complicated system of legal norms that underlie
production, exchange, and consumption is a unified political system
that specifies these norms and revises them to meet changing
conditions….Nothing comparable to the basic
structure of society exists on the global level.
(Freeman 2006, 38–39, emphasis added)


A Canadian citizen—no matter how economically and culturally
entwined with the United States—does not get a vote in American
elections, and the Canadian's economic interactions and
relationships are regulated and governed by Canadian, not American,
law. As a consequence, the American government lacks “original
jurisdiction or effective [or basic] political power” over
Canadians. The Canadian citizen lacks the same hierarchical
relationship with American political authorities that American citizens
have, except under special circumstances are that are themselves
negotiated by Canadian and American legal authorities. Different right
institutionalists emphasize different elements of the domestic,
coercive legal system. Matthias Risse (2006) and Michael Blake (2001),
for example, emphasize the coercive nature of domestic legal
systems. Risse has argued that the pervasiveness and immediacy of the
coercion in domestic legal systems makes them fundamentally different
from the kinds of interactions that occur at the international level:
even international laws call on the powers of the state for their
enforcement. Michael Blake, on the other hand, emphasizes how domestic
legal systems structure the most basic of economic interactions, make
determinate individual rights, and enforce them against abuses of
private power. He suggests that egalitarian principles of distributive
justice are what justifies the imposition of coercive
political authority on autonomous agents. Samuel Freeman (2007) says
that the international system—because it lacks the features and
powers of a robust legal system—does not constitute ‘a
system of social cooperation’ and, therefore, does not invoke
Rawls's ‘Criterion of Reciprocity’ that underlies the
difference principle.


Blake, Risse, and Freeman all represent—along with Rawls
himself—the moderate wing of right institutionalism. They are
united by three claims. First, the presence of a coercive legal system
leads to more demanding requirements of egalitarian distributive
justice. Second, the international institutions, regimes, and
organizations do not constitute a coercive legal system. However,
moderates are aware of the many ways in which the international order
can make the world hospitable for, or hostile to, well-ordered states.
As a consequence, moderates argue for principles of international
distributive justice that assist and protect legitimate peoples, with
the goal of ensuring that everyone lives within a well-ordered state.
International institutions don't activate principles of justice that
apply directly to distributive outcomes of global trade or economic
activity. Rather, those principles are activated in the event only
insofar as member polities (peoples, states, and the like) fail in
their own distributive requirements (such as when peoples fail to
prevent severe poverty, violating the human rights of their citizens)
or need assistance. Moderate Right Institutionalists share,
then, Rawls's indirect account of international distributive justice,
justifying the two-tiered account by appeal to the necessary
relationship between the co-membership in a coercive legal system and
distributive justice.


More extreme right institutionalists, most vividly
represented by Thomas Nagel in his article ‘The Problem of
Global Justice,’ (2005) argue that the lack of an international
legal system with sovereign coercive authority does not simply
undermine claims of egalitarian distributive justice; it
undermines all claims of justice outside the state. So, Nagel
accepts the first two claims of the moderates but suggests that
together they imply that justice is chimerical in the anarchic realm
of international politics.  He does accept that we have moral
obligations to prevent people from starving, being assaulted, or
murdered, but these are obligations of a universal
‘humanitarianism.’ Justice, for Nagel, is a moral
value that is necessarily indexed to coercive institutions, as
coercive institutions are necessary for large-scale social
coordination and cooperation. Claims of distributive justice only
apply to those institutions that engage in such large-scale economic
coordination, do so coercively, and do so in the name of the
individuals coerced. For Nagel, that last part is essential: the
answer to the question, “Why do we owe someone equal
distributive shares (or equal consideration in light of the difference
principle)?” is “We structure their economic lives through
coercive political institutions in their name.” Co-citizens have
their wills invoked as shared participants in the creation of
distributively relevant public policy, and this invocation gives rise
to egalitarianism. Since the international realm is characterized by
institutions that do not invoke the wills of those involved
as a justification of coercion, justice simply fails to apply to that
realm.


Both the extreme and moderate versions of right institutionalism have
been criticized, broadly, on two fronts. First, some have argued that
the right institutionalist focus on coercion has been misguided. If we
strip away coercive institutions, or were somehow able to make coercive
institutions non-coercive, but retained the various regimes of economic
cooperation, we would still have obligations of distributive justice. I
turn to these arguments in the next section. The second objection is an
internal critique that denies their second shared claim. On this
objection, the international realm is a coercive legal system
and thereby activates principles of distributive justice akin to those
in the domestic arena. Right institutionalism depends on the coercive
nature of domestic politics being different from that of international
politics. Those who argue against it thereby try to close the gap by
pointing out the many ways in which coercion is deployed
internationally. Cohen and Sabel (2006) argue that the collective
activities of various states have created an international organization
(the WTO) that can essentially issue coercive threats: follow WTO or
suffer impoverishment as a consequence of being denied access to global
markets. They write:

Still, it might be said that any complaint against global rule-making
bodies should really be directed against the state for accepting their
[the World Trade Organization] directives…But this point seems
almost facetious.  Opting out is not a real option (the WTO is a “take
it or leave it” arrangement without even the formal option of picking
and choosing which parts to comply with), and given that it is not,
and that everyone knows that it is not, there is a direct rule-making
relationship between the global bodies and the citizens of different
states.


Eric Cavallero (2010), on the other hand, argues that the
international system is coercive in a much more direct way: Great
Powers (including and especially the United States) coercively enforce
international norms of property by invading or covertly deposing
nations that misbehave. Arash Abizadeh (2007) has emphasized the
coercion inherent in the maintenance of borders and territorial
integrity, especially in response to immigration. If states claim the
right to determine who enters their territory, then they place
themselves in the position of coercing non-citizens in virtue of the
methods they use to prevent those who wish to cross their borders from
doing so. In each case, the structure of the objection is quite
similar: states coerce via invasion and espionage, via collective
action through international institutions, and via border maintenance,
therefore the international system is coercive in nature and, thus,
appropriately calls for egalitarian distributive justice.


These objections have forced right institutionalists to become more
attentive to the ways in which coercive contexts can be different. As a
consequence, the responses to these objections will be complex. For
example, it is clear that a state requiring a citizen to purchase
health insurance, stopping a non-citizen at the border, or using a
covert paramilitary organization to topple an unfriendly regime are all
examples of coercion, but are they all the same type of
coercion and do they all subsequently demand the same
normative response? Furthermore, should we evaluate these coercive
activities in their current form—where the international
world is populated by rogue states, failed and failing states, and
burdened societies—or should we evaluate these coercive activities
based on how they would operate with a genuine Society of Peoples? At
any rate, the debate is ongoing as right institutionalists are pushed
by these objections to create more sophisticated accounts of coercion
and to consider coercion is more specific contexts (see Blake
2011).
3.2 The Basic Structure as Cooperative Interdependence


 Left institutionalists are distinguished from right
institutionalists in three ways. First, left institutionalists tend to
argue for more robust distributive obligations that operate directly on
the institutions that characterize international politics. Second, they
tend to reject a strongly bifurcated view of the differences between
international and domestic justice, some arguing that there is no
difference, others arguing that there are many institutional contexts
that give rise to distributive obligations, and still others claiming
that domestic and international institutional contexts, and their
corresponding principles of distributive justice, operate on a smooth
continuum. Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, left institutionalists
reject the right institutionalist emphasis on coercion in activating
claims of distributive justice. To the contrary, left institutionalists
typically characterize the basic structure in terms of cooperation, the
provision of basic goods, or economic interdependence.  (Sangiovanni, 2007, 19–20)


We have already examined some early left institutionalist responses
above. We will, here, consider some more recent extensions of the
view. These thinkers generally accept that the state—with its
coercive legal apparatus—gives rise to especially stringent
demands of distributive justice. However, they argue that the nature
of the global economic system also gives rise to robust
distributive obligations. These distributive obligations arise
directly in virtue of the institutional features of the global
economic system irrespective of their effects on domestic justice. What
differentiates them from the early, more radical left institutionalist
thinkers, is that they recognize and accept that distinct norms of
egalitarian concern might be appropriate in the domestic and global
contexts. Moderate left institutionalists then accept with
Rawls a two-tiered account of global justice; they differ from right
institutionalists (and from Rawls) in arguing that distinct norms of
distributive justice apply to individuals at the global
level. 


Moderate left institutionalists generally present some view as to
what activates these distributive obligations. Darrell Moellendorf
(2011), for example, offers the following, jointly sufficient
criteria:

The version of membership dependence that I affirm is based upon what
I term the principle of associational justice. The idea is
that duties of social justice exist between persons who have a moral
duty of equal respect to one another if those persons are co-members
in an association that is (1) relatively strong, (2) largely
nonvoluntary, (3) constitutive of a significant part of the background
rules for the various relationships of their public lives, and (4)
governed by norms that can be subject to human control.


Cohen and Sabel (2006) have offered three distinct principles by
which these distributive duties might be justified. Andrea
Sangiovanni (2007), despite the fact that his view has much in common
with right institutionalisn, presents a left-oriented view because his
account of international distributive justice is both non-coercive and
direct:

I will argue that equality is a relational ideal of
reciprocity among those who support and maintain the state's
capacity to provide the basic collective goods necessary to protect us
from physical attack and to maintain a stable system of property
rights and entitlements. (Sangiovanni, 2007, 19–20.)


These views can all be used to directly evaluate global
inequalities. However, unlike the more extreme left institutionalism of
early Beitz and Pogge, each view produces comparatively less
egalitarian results at the global level. Mollendorf argues that, even
though both the global economic system and the state satisfy all four
criteria, the former activates obligations of ‘reciprocity’
while the latter activates the obligations of ‘inclusive and
equal citizenship.’ Cohen and Sabel argue that the state requires
liberal egalitarianism while international institutions create
obligations of ‘inclusion.’ In both cases, the obligations
at the global level are less robust than at the domestic. Similarly,
Sangiovanni argues that the provision of collective goods generates an
obligation of reciprocity, understood as egalitarian shares. The global
economic system gives rise to distributive obligations, but the scope
of the obligation is limited to the public goods produced by the system
itself, in the event it comes to produce them (whether it currently
does so is a matter of controversy). This means that
Sangiovanni's account could be indifferent to considerable
inequality among citizens of different countries as long as reciprocity
held within each country and obtained in the contribution to a system
of physical and economic rights made by the international
system. What is important to note about moderate left
institutionalism, and what distinguishes it from the more extreme
version, is that moderates seek robust principles of distributive
justice that apply to the particular domain of the global that are of
apiece with the principles of distributive justice domestically but are
nonetheless sensitive to the differences between the two domains.


Moderate left institutionalist views are considerably more diverse
when compared to moderate right institutionalists: there is no central
concept—like coercion—that binds them together. And
moderate left institutionalism, as a view that is responsive to the
particular features of international institutions, has much to
recommend it. However, there are some areas of concern. First, one
might worry that many left institutionalist arguments import notions
of coercion into their view. Mollendorf makes
‘non-voluntariness’ one of the criteria of distributively
relevant institutions, which seems to imply that individuals or states
that don't wish to participate in the global economy will be coerced
into doing so, generally by threat of economic catastrophe. Similarly,
Cohen and Sabel present their three ‘weak’ non-coercive
accounts of when obligations of distributive justice are activated,
but their argument that the WTO should invoke norms of inclusion is
based—at least partly—on the fact that the WTO can issue coercive
threats. Sangiovanni discusses the provision of public goods, which
may seem non-coercive, but if these public goods are necessary for
even minimally decent lives, then it seems that the threat of their
non-provision could very well be a coercive one. To put it another
way, is it really the case that economic cooperation through
trade—even institutionalized in order to solve coordination
problems—is ever enough to invoke norms of distributive justice if
there is no chance that that economic cooperation, no matter how
unequally distributed, will undermine the possibility of the
participants to live decent lives? The worry here is that left
institutionalists might be begging the question by assuming that the
international system is indeed coercive, will remain coercive even if
reformed, and is coercive in precisely way needed to generate
obligations of distributive justice. Left institutionalists,
therefore, are quite adept at identifying injustices in the
international arena, but they are less persuasive at showing that the
appropriate normative response to these wrongs is to have the
international system be governed by principles of distributive
justice. For example, suppose Mollendorf is correct that the WTO
wrongly forces an inappropriate development model on weak and failing
nations that serves the rich and powerful while undermining the
ability of those nations to become democratically
well-ordered. Certainly the right response to recognizing this wrong
is to have the WTO cease that unjust behavior. It is hard to
see why we would need the more robust norm of distributive equality to
understand the wrongness of the WTO's behavior.
4. The New Cosmopolitanism and Beyond


As the above discussion demonstrates, much work in global justice
begins with interpretations of—and arguments about—Rawlsian principles. Some recent work, however, has sought to
break the Rawlsian spell, by demonstrating the plausibility of
principles and theories not foundationally linked to Rawlsian
arguments. This work includes many recent philosophical theories
which—while undoubtedly influenced by Rawls—are less
concerned with applying Rawlsian methods directly to global
institutions (see also Miller 2010; Brock 2009; Altman and Wellman
2009). We will here examine only two important recent
contributions to this project. The first, which we might call
pure egalitarianism, argues that egalitarianism applies among persons
considered as human; no institutional framework is needed to give rise
to strong duties of distributive justice. The second, associated
with Thomas Pogge, argues that the global institutional structure we
see today is not merely unjust, but actively violating the negative
rights of the global poor. We will consider these arguments in
turn.
4.1 Pure egalitarianism


The dispute between left and right institutionalism has centered on
how to interpret the institutions found at the global level; both sides
in the debate agreed that the nature of these institutions is of
primary importance in establishing whether or not egalitarian duties
hold globally. Some recent theorists, however, have challenged
this assumption. On this vision, what is relevant from the
standpoint of justice is only whether or not a particular agent is, in
fact, a recognizably human agent—not whether that agent stands
in a particular relationship as regards other humans. Simon Caney
is a chief exponent of this theoretical perspective, and defends it as
follows:


Consider a world with two separate systems of interaction that have no
contact but are aware of each other and suppose that one of them is
prosperous whereas the other is extremely impoverished. Compare, now,
two individuals—one from the prosperous system and one from
the impoverished system—who are identical in their abilities
and needs. The member of the prosperous system receives more. But it
is difficult to see why—concentrating on any possible and
reasonable criteria for entitlement—this is fair. Ex
hypothesi, she is not more hard-working or more gifted or more
needy. In all respects they are identical (bar one, namely that one is
lucky to live in the prosperous society and one is not) and yet an
institutionalist approach confers on one many more benefits. Moreover,
it does so wholly arbitrarily because there is no ground on which the
member of the prosperous society can claim to be entitled to
more. (Caney 2005, 111; see also Tan 2004)


This form of egalitarianism has some undisputed attractions. 
It keeps the moral attention focused on human persons, which is—we might agree—right where it ought to be. It is
compatible, moreover, with a variety of different theories of what
might be the appropriate metric with which to demonstrate our
egalitarian respect; Caney argues that a global principle of equality
of opportunity is likely superior to one based upon resources (Caney
2003). It is compatible, moreover, with the institutions we have
developed being relevant from the standpoint of justice, insofar as
they help or hinder efforts to live up to the demands of global
equality. It insists, in the end, only that such institutions are at
most helpful tools, rather than foundational forms of human
relationship that give rise to distinct moral duties.


The problem with this form of egalitarianism, however, is that
comparatively few of us are prepared to take distributive equality as a
foundational value; most of us believe that distributive equality is
relevant only within certain relational contexts, as a way of
guaranteeing that individuals are not dominated or marginalized within
those relationships (Anderson 1999). To say that equality is
itself a value independently of these considerations comes perilously
close to making envy a core part of liberal equality. Return once
again to the example of Atlantis. Imagine that the world were
made fully just, according to whatever conception of justice you
require, and that the island of Atlantis them rose into that just
world; imagine further that every Atlantean were possessed of a small
quantity of diamonds, which made them significantly more wealthy than
the average person. Would the Atlanteans have the duty, simply in
virtue of common humanity, to redistribute their diamonds, so as to
ensure equality? The answer, for a pure egalitarian, must be yes;
this answer, however, seems to say that what was a just world has now
become unjust, simply because we are made aware of others doing better
for themselves than we are (Blake 2012). This particular vision
of egalitarianism depends upon an ideal of quality that many people—including both right and left Rawlsians—have regarded
as deeply problematic.
4.2 Poverty and Causation


The pure egalitarian impulse begins with the idea that we have
duties of justice towards one another that do not depend upon shared
institutions. Thomas Pogge's recent work, in contrast,
argues that institutions are morally central—but in a manner
somewhat unlike that argued for by the left Rawlsians. (Pogge
was, of course, an early advocate of left institutionalism, but his
more recent work does not depend upon left institutionalism being
true.) Pogge's recent work (see, especially, 2002) has
argued that the institutions we have built in the world are, in fact,
directly violating the rights of the poor. We can start our analysis
here by noting the starkness of Pogge's conclusion: global
poverty represents, for Pogge, not just an unmet humanitarian
obligation, but an ongoing human evil, perhaps the greatest one in
history. Pogge's argument insists that international
poverty and underdevelopment—and the death and wasted potential
this entails—find their causal origin in a set of global
institutions created and imposed by the wealthy nations of the world
upon the global poor (Pogge 2010a; Pogge 2002). As such, the
poverty of the underdeveloped nations is not simply a fact in the
world, to be dealt with by comparatively weak moral notions of
humanitarian benefit and charity; it is, instead, a violation of the
rights of the poor. It is not simply a violation of their
legitimate expectations; they might expect to be helped, for instance,
and we are not merely refraining from doing that. It is a
violation of their negative rights to be free from harm. The
poorer inhabitants of the world have rights that are being violated, on
a massive scale, by the wealthy states. One significant mechanism
for this violation is the ascription of the resource and borrowing
privilege to any organization able to take effective political control
of a territorial jurisdiction. A group does not have to truly represent
the interests of a place's inhabitants, on the rules set up by
international law, in order to sell that jurisdiction's
resources. So long as an agent is able to effectively control and
repress the inhabitants, it has the ability to speak in their name in
international treaty-making—regardless of how badly it treats
these inhabitants. The result, for Pogge, is that the
institutions of global society have set up incentives by which
undemocratic regimes are rewarded and encouraged in the underdeveloped
countries, and in which resources predictably flow from these countries
to those already blessed with wealth. The shared history of colonial
rule, moreover, has led to the radical underdevelopment experienced by
many former colonies, with the result that these colonies are likely to
be exceptionally vulnerable to the decisions and acts of agents within
former colonial powers. Global institutions are, in the end,
developed and maintained to benefit the wealthier nations that set
these institutions up, and whose participation is necessary for their
survival as institutions. They serve only to impose a set of
property rules upon the poorer nations that guarantee their continued
poverty and underdevelopment.


Pogge's analysis is powerful, and includes a number of
valuable positive suggestions about how we might begin to rectify these
defects—including revisions in how pharmaceutical research is
incentivized, and mechanisms for a global tax on resource use (Pogge
1994 and 2011). For the moment, though, we may examine only the
major critical responses to which Pogge's argument has been
subjected. Most of Pogge's critics agree with his
contention that international poverty is unjust, in addition to being a
violation of humanitarian duties. These critics, though, have
frequently questioned whether or not Pogge has made his case that this
poverty is causally ascribable to the international institutional set—and that simple revisions in this set could dramatically
decrease global poverty. 


The first form of critique begins with an objection to Pogge's
idea that global institutions cause international poverty. The
worry with this idea begins with concerns about the idea that the
notion of a cause can be, without certain controversial assumptions, be
easily ascribed to anything as complex as the global institutional
set. In particular, for an institution to be said to have caused
a result, there must be a comprehensible baseline of expectations to
which the existing result might be compared. Alan Patten and
Mathias Risse have each provided a version of this critique. Patten
argues that Pogge illegitimately smuggles in a moralized baseline of
expectations, in which the inhabitants of the poorer nations obtain the
resources and rights they would have under ideal justice; this baseline
is what the poor deserve, argues Patten, but it is a stretch to say
that the wealthy nations cause the poverty of the poor when they fail
to bring about ideal justice (Patten 2005). Mathias Risse offers an
even more pointed criticism, pointing out that the usual baseline for
causation to be ascribed to an interaction is the expectations that
would hold in the absence of such interaction (Risse 2005). 
Risse points out that the statistical baseline for most of humanity
throughout history has been radical poverty and misery. On this
analysis, the interaction between the poor and the rich might be taken
to have increased the wealth of the poor, rather than caused their
poverty. This is compatible, of course, with the existence of
duties of justice as regards the benefits of industrialization and
globalization; the poor may have become slightly better off, but the
wealthy have undoubtedly gotten much, much richer, and we might develop
theories that condemn this gap. Pogge's contention that
global poverty is caused by the wealthy societies of the world, though,
seems—to Risse and Patten—simply incorrect.


Joshua Cohen offers a more wide-reaching version of these
concerns. He, too, begins with the difficulty of saying that the
poverty of the global poor is caused by the wealth of the global rich
(Cohen 2011). He challenges, that is, the extent to which the global
institutions imposed by the wealthy are actually causally
responsible. His analysis, though, draws more on modern
development economics, and notes that modern theorists have identified
various factors that might determine why some countries are poor and
some are rich: they include the institutions described by Pogge, but
they also include such endogenous factors as geography, resource
allocation, and political culture (Easterly 2006). The precise
weighting and power of these various factors is, of course, a matter of
tremendous disagreement and controversy, and much of the field of
development economics is devoted to developing more complete and
powerful analyses of how the relative wealth and poverty of nations is
to be explained. This is a difficulty for Pogge, argues Cohen, since
his analysis of poverty includes only two possibilities: either the
poor nations of the world are responsible for their own poverty, which
is implausible, or the rich nations of the world are responsible for
that poverty. Cohen's conclusion is that Pogge has not
adequately come to terms with the empirical complexity of how poverty
is to be explained, and that as a result his conclusions about
international culpability for poverty are simply unmotivated.


The debate between Pogge and his critics, of course, continues (see
Pogge 2010b); Pogge is able to offer rejoinders to many of the
objections discussed here. In particular, Pogge has emphasized
recently that the baseline with which his analysis proceeds is one of
a reasonable alternative set of arrangements that would not generate
this massive human rights deficit. It is important to recognize,
though, that much of this debate turns on a mixture of empirical
social science and political philosophy. This is, we believe, likely
to be a territory in which an increasing amount of work on global
justice will have to be situated in the years to come.  We can
therefore turn to our last section, concerned with future directions
for research.
5. Future directions


It is rarely a smart move to make predictions within
philosophy. Nevertheless, it is perhaps appropriate to offer a
few views about what we are likely to see in future work about global
justice. The first, following on our discussion of Pogge's
work, is an increased engagement by philosophers with empirical
evidence and empirical methods. Apart from the pure egalitarians,
political philosophers all make assumptions about the nature and powers
of global institutions; these assumptions can be grounded—or
refuted—by engagement with international lawyers, development
economists, and the like. To some extent, this engagement is
already happening (Pogge and Reddy 2010; Hassoun and Subramanian
2012). More of this engagement is, we believe, both likely and
likely to be beneficial.


The second trend we would identify is that there is increasingly likely
a need for political philosophy dealing with specific global
phenomena. Much of what we have dealt with here has looked only
at the macro-level phenomenon of global inequality. A full
analysis of global justice will also look at specific forms of human
institution and agency that are likely to be relevant from the
standpoint of justice. We have already mentioned, if only in
passing, the issues of immigration, fairness in trade, and
feminism. We would conclude here by mentioning some other areas
of inquiry that might become increasingly important. Allan
Buchanan and Thomas Pogge have both produced recent work on global
incentives for pharmaceutical research (Buchanan 2009; Pogge
2009). Lea Ypi has written on the issue of global debt relief
(Ypi 2009). Stephen Gardiner and Simon Caney have written on the
relationship of global climate change and global inequality (Gardiner
2004, Caney 2008 and 2009). Increasingly, we believe that these
sorts of analyses are likely to proliferate, and philosophers come to
terms not just with the fact of inequality, but with the plurality of
different reasons for—and solutions to—that
inequality. Political philosophy has only recently turned its
attention to questions of global justice; it is our hope that this
attention will deepen in years to come, as we gain more understanding
of the nature and causes of global underdevelopment and inequality.