A verb is transitive iff it usually occurs with a direct
object, and in such occurrences it is said to occur
transitively. Thus ‘ate’ occurs transitively in
‘I ate the meat and left the vegetables’, but not in
‘I ate then left’ (perhaps it is not the same verb
‘left’ in these two examples, but it seems to be the same
‘ate’). A verb is intensional if the verb phrase
(VP) it forms with its complement is anomalous in at least one of
three ways: (i) substituting one expression for another that is
coreferential with it in the complement of the verb can change the
truth-value of the sentence in which the VP occurs – for
instance, you might admire Mark Twain but not Samuel Clemens, not
realizing that your pesky neighbor Sam is the famous writer
(in this case substitution of the coreferential ‘Samuel
Clemens’ for ‘Mark Twain’ in the VP ‘admire
Mark Twain’ will turn a true sentence, ‘you admire Mark
Twain’ into a false one, ‘you admire Samuel
Clemens’); (ii) the VP admits of a special
“unspecific” reading if it contains a quantifier, or a
certain type of quantifier (for examples, see section 1); and (iii)
the normal existential commitments of names and existential
quantifiers in the complement are suspended even when the embedding
sentence is negation-free (again, see section 1).


Intensional phenomena are puzzling, and worth studying, because (a)
it seems that the only way to account for language-speakers'
capacities to produce and understand sentences of their native
languages which they have never encountered before is to posit
 compositional structure
 in language and an interpretive capacity in
speakers that exploits it. But (b) the simplest ideas about what such
structure is like cannot accommodate intensionality. So we want to know
what the smallest complication is which allows for the intensional.
Investigation of intensional verbs has focussed mainly on verbs used to make
 propositional attitude reports.
These verbs take clauses rather than direct objects as their complements.
However, as we will see below, intensional transitive verbs (henceforth
ITVs) do not merely duplicate the problems raised by propositional
attitude verbs, but introduce special difficulties of their own.
 
1. Some groups of ITVs and their behavior


Search verbs and desire verbs manifest all three of the behaviors
listed in the prologue as “marks” or effects of
intensionality. Thus, Lois Lane may be seeking Superman. But it does
not seem to follow that she is seeking Clark, even though Superman is
Clark, and so we have an example of the first kind of anomaly
mentioned in the prologue: substitution of one name with another for
the same person leads to a change in truth-value for the embedding
sentence (here “Lois is seeking Superman”). Similarly, a
thirsty person who believes that water quenches thirst and that
H2O is a kind of rat poison may want some water but not
some H2O. [According to some, this alleged failure of
substitution to preserve truth-value is an illusion; but for reasons
of space I do not pursue this theory — its locus
classicus is (Salmon 1986).]


Second, both search verbs and desire verbs create specific-unspecific
ambiguities in their containing VP's when the syntactic object of the
verb consists in a determiner followed by a nominal (this ambiguity is
also known as the relational/notional ambiguity, following Quine 1956,
where it was first studied, at least in the modern period). For
example, ‘Oedipus is seeking a member of his family’ could
be true because Oedipus is seeking specifically Jocasta, who is a
member of his family, though he doesn't realize it. On such an
occasion, what is true can be more carefully stated as ‘there is
a member of his family such that Oedipus is seeking that
person’. The alternative, unspecific or notional reading, is
forced by adding ‘but no particular one’: ‘Oedipus
is seeking a member of his family, but no particular one’. Here
Oedipus is implied just to have a general intention to find some
member or other of his family.  Contrast the extensional
‘embrace’: Oedipus cannot embrace a member of his family,
but no particular one.


Third, it is obvious that it is possible both to want, and to search
for, that which does not exist, for instance, a fountain of eternal
youth. But it isn't possible to, say, stumble across such a
thing, unless it exists.


Depiction verbs, such as ‘draw’, ‘sculpt’, and
‘imagine’, resist substitution in their syntactic objects,
at least if the clausal ‘imagine’ does: if imagining that
Superman rescues you is not the same thing as imagining that Clark
rescues you, it is hard to see why imagining Superman would be the
same thing as imagining Clark. A specific/unspecific ambiguity is also
possible, as is attested by the wall label for Guercino's The
Aldrovandi Dog (ca. 1625) in the Norton Simon Museum,
which states ‘this must be the portrait of a specific
dog’, thereby implicating an alternative, that ‘Guercino
drew a dog’ could be taken to mean that he drew a dog,
but no particular dog — he just made one up. And we can clearly
draw or imagine that which does not exist (as opposed to, say,
photographing it). Braque's Little Harbor in Normandy (1909)
is an example, according to the curators of the Art Institute of
Chicago: ‘it appears this work was painted from imagination,
since the landscape depicted cannot be identified.’


However, whether or not a notional reading of a depiction VP is
possible depends on which quantificational determiner occurs in the
noun phrase complement. If we say ‘Guercino drew every
dog’, ‘Guercino drew most dogs’, or ‘Guercino
drew the dog’ (non-anaphoric ‘the dog’), we seem to
advert to some antecedent domain with respect to which ‘drew
every/most/the dog(s)’ are to be evaluated. So specific readings
are
 required.[1]
 This resistance to unspecific construal is
robust across languages and is typical of those quantificational
determiners which do not occur naturally in existential contexts such
as ‘there is’: contrast ‘there is a dog in the
garden’ with ‘there is every dog in the garden’,
‘there are most dogs in the garden’, or ‘there is the
dog in the garden’. An account of what is wrong with ‘there
is every dog in the garden’ (see Keenan 2003) might well contain the
materials for explaining the lack of unspecific readings of depiction
VP's with determiners like ‘every’, ‘most’ and
‘the’; see further (Forbes 2006:142–150).


It should be emphasized that depiction verbs are special in this
respect, for there is no problem getting unspecific readings with
‘every’, ‘most’ and ‘the’ using
desire verbs or search verbs. Guercino might be looking for every dog
on Aldrovandi's estate, though there are no particular dogs he is
looking for; the reader might be driving around an unfamiliar airport
rental car lot, looking for the exit, and in this case there is no
exit such that it is being sought. (‘look’
isn't really a transitive verb, but when the following
preposition is ‘for’, a search activity is denoted, so it
is customary to count the likes of ‘looking for’ as a
“transitive verb” in contexts where intensionality is
under discussion.)


Mixed behavior is also manifested by evaluative verbs, for example
‘respect’, ‘admire’, ‘disdain’,
‘worship’, including emotion verbs such as ‘lust
(after)’ and ‘fear’. Lex Luthor might fear Superman,
but not Clark, and Lois might disdain Clark, but not
Superman. However, unspecific readings of VP's with quantified
complements are harder to hear, at least when the quantifier is
existential. ‘Lois admires an extraterrestrial’ can be
heard in two ways: there is the ‘admires a particular
extraterrestrial’ reading, and there is a generic
reading, which means that among the kinds of thing she admires are
extraterrestrials in general. Generic readings of evaluative VP's
attribute dispositions, and are not the same as unspecific or notional
readings (see Cohen 1999 for a good discussion of generics).  There
does not seem to be a sensible non-generic construal of ‘Lois
admires an extraterrestrial, but no particular one’.


The verb ‘need’ is an interesting case. A sports team
might need a better coach, though no specific better coach, and might
need a better coach even if there are none to be had. So two out of
three marks of intensionality are present. However, ‘need’
contrasts with ‘want’ as regards substitution: our
dehydrated subject who does not want H2O because he believes
it to be a kind of rat poison, nevertheless needs
H2O. It seems that co-denoting terms may be interchanged in
the complement of ‘need’. But merely accidentally
co-extensive ones cannot be: Larson (2001, 232) gives the example of
Max the theater impresario, who needs more singers but not more
dancers, even though all who sing dance, and vice-versa. The property
singer and the property dancer are different
properties, so expressions for them cannot be exchanged in the
complement of ‘need’. Similar restricted substitutivity is
observed with transaction verbs such as ‘wager’,
‘owe’, ‘buy’, ‘sell’,
‘reserve’, and perhaps the transaction resultative
‘own’. One may reserve a table at a restaurant,
though there is rarely a specific table one has reserved in
making the reservation. But these verbs do allow interchange of co-referential
expressions (a purchase of water-rights is a purchase of
H2O-rights) though not (Zimmerman 1993, 151) of accidentally
co-extensive ones. For ‘own’ see (Zimmerman 2001,
passim).


Indeed, it is even arguable that some marks of intensionality are
present with verbs that allow interchange of accidentally
co-extensive expressions. A case in point is verbs of absence, such as
‘omit’ and ‘lack’. If it so happens that all
and only the physicists on the faculty are the faculty's Nobel prize
winners, then a faculty committee that lacks a physicist lacks a Nobel
prize winner. However, not too much weight can be put on this case,
since it may be that at some level, ‘lack’ should be
analyzed (possibly in a complicated way) in terms of not
having, in which case it would not really be an intensional verb
at all; though so far as the author knows, no convincing analysis of
this type has been formulated. See (Zimmerman 2001, 516–20) for
further discussion of relationships among the marks of
intensionality.
How many mechanisms for how many marks?


We have distinguished three “marks” or effects of
intensionality: substitution-resistance, the availability of unspecific
readings, and existence-neutrality. A natural question is whether one
and the same semantic mechanism underlies all three effects, whether
they are entirely independent, or whether two have a common source
distinct from the third's.


In the context of a discussion of propositional attitude verbs, that
is, verbs which take clausal or clause-embedding noun-phrase
complements rather than simple noun-phrase (NP) objects, one hypothesis
which keeps explanatory apparatus to the minimum is that all three
effects of intensionality arise from the possibility of the complement
having narrow scope with respect to the attitude verb. Thus we
might distinguish two readings of
(1) Lex Luthor fears that Superman is nearby,


namely
(2a) Lex Luthor fears-true the proposition that Superman is
 nearby[2]


and
(2b) Superman is someone such that Lex Luthor fears(-true
the proposition) that he is nearby.


In (2a) we make the clause ‘that Superman is nearby’ the
complement of ‘proposition’ to guarantee that
‘Superman’ is within the scope of ‘fears’ (the
resulting NP ‘the proposition…’ is a “scope
island”). And in (2b) we use a form of words that encourages an
interpreter to process ‘Superman’ ahead of
‘fears’. We can associate substitution-resistance with
(2a), while allowing substitution in (2b). (2b) ascribes a complex
property to Superman, and therefore also to Clark; namely, being an
x such that Lex fears x to be nearby. (2a), on the other hand,
puts Lex in the fearing-true attitude relation to a certain
proposition, with essentially no implications about what other
propositions he may fear-true. So, provided the proposition that
Superman is nearby is distinct from the proposition that Clark Kent is
nearby, substitution-failure in (1) construed as (2a) is
explicable.


As for taking these two propositions to be distinct, there are many
serviceable accounts, mostly involving some variation of the original
proposal in modern philosophical semantics, found in (Frege 1892,
1970). According to Frege, every meaningful expression or phrase has
both a customary reference that it denotes, and a
customary sense that it expresses. In the case of clauses, the
customary reference would be a truth-value which is compositionally
derived from the denotations of the words of the clause, and the
customary sense would be a way of thinking of that truth-value,
compositionally derived from the senses of the words of the clause.
Therefore, provided that ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark
Kent’ have different though coreferential senses (i.e., provided
they express different ways of thinking of the same individual) we will
get different propositions.


However, on the face of it, this only has (1), intended in the (2a)
manner, expressing a different proposition from
(2c) Lex Luthor fears that Clark is nearby.


Since truth-value is on the level of reference, and the
corresponding words of (2a) and (2c) all have the same referents, the
resulting truth-values for (2a) and (2c) will be the same; but they are
supposed to be different. So Frege makes the ingenious suggestion that
it is an effect of embedding in intensional contexts (he only
considered clausal verbs) that expressions in such contexts no longer
denote their customary references, but rather their customary senses.
Then (1) intended as (2a) is true iff the reference of
‘Lex’ stands in the fearing-true relation to the
switched reference of ‘Superman is nearby’,
namely, its customary sense. Now we have our explanation of why merely
interchanging customarily co-referential expressions in (1)
can produce falsehood from a truth: the substitution does not preserve
reference, since the names are now denoting their customary senses.
However, if (1) is intended as (2b), there will be no truth-value
switch, since there is no name-reference switch: in (2b)
‘Superman’ is not in the scope of ‘fears’,
therefore it denotes its customary reference, and interchange with any
other expression denoting that same referent must of necessity be
truth-value preserving. (Readers in search of more detailed discussion
of Frege's notion of sense might consult the section on 
 Frege's philosophy of language
 in the entry on Frege.
 See also the entry on
 propositional attitude reports.)


A view like this has the capacity to explain the other
intensionality effects. The specific-unspecific ambiguity in ‘Lex
fears that an extraterrestrial is nearby’ is explained in terms
of scope ambiguity, the notional or unspecific reading corresponding
to
(3a) Lex Luthor fears-true the proposition that an
extraterrestrial is nearby


and the relational or specific reading to
(3b) An extraterrestrial is such that Lex Luthor fears that
it is nearby.


Existence-neutrality is also explained, for obviously the
proposition that an extraterrestrial is nearby is available
for its truth to be feared, believed, doubted or denied, whether or not
there are extraterrestrials.


There are other accounts of substitution failure, but details are
incidental at this point. For there are real issues about (A) whether a
single mechanism could be responsible for all three effects,
and (B) whether an account of any effect in terms of a scope mechanism
is workable for transitive, as opposed to clausal, verbs.


(A) The behaviors cited in the previous section suggest that
substitution-resistance and the availability of an unspecific reading
have different explanations. For we saw that the verb
‘need’ contrasts with the verb ‘want’ as
regards substitution-resistance, but is similar as regards the
availability of unspecific readings of embedding VP's. So it
seems that there is a mechanism that blocks substitution, perhaps the
Fregean reference-switch one, perhaps something else more compatible
with what Davidson calls “semantic innocence” (Davidson
1969, 172—a semantically innocent account of
substitution-failure is one that does not alter the semantics of the
substitution-resisting expressions themselves for the special case in
which they occur in intensional contexts). And this mechanism cannot
occur with ‘need’, but can with ‘want’
(‘can’ rather than ‘does’ because it is
optional; this is to allow for “transparent” or
substitution-permitting readings of the likes of ‘Lex fears
Superman’ analogous to (3b)). On the other hand, whatever
accounts for notional readings is evidently available to both verbs,
and therefore it is not the same mechanism as underlies the
substitution-resistance of ‘wants’. However, this
reasoning is not conclusive, since the substitution-resistance
mechanism may be present with ‘needs’ (and transaction
verbs) but somehow rendered ineffective (see Parsons 1997, 370).


Evaluative verbs present the converse challenge:
substitution-resistance but apparently no unspecific readings of
embedding VP's, certainly not existential ones. It is less clear
how a defender of a ‘single explanation’ theory would
handle this, at least if the single explanation is a scope mechanism,
since it appears from the other cases that occurrence within the scope
of the intensional verb immediately produces an unspecific reading.


Suspension of existential commitment may group with availability of
unspecific readings for explanatory purposes. There appear to be no
cases of intensional transitives which allow notional readings of
embedded VP's, but where those VP's have the same existential
consequences as ones which differ just by the substitution of an
extensional for the intensional verb.


(B) The scope account is the only real contender for a single
explanation of the intensionality effects. But there is a major
question about whether it can be transferred at all from clausal to
transitive verbs. For the intensionality effects would all be
associated with narrow-scope occurrences of noun phrases (NP's),
and with a transitive verb such syntactic configuration is problematic
when the NP is quantified. This is because, in standard first-order
syntax, a quantifier must have a sentence within its scope (an open
sentence with a free variable the NP binds, if redundant quantification
is ruled out in the syntax). We can provide this for relational or
wide-scope readings, for example
(4) An extraterrestrial is such that Lois is looking for
it


in which ‘Lois is looking for it’ is the scope of
‘an extraterrestrial’. But if ‘an
extraterrestrial’ is supposed to be within the scope of
‘looking for’ there is no clause to be its scope;
it has to be an argument of the relation, which is not allowed in
first-order language. As Kaplan says, ‘without an inner
sentential context…distinctions of scope disappear’
(Kaplan 1986, 266). (However, readers who have taught symbolic logic will be
very familiar with the student who, having symbolized ‘Jack hit
Bill’ as ‘Hjb’, then offers something like
‘Hj(∃x)’ as the symbolization of
‘Jack hit someone.’)


The description of the problem suggests two forms of solution. One
is to preserve first-order syntax by uncovering hidden material to be
the scope of a quantified NP even when the latter is within the scope
of the intensional verb. The other is to drop first-order syntax in
favor of a formalism which permits the meanings of quantified NP's to
be arguments of intensional relations such as fearing and seeking. We
consider these options in turn in the following two sections.
Propositionalism


The idea of uncovering hidden material to provide NP's in notional
readings of intensional VP's with sentential scope was prominently
endorsed in (Quine 1956), where the proposal is to paraphrase search
verbs with ‘endeavor to find’. So for (5a) we would have
(5b):
(5a) Lois is looking for an extraterrestrial




(5b) Lois is endeavoring to find an extraterrestrial.



Partee (1974, 97) objects that this cannot be the whole story, since
search verbs are not all synonyms (‘groping for’
doesn't mean exactly the same as ‘rummaging about
for’), but Parsons (1977, p. 381) and Larson (2001, p. 233)
suggest that the search verb itself be used in place of
‘endeavor’. So we get
(6a) Lois is looking to find an
extraterrestrial


or in somewhat non-Quinean lingo,
(6b) Lois is looking in order to make true the proposition
that an extraterrestrial is such that she herself finds
 it.[3]


Here ‘an extraterrestrial’ is within the scope of
‘looking’ but has the open sentence ‘she herself
finds it’ as its own scope.


It may or may not be meaning-preserving to replace (5a)’s
prepositional phrase with (6a)’s purpose clause, but even if it is
meaning-preserving, that is insufficient to show that (6a) or (6b)
articulates the semantics of (5a); it may merely be a synonym. However,
with ‘need’ and desire verbs, evidence for the presence of
a hidden clause is strong. For example, in
(7) Physics needs some new computers soon


it makes little sense to construe ‘soon’ as modifying
‘needs’; it seems rather to modify a hidden
‘get’ or ‘have’, as is explicit in
‘Physics needs to get some new computers soon’, i.e.,
‘Physics needs it to be the case that, for some new
computers, it gets them soon’. (For ‘have’ versus
‘get’, see (Harley 2004).)


Secondly, there is the phenomenon of propositional anaphor (Larson,
Dikken & Ludlow 1997, see Other Internet Resources), illustrated
in
(8) Physics needs some new computers, but its budget
won't allow it.


What is not allowed is the truth of the proposition that Physics
gets some new computers.


Third, attachment ambiguities suggest there is more than one verb
present for modifiers to attach to (Dikken, Larson, & Ludlow 1996,
332):
(9) Physics will need some new computers next
year


could mean that a need for new computers will arise in the
department next year, but could also mean that next year is when
Physics should get new computers, if its need (which may arise
later this year) is to be met.


Finally, ellipsis generates similar ambiguities:
(10) Physics will need some new computers before
Chemistry


could mean that the need will arise in Physics before it does in
Chemistry, but could also mean that Physics will need to get some new
computers before Chemistry gets any.


However, the strength of the case for a hidden ‘get’
with ‘need’ or ‘want’ contrasts with the case
for propositionalism about search verbs. As observed by Partee (1974,
99) there are no attachment ambiguities like those in (9). For
example,
(11) Physics will shop for some new computers next
year


can only mean that the shopping will occur next year. There is no
second reading, corresponding to the other reading of (9), in which
‘next year’ attaches to a hidden ‘find/buy’. The phenomena
in (8) and (10) also lack parallels with search verbs; for example,
‘Physics will shop for some new computers before
Chemistry’ lacks a reading that has Physics shopping with the
following goal: to find/buy new computers before Chemistry finds/buys any. And
although the propositionalist might offer something like
(12) Physics is seeking more office space by
noon


as an analog of (7), it is not easy to decide if ‘by
noon’ gives the deadline by which any finding of more office
space must occur, or rather the deadline by which the seeking must
end.


Other groups of intensional transitives, such as depiction verbs and
evaluative verbs, raise the problem that there is no evident
propositional paraphrase in the first place. For psychological
depiction verbs such as ‘fantasize’ and
‘imagine’, Parsons (1977, 376) proposes what he calls
“Hamlet ellipsis”: for ‘Mary imagined a
unicorn’ we would have the clausal ‘Mary imagined a unicorn
to be’. Larson (2001, 233) suggests that the complement is a
“small” or “verbless” clause, and for
‘Max visualizes a unicorn’ proposes ‘Max visualizes a
unicorn in front of him’. This is too specific, for we can
understand ‘Max visualizes a unicorn’ without knowing
whether he visualizes it in front of him, above him or below him, but
even if we change the paraphrase to ‘Max visualizes a unicorn
spatially related to him’, this proposal, as well as
Parsons', have problems with negation: ‘Mary didn't
imagine a unicorn’ is not synonymous with either ‘Mary
didn't imagine a unicorn to be’ or with ‘Mary
didn't imagine a unicorn spatially related to her’, since
the first of these allows for her to imagine a unicorn but not imagine
it to be, the second, for her to imagine a unicorn but not as spatially
related to her. There may be philosophical arguments that exclude these
 options,[4]
 but the very fact that a philosophical
argument is needed makes the proposals unsatisfactory as semantics.


Clausal paraphrases for verbs like ‘fear’ are even less
likely, since the extra material in the paraphrase can be read as the
focus of the fear, making the paraphrase insufficient. For example,
fearing x is not the same as fearing encountering x,
since it may be the encounter that is feared, say if x is an
unfearsome individual with a dangerous communicable disease. In the
same vein, fearing x is not the same as fearing that
x will hurt you; for instance, you may fear that your
accident-prone dentist will hurt you, without fearing the dentist.


We conclude that if any single approach to intensional transitives
is to cover all the ground, it will have to be non-propositionalist.
But it is also possible, perhaps likely, that intensional transitives are not a
unitary class, and that propositionalism is correct for some of these
verbs but not for others (see further Schwarz 2006, Montague 2007).
Montague's semantics


The main non-propositionalist approaches to ITVs begin from the work
of Richard Montague, especially his paper “The Proper Treatment
of Quantification in Ordinary English” (Montague 1973), usually
referred to as PTQ in the literature (Montague's condition (9) (1974,
264) defines ‘seek’ as ‘try to find’, but this
is optional). Montague developed a systematic semantics of natural
language based on higher-order intensional type-theory. We
explain this term right-to-left.


Type theory embodies a specific model of semantic compositionality
in terms of functional application. According to this model,
if two expressions x and y can concatenate into a
meaningful expression xy, then (i), the meaning of one of
these expressions is taken to be a function, (ii) the meaning of the
other is taken to be an item of the kind that the function in question
is defined for, and (iii) the meaning of xy is the output of
the function when applied to the input. The type-theoretic
representation of this meaning is written x(y) or
y(x), depending on which expression is taken to be the
function and which the input or argument. A functional application such
as x(y) is said to be well-typed iff the
input that y denotes is the type of input for which
the function x is defined.


For example, in the simple theory of types, a common noun
such as ‘sweater’ is assigned a meaning of the following
type: a function from individuals to truth-values (a function of type
ib, for short; b for ‘boolean’). For
‘sweater’ the function in question is the one which maps
all sweaters to the truth-value TRUE, and all other individuals to the
truth-value FALSE. On the other hand, an (“intersective”)
adjective such as ‘woollen’ would be assigned a meaning of
the following type: a function from (functions from individuals to
truth-values) to (functions from individuals to truth-values), or a
function of type (ib)(ib) for short. Thus the
meaning of ‘woollen’ can take the meaning of
‘sweater’ (an ib) as input and produce the
meaning of ‘woollen sweater’ (another ib) as
output; this is why the meaning of ‘woollen’ has the type
(ib)(ib).  woollen(sweater) is the
specific function of type ib that maps sweaters made of wool
to TRUE, and all other individuals to FALSE.


In this framework, a quantified NP such as ‘every sweater’
has a meaning which can take the meaning of an intransitive verb
(e.g., ‘unravelled’), or more generally, a Verb Phrase
(VP), as input and produce the meaning (truth-value) of a sentence
(e.g. ‘every sweater unravelled’) as output. Intransitive
verbs and VPs are like common nouns in being of type ib. For
example, the VP quickly(unravelled) is of
type ib, mapping all and only individuals that unravelled
quickly to TRUE. So a quantified NP is a function from inputs of
type ib to outputs of type b, and is thus of type
(ib)b. ‘Every sweater unravelled
quickly’ would be represented
as (every(sweater))(quickly(unravelled)), and would
denote the truth-value that is the result of applying a meaning of
type (ib)b, that of
every(sweater), to a meaning of type ib,
that of quickly(unravelled) (the
adverb quickly itself is of type
(ib)(ib), like the
adjective woollen). Rules specific to
every guarantee that every(sweater)
maps quickly(unravelled) to TRUE iff
quickly(unravelled) maps to TRUE everything that
sweater maps to TRUE.


So far, the apparatus is extensional, which, besides providing only
two possible sentence-meanings, TRUE and FALSE, imposes severe
limitations on the range of concepts we can express. Suppose that the
Scottish clothing company Pringle has a monopoly on the manufacture of
woollen sweaters, and makes sweaters of no other material. Then a garment is
a woollen sweater iff it is a Pringle sweater, meaning that
woollen(sweater) and pringle(sweater)
are the same function of type ib, and these two terms for that
function are everywhere interchangeable in the type-theoretic language.
Then modal operators such as ‘it is contingent that’ cannot
be in the language, since interchanging
woollen(sweater) and pringle(sweater)
within their scope should sometimes lead to change of truth-value, but
cannot if the two expressions receive the same meaning in the
semantics. For example, ‘it is contingent that every Pringle
sweater is woollen’ is true, but ‘it is contingent that
every woollen sweater is woollen’ is false. Therefore the concept
of contingency has no adequate representation in the type-theoretic
(boldface) language.


Shifting to intensional type theory deals with this
difficulty. The intension of any expression X is a function from
possible worlds to an extension of the type which that expression has
in the extensional theory just sketched, if it has such an extension,
otherwise to something appropriate for intensional vocabulary such as
‘it is contingent that’. An intension which is a function
from possible worlds to items of type t is
said to be of type st.
sweater, for instance, will have as its intension a
function from possible worlds to functions of type ib,
providing for each possible world a function that specifies the
individuals which are sweaters at that world; so
sweater‘s intension is of type
s(ib). However, a modal sentential operator such as
‘it is contingent that’ will have as its intension a
function that, for each possible world, produces the very same
function, which takes as input functions of type sb and
produces truth-values as output. So the extension of ‘it is
contingent that’ at each world is the same function, of type
(sb)b. (The operator is said to be
intensional because its extension at each world is a
function taking intensions, such as functions of type sb, as
input.)


A function of type sb is sometimes called a
possible-worlds proposition, since it traces the truth-value
of a sentence at each world. For example, with appropriate assignments
to the constituents,
(13)
(every(woollen(sweater)))(woollen)


should be true, that is, refer to TRUE, at every
 world.[5]
 So the
intension of (13) is the function f of type
sb such that for every world w, f(w)
= TRUE. This is a constant intension. On the other hand,
(14)
(every(pringle(sweater)))(woollen)


is true at some worlds but false at others, those where Pringle makes
non-woollen sweaters; so its intension is non-constant.


We define the intension of contingent to be the
function which, for each world w as input, produces as output the
function c of type (sb)b
such that for any function p of type
sb, c(p)
is true at w iff there are worlds u and v such that
p(u) = TRUE and
p(v) = FALSE (this is the meaning of
‘contingent that’ in the sense ‘contingent
whether’). So the intension of ‘contingent’ is also
constant, since the same function c is the
output at every world.


Since contingent expects an input of type
sb, we cannot write
(15)
contingent((every(woollen(sweater)))(woollen))


since in evaluating this formula at a world w we would find
ourselves trying to apply the reference of contingent
at w, namely, the function c just defined, to
the reference of (every(woollen(sweater)))(woollen) at
w, namely, the truth-value TRUE. But c
requires an input of type sb, not b. So we introduce
a new operator, written ^, such that if X is an
expression and t is the type of X's reference
at each w, then at each w, the reference of ^X is of
type st. ^X may be read as
‘the intension of X’, since the rule for ^
is that at each world, ^X refers to that function
which for each world w, outputs the reference of X at w.


If we now evaluate
(16)
contingent^((every(woollen(sweater)))(woollen))


at a world w, the result will be FALSE. This is because the function
p of type sb that is the reference
of ^((every(woollen(sweater)))(woollen)) at every
world, maps every world to TRUE. So there is no u such that
p(u) = FALSE. But there is such a u for
^((every(pringle(sweater)))(woollen)), and so
(17)
contingent^((every(pringle(sweater)))(woollen))


is TRUE at w. Note that choice of w doesn't matter, since the
intension of contingent produces the same function
c at every world, and the reference of, e.g.,
^((every(pringle(sweater)))(woollen)), is the same
function of type sb at every world.


Finally, our type-theory, intensional or extensional, is
higher-order, because the semantics makes available
higher-order domains of quantification and reference.
sweater refers to a property of individuals, a
first-order property. (every(sweater)) refers
to a property of properties of individuals, a second-order property.
For just as sweater(my favorite garment) attributes
the property of being a sweater to a certain individual, so we can
think of (every(sweater))(woollen) as attributing a
property to the property of being woollen. Which property is attributed
to being woollen? The rules governing every ensure
that (every(F)) is truly predicated of
G iff G is a property of every
F. In that case, G has the property of being
a property of every F. So (every(F)) stands
for the property of being a property of every F.


Treating quantified NP's as terms for properties of properties means
they can occur as arguments to any expression defined for properties of
properties. We can even rescue the uncomprehending student's attempt at
‘Jack hit someone’, for provided ‘hit’ is of
the right type — which is easily arranged — we can have
(hit(someone))(jack). Here hit
accepts the property of being a property of at least one person, and
produces the first-order property of hitting someone, which is then
attributed to Jack. In extensional type-theory, hit
has the type ((ib)b)(ib) if
(hit(someone))(jack) is well-typed and
jack is of type
 i.[6]


The significance of this for the semantics of intensional
transitives is that we now have a way of representing a reading of,
say,
(18) Jack wants a woollen sweater


in which the quantified NP is within the semantic scope of the verb
without having scope over a hidden subsentence with a free variable for
the NP to bind: the quantified NP ‘a woollen sweater’ can
just be the argument to the verb. To allow for the intensionality of
the transitive verb, Montague adopts the rule that if x and
y can concatenate into a meaningful expression xy,
the reference of the functional expression is a function which operates
on the intension of the argument expression. Suppressing some
irrelevant detail, this means that if ‘wants’ syntactically
combines with ‘a woollen sweater’ to produce the VP
‘wants a woollen sweater’, then in its semantics,
want applies to the intension of (a(woollen
(sweater))), resulting in the following semantics for
(18):
(19)
 want(^(a(woollen(sweater))))(jack).[7]


In (19), a(woollen((sweater)) is within the scope
of want. So if we take (19) to represent the notional
reading of (18), the idea that notional readings are readings in which
the quantified NP has narrow scope with respect to the intensional verb
is sustained.
Revisions and refinements


How does Montague's account of intensional transitives fare
vis à vis the three marks of
intensionality? The existence-neutrality of existential NP's is clearly
supported by (19), for there is nothing to prevent the application at a
world w of want to
^(a(woollen(sweater))) from producing a function
mapping Jack to TRUE even if, at the same w,
(woollen(sweater)) maps every individual to FALSE.


Substitution-failure is supported for contingently coextensive
expressions. For instance, (19) does not entail
want(^(a(pringle(sweater))))(jack) even if there are
worlds where all and only woollen sweaters are Pringle sweaters, so
long as there are other worlds where this is not so. Let u be a world
of the latter sort. Then a(pringle(sweater)) at u and
a(woollen(sweater)) at u are different functions of
type (ib)b, making
^(a(pringle(sweater))) and
^(a(woollen(sweater))) different at every world.
Therefore want(^(a(pringle(sweater)))) may map Jack to
FALSE at worlds where want(^(a(woollen(sweater))))
maps Jack to TRUE: since want is applied to different
inputs here, the outputs may also be different.


But this result depends on the fact that
(pringle(sweater)) and
(woollen(sweater)) are merely contingently
coextensive. If ‘water’ and ‘H2O’
are necessarily co-extensive, then wanting a glass of water
and wanting a glass of H2O will be indistinguishable in
higher-order intensional type theory. This failure to make a
distinction, however, traces to the intensionality of the semantics
— to its being (merely) a possible-worlds semantics — not
to its being higher-order or type-theoretic. So possible solutions
include (i) augmenting higher-order intensional type theory with extra
apparatus, or (ii) employing a different kind of higher-order type
theory. In both cases the aim is to mark distinctions like that between
wanting a glass of water and wanting a glass of H2O.


A solution of the first kind, following (Carnap 1947), is proposed
in (Lewis 1972:182–6); the idea is that the meaning of a complex
expression is not its intension, but rather a tree that exhibits the
expression's syntactic construction bottom-up, with each node in the
tree decorated by an appropriate syntactic category label and semantic
intension. But as Lewis says (p. 182), for non-compound lexical
constituents, sameness of intension implies sameness of meaning. So
although his approach will handle the water/H2O problem if
we assume the term ‘H2O’ has structure that the
term ‘water’ lacks, it will not without such an assumption.
For the same reason, it cannot explain substitution-failure involving
unstructured proper names, on the usual view (deriving from Kripke
1972) that identity of extension (at any world) for such names implies
identity of intension. So we have no account of why admiring Cicero is
different from admiring Tully.


A solution of the second kind, employing a different kind of
higher-order type theory, is pursued in (Thomason 1980). In Thomason's
“intentional” logic, propositions are taken as a primitive
category, instead of being analyzed as intensions of type sb.
In turns out that a somewhat familiar higher-order type theory can be
built on this basis, in which, roughly, the type of propositions plays
a role analogous to the type of truth-values in extensional type
theory. A property such as orator, for example, is a
function of type ip (as opposed to ib), where
p is the type of propositions: given an individual as input,
orator will produce the proposition that that
individual is an orator as output. Proper names, however, are not
translated as terms of type i, for then
cicero and tully would present the
same input to orator, resulting in the same
proposition as output: orator(cicero) =
orator(tully). So there would be no believing Cicero
is an orator without believing Tully is an orator. Instead, Thomason
assigns proper names the type (ip)p, functions from
properties to propositions. And merely the fact that Cicero and Tully
are the same individual does not require us to say that
cicero and tully must produce the
same propositional output given the same property input. Instead, we
can have cicero(orator) and
tully(orator) distinct (see Muskens 2005 for further
elaboration of Thomason's approach).


Applying this to intensional transitives is just a matter of
assigning appropriate types so that the translations of, say,
‘Lucia seeks Cicero’ and ‘Lucia seeks Tully’,
are different propositions (potentially with different truth-values).
We need to keep the verb as function, and we already have the types of
cicero and tully set to
(ip)p. The translations of ‘seeks Cicero’
and ‘seeks Tully’ should be functions capable of accepting
inputs of type (ip)p, such as lucia,
and producing propositions as output. seeks therefore
accepts input of type (ip)p and produces output that
accepts input of type (ip)p and produces output of
type p. Thus seeks is of type
((ip)p)(((ip)p)p), and we
get substitution-failure because seeks(cicero) and
seeks(tully) can be different functions of type
((ip)p)p so long as cicero
and tully are different functions of type
(ip)p (as we already said they should be).
seeks(cicero) can therefore map lucia
to one proposition while seeks(tully) maps it (not
‘her’) to another; and these propositions can have
different
 truth-values.[8]


Finally, there is the question whether (19) shows that Montague's
semantics supports notional readings. One problem is that Montague's
semantics for extensional verbs such as ‘get’ is exactly
the same as for intensional verbs, and it takes an extra stipulation,
or meaning-postulate, for ‘get’, to guarantee that
the extension of get(^(a(woollen(sweater)))) at w maps
Jack to TRUE only if the extension of
(woollen(sweater)) at w maps some individual to TRUE
(you can want a golden fleece even if there aren't any, but you can't
get one in these circumstances). So apparently (19)'s pattern
embodies something in common to the notional meaning of ‘want a
woollen sweater’ and the meaning of ‘gets a woollen
sweater’, something which is neutral on the existence of woollen
sweaters. This is unintuitive, but is perhaps not a serious problem,
since it can be avoided by a different treatment of extensional
transitives.


A more pressing question is what justification we have for thinking
that (19) captures the notional, ‘no particular one’,
reading of
 (18).[9]
 On the face of it, (19) imputes to Jack the
wanting attitude towards the property of being a property of a woollen
sweater. This is the same attitude as Jack may stand in to a particular
woollen sweater, say that one. But it is not at all clear that
we have any grasp of what a single attitude with such diverse objects
could be, and the difficulty seems to lie mainly with the proposed
semantics for notional readings. What does it mean to have the attitude
of desire towards the property of being a property of a woollen
sweater?


Two ways of dealing with this suggest themselves. First, we might
supplement the formal semantics with an elucidation of what it
is to stand in a common-or-garden attitude to a property of
properties. Second, we might revise the analysis to eliminate this
counterintuitive aspect of it, but without importing the
propositionalist's hidden sentential contexts.


Both (Moltmann 1997) and (Richard 2001) can be read as providing,
within Montague's general approach, an account of what it is to stand
in an attitude relation to a property of properties. Both accounts are
modal, having to do with the nature of possible situations in which the
attitude is in some sense “matched” by the situation: an
attitude-state of need or expectation is matched if the need or
expectation is met, an attitude-state of desire is matched if the
desire is satisfied, an attitude-event of seeking is met if the search
concludes successfully, and so on. According to Moltmann's account
(1997, 22–3) one stands in the attitude relation of seeking to
^(a(woollen(sweater))) iff, in every minimal
situation σ in which that search concludes successfully, you
find a woollen sweater in σ. Richard (2001, p. 116) offers a more
complex analysis that is designed to handle negative quantified NP's as
well (‘no woollen sweater’, ‘few woollen
sweaters’, etc.). On this account, a search π demands
^(a(P)) iff for every relevant success-story
m = <w, s> for π, things in s with a property
entailing P are in the extension of
^(a(P)) at w. Here s is the set of things that are
found when the search concludes successfully in w.


By contrast, (Zimmerman 1993) and (Forbes 2000, 2006) propose revisions in
(19) itself and its ilk. Zimmerman (161–2) replaces the
quantifier intension with a property intension, since he holds that (i)
unspecific readings are restricted to “broadly” existential
quantified NP's, and (ii) the property corresponding to the
nominal in the existential NP (e.g., ‘woollen sweater’) can
do duty for the NP itself. Of course, the proposed restriction of
unspecific readings to existentials is controversial (cf. our
earlier example, ‘Guercino is looking for every dog on
Aldrovandi's estate’). It may also be wondered whether there is
any less of a need to explain what it is to stand in the seeking
relation to a property of objects than to a property of properties.


According to (Forbes 2000) the need for such an explanation already
threatens the univocality of a verb such as ‘look for’ as
it occurs in ‘look for that woollen sweater’ and
‘look for some woollen sweater’. Observing that search
verbs are action verbs, Forbes applies Davidson's event semantics to
them (Davidson 1967). In this semantics, as developed in (Parsons
1990), search verbs become predicates of events, and in relational
(specific) readings, the object searched for is said to be in a
thematic relation to the event, one denoted by ‘for’; thus
‘for some search e, e is for that
woollen sweater’. But in unspecific readings, no thematic
relation is invoked; rather, the quantified NP is used to
characterize the search. So we would have ‘for some
search e, e is characterized by
^(a(woollen(sweater)))’, i.e., e is an
a-woollen-sweater search (Forbes 2000, 174–6; 2006, 77–84).


There is therefore a range of different non-propositionalist
approaches to intensional transitives. As we already remarked, one
possibility is that propositionalism is correct for some verbs and
non-propositionalism correct for others. However, there is also the
option that non-propositionalism is correct for all. A
non-propositionalist who makes this claim will have to explain the
phenomena illustrated in (7)–(10), without introducing degrees of
freedom that make it unintelligible that these phenomena do not arise
for all intensional transitives.
The logic of intensional transitives


There may be no such topic as the logic of propositional
attitudes: it may be doubted whether ‘Mary wants to meet a man
who has read Proust and a man who has read Gide’
logically entails ‘Mary wants to meet a man who has read
Proust’. Even if standing in the wanting-to-be-true attitude to
I meet a man who has read Proust and a man who has read Gide
somehow necessitates standing in the wanting-to-be-true attitude to
I meet a man who has read Proust, the necessitation appears to
be more psychological than logical. On the other hand, what we might
call ‘objectual attitudes’, the non-propositional attitudes
ascribed by intensional transitives, seem to have a logic (for a
compendium of examples, see Richard 2000, 105–7): ‘Mary
seeks a man who has read Proust and a man who has read Gide’ does
seem to entail ‘Mary seeks a man who has read Proust’.


Yet, as Richard notes (Richard 2001, 107–8), the inferential
behavior of quantified complements of intensional transitives is still
very different from the extensional case. For example (his
‘Literary Example’), even if it is true that Mary seeks a
man who has read Proust and a man who has read Gide, it may be false
both that she seeks at most one man and that she seeks at least two
men; for she may be indifferent between finding a man who has read
both, versus finding two men, one a reader of Proust but not Gide, the
other of Gide but not Proust. Contrast ‘saw’,
‘photographed’, or ‘met’: if she met a man who
has read Proust and a man who has read Gide, it cannot be false both
that she met at most at one man and also that she met at least
two men. As Richard insists, it is a constraint on any semantics of
intensional transitives that they get this type of case right.


By contrast, in other cases, even very simple ones, it is
controversial exactly what inferences intensional transitives in
unspecific readings support. If Mary seeks a man who has read Proust,
does it follow that she seeks a man who can read? After all, it is
unlikely that a comic-book reader will satisfy her tastes in
 men.[10]
If Perseus seeks a mortal gorgon, does it follow that he seeks a
 gorgon?[11]
 After all, if he finds an immortal gorgon,
he is in trouble. Zimmerman (1993, 173) takes it to be a requirement
on accounts of notional readings that they validate these deletion or
“weakening” inferences. But there are characterizations of
unspecific readings on which these inferences are in fact invalid, for
instance, a characterization in terms of indifference towards
which object of the relevant kind is found (Lewis uses such an
‘any one would do’ characterization in Lewis 1972,
p. 199).  For even if it is true that Mary seeks a man who has read
Proust, and any male Proust-reader would do, it does not follow that
Mary seeks a man who can read, and any man who can read would do. For
not every man who can read has read Proust.


Is there anything intrinsic to the indifference characterization of
unspecificity (‘any one would do’) that we can object to
while leaving the status of weakening inferences open? One objection
is that the characterization does not work for every verb or
quantifier: ‘Guercino painted a dog, any dog would do’
makes little sense, and ‘the police are looking for everyone who
was in the room, any people who were in the room would do’ is
not much better. More importantly, the characterization seems to put
warranted assertibility out of reach, since the grounds which we
normally take to justify ascribing an existentially quantified
objectual attitude will rarely give reason to think that the agent has
absolutely no further preferences going beyond the characterization of
the object-kind given in the ascription (probably Mary would pass on
meeting a male psychopathic killer who has read Proust).


Still, this is not to validate weakening inferences; for that we
would need to show that the more usual gloss of the unspecific reading,
using a ‘but no particular one’ rider, supports the
inferences as strongly as the indifference characterization refutes
them. And it is unclear how such an argument would proceed (see further
Forbes 2006, 94–6). In addition, making a good case that the
inferences are intuitively valid is one thing, getting the semantics to
validate them is another. Both the propositionalist and the Montagovian
need to add extra principles, since there is nothing in their bare
semantics to compel these inferences. For even if Jack stands in the
wanting relation to ^(a(woollen(sweater))), that by
itself is silent on whether he also stands in the wanting relation to
^(a(sweater)). The accounts of Moltmann and Richard
both decide the matter positively, however (e.g., if in every minimal
situation in which Jack's desire is satisfied, he gets a woollen
sweater, then in every such situation, he gets a sweater; so he wants a
sweater).


The intuitive validity of weakening can also be directly
challenged. For example, via weakening we can infer that if A is
looking for a cat and B is looking for a dog, then A and B are looking
for the same thing (an animal). For discussion of this kind of
example, see (Zimmerman 2006), and for the special use of ‘the
same thing’, (Moltmann 2008).


Another interesting logical problem concerns the “conjunctive
force” of disjoined quantified NP's in objectual ascriptions.
There is a large literature on the conjunctive force of disjunction in
many other contexts (e.g., Kamp 1973, Loewer 1976, Makinson 1984,
Jennings 1994, Zimmerman 2000), for instance as exhibited in
‘x is larger than y or z’ and
‘John can speak French or Italian’. In these cases the
conjunctive force is easily captured by simple distribution:
‘x is larger than y and larger than
z’, ‘John can speak French and can speak
 Italian’.[12]
 However, with intensional transitives we
find the same conjunctive force, but no distributive articulation. If
we say that Jack needs a woollen sweater or a fleece jacket, we say
something to the effect that (i) his getting a woollen sweater is one
way his need could be met, and (ii) his getting a fleece
jacket is another way his need could be met. But ‘Jack needs a
woollen sweater or a fleece jacket’ does not mean that
Jack needs a woollen sweater and needs a fleece jacket. This
last conjunction ascribes two needs, only one of which is met by
getting a satisfactory woollen sweater. But the latter acquisition by
itself meets the disjunctive need for a woollen sweater or a fleece
jacket. So there is a challenge to explain the semantics of the
disjunctive ascription, while at the same time remaining within a
framework that can accommodate all cases of conjunctive force —
comparatives, various senses of ‘can’, counterfactuals with
disjunctive antecedents (‘if Jack were to put on a woollen
sweater or a fleece jacket he'd be warmer’) and so on; see
further (Forbes 2003, 59–64; 2006, 97–111).


A penultimate type of inference we will mention is one in which
intensional and extensional verbs both occur, and the inference seems
valid even when the intensional VP's are construed unspecifically. An
example:
(20a) Jack wants a woollen sweater



(20b) Whatever Jack wants, he gets


(20c) Therefore, Jack will get a woollen sweater



Obviously, (20a,b) entail (20c) when (20a) is understood
specifically. But informants judge that the inference is also valid
when (20a) is understood unspecifically, with ‘but no particular
one’ explicitly appended. If we seek a validation of the
inference that hews to surface form, Montague's uniform treatment of
intensional and extensional verbs has its appeal: (20b) will say that
for whatever property of properties P Jack
stands in the wanting relation to, he stands in the getting relation
to. So the inference is portrayed as the simple modus ponens
it seems to be. It would then be the task of other meaning-postulates
to carry us from his standing in the getting relation to
^(a(woollen(sweater))) to there being a woollen
sweater such that he gets it.

The final example to be considered here involves fictional names in the
scope of intensional transitives. An example (Zalta 1988, 128) of the
puzzles these can lead to is: 

(21a) The ancient Greeks worshipped Zeus. 



(21b) Zeus is a mythical character.


(21c) Mythical characters do not exist.


(21d) Therefore, the ancient Greeks worshipped something that does
(did) not exist.



Or even:
(21e) Therefore, there is something that doesn't exist such
that the ancient Greeks worshipped it.


One thing the example shows is that specific/unspecific is not to be
confused with real/fictional. (21a) is a true specific ascription, just
as ‘the ancient Greeks worshipped Ahura Mazda’ is a false
one. (21b) is also true. So the ancient Greeks, who would not have
knowingly worshipped a mythical character, were making a
rather large mistake, if one of a familiar sort.


(21c) is also true, if we are careful about what ‘do not
exist’ means in this context. It is contingent that Zeus-myths
were ever formulated, and one sense in which we might mean (21c) turns
on the assumption that fictional and mythical characters exist iff
fictions and myths about them do. In this sense, (21c) is false, though
an actual fictional character such as Zeus would not have existed if
there had been no Zeus-myths. This also explains why (21a) and (21b)
can both be true: ‘Zeus’ refers to the mythical character,
a contingently existing abstract object.


However, by far the more likely reading of (21c) is one on which it
means that mythical characters are not real. Zeus is not flesh and
blood, not even immaterial flesh and blood. With this in mind, (21d)
and (21e) are both true. The quantifier ‘something’ ranges
over a domain that includes both real and fictional or mythical
entities, and there is something in that domain, the mythical
character, which was worshipped by the ancient Greeks and which is not
in the subdomain of real items.


This gets the right truth-values for the statements in (21), but
might be thought to run into trouble with the likes of ‘Zeus
lives on Mt. Olympus’: if ‘Zeus’ refers to an
abstract object, how can Zeus live anywhere? One way of dealing with
this kind of case is to suppose, evidently plausibly, that someone who
says ‘Zeus
lives on Mt. Olympus’ and knows the facts means
(22) According to the myth, Zeus lives on Mt.
Olympus.


On the other hand, if an ancient Greek believer says ‘Zeus
lives on Mt. Olympus’, he or she says something false, there
being no reason to posit a covert ‘according to the myth’
in this case.


However, even the covert operator theory might be contested, on the
grounds that within its scope we are still unintelligibly predicating
‘lived on Mt.  Olympus’ of an abstract object. Simply
prefixing ‘according to the myth’ to the unintelligible
cannot render it intelligible.  But there is the evident fact that
(22) is both intelligible and true.  So either prefixing
‘according to the myth’ can render the
unintelligible intelligible, or what is going on in the embedded
sentence is not to be construed as standard predication. For further
discussion of these matters, see, for example, van Inwagen 1977,
Parsons 1980, Zalta 1988, Thomasson 1998, and Salmon 2002.