We have some of our properties purely in virtue of the way we are.
(Our mass is an example.) We have other properties in virtue of the
way we interact with the world. (Our weight is an example.) The former
are the intrinsic properties, the latter are the extrinsic properties.
This seems to be an intuitive enough distinction to grasp, and hence
the intuitive distinction has made its way into many discussions in
philosophy, including discussions in ethics, philosophy of mind,
metaphysics, epistemology and philosophy of physics. Unfortunately,
when we look more closely at the intuitive distinction, we find reason
to suspect that it conflates a few related distinctions, and that each
of these distinctions is somewhat resistant to analysis. 
 
1. Introduction

The standard way to introduce the distinction between intrinsic and
extrinsic properties is by the use of a few orientating
characterisations. David Lewis provides the following list:


A sentence or statement or proposition that ascribes intrinsic
properties to something is entirely about that thing; whereas an
ascription of extrinsic properties to something is not entirely about
that thing, though it may well be about some larger whole which
includes that thing as part. (Lewis 1983a: 197)

A thing has its intrinsic properties in virtue of the way that thing
itself, and nothing else, is. Not so for extrinsic properties, though
a thing may well have these in virtue of the way some larger whole is
… (Lewis 1983a: 197)

If something has an intrinsic property, then so does any perfect
duplicate of that thing; whereas duplicates situated in different
surroundings will differ in their extrinsic properties. (Lewis 1983a:
197)


The other way to introduce the subject matter is by providing examples
of paradigmatic intrinsic and extrinsic properties. One half of this
task is easy: everyone agrees that being an uncle is extrinsic, as is
being six metres from a rhododendron. The problem with using this
method to introduce the distinction is that there is much less
agreement about which properties are intrinsic. Lewis has in several
places (1983a, 1986a, 1988) insisted that shape properties are
intrinsic, but one could hold that an object’s shape depends on
the curvature of the space in which it is located at, and this might
not even be intrinsic to that space (Nerlich 1979), let alone the
object (see also Bricker 1993 and Skow 2007). Lewis also mentions
charge and internal structure as being examples of intrinsic
properties. (For ease of exposition, we will assume below that shape
properties are intrinsic. We will also assume that properties like
being made of tin, and having a mass of 500kg are intrinsic.)
1.1 Philosophical Importance

The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic properties plays an
essential role in stating several interesting philosophical problems.
Historically, the most prominent of these has to do with notions of
intrinsic value. G. E. Moore (1903: §18) noted that we can make a
distinction between things that are good in themselves, or possess
intrinsic value, and those that are good as a means to other things.
To this day there is still much debate over whether this distinction
can be sustained (Feldman 1998, Kagan 1998), and, if it can, which
kinds of things possess intrinsic value (Krebs 1999). In particular,
one of the central topics in contemporary environmental ethics is the
question of which kinds of things (intelligent beings, conscious
beings, living things, species, etc) might have intrinsic value. While
this is the oldest (and still most common) use of the
intrinsic/extrinsic distinction in philosophy, it has not played much
role in the discussions of the distinction in metaphysics, to which we
now turn.

As P. T. Geach (1969) noted, the fact that some object aaa is
not FFF before an event occurs but is FFF after that
event occurs does not mean that the event constitutes, in any deep
sense, a change in aaa. To use a well-worn example, at the time
of Socrates’s death Xanthippe became a widow; that is, she was
not a widow before the event of her husband’s death, but she was
a widow when it ended. Still, though that event constituted (or
perhaps was constituted by) a change in Socrates, it did not in itself
constitute a change in Xanthippe. Geach noted that we can distinguish
between real changes, such as what occurs in Socrates when he dies,
from mere changes in which predicates one satisfies, such as what
occurs in Xanthippe when Socrates dies. The latter he termed
‘mere Cambridge’ change. There is something of a consensus
that an object undergoes real change in an event iff there is some
intrinsic property it satisfied before the event but
not afterwards.

David Lewis (1986a, 1988) built on this point of Geach’s to
mount an attack on endurantism, the theory that
objects persist by being wholly located at different times, and that
there can be strict identity between an object existing at one time
and one existing at another time. Lewis argues that this is
inconsistent with the idea that objects undergo real change. If the
very same object can be both FFF (at one time) and not
FFF (at another), this means that FFF-ness must be a
relation to a time, but this means that it is not an intrinsic
property. So any property that an object can change must be extrinsic,
so nothing undergoes real change. Lewis says that this argument
supports the rival theory of perdurantism, which says
that objects persist by having different temporal parts at different
times. While this argument is controversial (see Haslanger (1989),
Johnston (1987) and Lowe (1988) for some responses), it does show how
considerations about intrinsicality can resonate within quite
different areas of metaphysics.

A third major area where the concept of intrinsicality has been put to
work is in stating various supervenience theses. Frank Jackson (1998)
defines physicalism in terms of duplication and physical duplication,
which are in turn defined in terms of intrinsic properties. Similarly,
Jaegwon Kim (1982) defines a mind/body supervenience thesis in terms
of intrinsic properties. As Theodore Sider (1993) notes, the simplest
way to define the individualist theory of mental
content that Tyler Burge (1979) attacks is as the claim that the
content of a thinker’s propositional attitudes supervenes on the
intrinsic properties of the thinker. And many
internalist theories in epistemology are based around
the intuition that whether a thinker is justified in believing some
proposition supervenes on the intrinsic properties of the thinker.

A fourth area where the concept of intrinsically has been employed is
to state recombination principles intended to describe what possible
states of the world there are. (See Lewis 1986a.) An initial attempt
to state such a principle might be (R1), where xxx is wholly
distinct from yyy iff xxx and yyy have no parts in
common. (As is standard in philosophical usage, each thing is counted
as a part of itself. Hence, things are not wholly distinct from
themselves.) 

(R1)

For any properties ppp and qqq , it is possible that
there are two wholly distinct things, xxx and yyy, such
that xxx has ppp and yyy has qqq.



Given an abundant theory of properties according to which each
(non-defective) predicate expresses a property, however, (R1) clearly
fails, since it isn’t possible for there to be an xxx and a
yyy such that xxx has the property of being made of gold,
and yyy has the property of being such that nothing is made of
gold. This defect with (R1) can be fixed by replacing (R1) with
(R2).

(R2)

For any intrinsic properties ppp and qqq, it
is possible that there are two wholly distinct things, xxx and
yyy, such that xxx has ppp and yyy has
qqq.



While being made of gold and being such that nothing is made of gold
refutes (R1), they don’t refute (R2), since being such that
nothing is made of gold is clearly non-intrinsic.

Most of the philosophical applications of intrinsicality are
independent of its precise analysis. Work on its analysis, however,
has helped clarify these applications by allowing us to distinguish
between different notions of intrinscality and different notions in
the vicinity of intrinsicality, and by giving us a greater
understanding of these various notions and of what properties satisfy
them. A good example of the latter kind of advance is Theodore
Sider’s (2003) observation that most of the properties in folk
theory are ‘maximal’ and hence not intrinsic properties.
This observation provides a strong argument against various theories
that appeal to the intuitive intrinsicality of some everyday
property.

Though these are the most prominent uses of the intrinsic/extrinsic
distinction in philosophy, they by no means exhaust its uses. Many
applications of the distinction are cited by I. L. Humberstone (1996),
including the following: George Schlesinger (1990) uses the
distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic properties to state a
non-trivial version of Mill’s principle of the uniformity of
nature. Wlodzimierz Rabinowicz (1979) uses the distinction to
formulate principles of universalizability for moral principles and
natural laws. And E. J. Khamara (1988) uses a distinction between
relational and non-relational properties to state a non-trivial
version of the principle of Identity of Indiscernibles.
1.2 Global and Local

In addition to the “global” concept of a property being
intrinsic, there is a “local” concept of something having
a property in an intrinsic fashion (see Humberstone 1996, p. 206). For
each of Lewis’s characterisations concerning the concept of an
intrinsic property quoted in section
 1.1,
 there is a corresponding characterisation for the concept of a thing
having a property in an intrinsic fashion. These are:

 xxx has FFF in an intrinsic fashion iff a sentence
ascribing FFF to xxx is entirely about that thing.
 xxx has FFF in an intrinsic fashion iff xxx has
FFF in virtue of how xxx itself, and nothing else, is.
 xxx has FFF in an intrinsic fashion iff every duplicate
of xxx has FFF.


It follows from at least the third of these characterisations that
something can have an extrinsic property in an intrinsic fashion. For
example, since every duplicate of a piece of tin has the property of
being made of tin, every duplicate of a piece of tin also has the
extrinsic property of being either made of tin or married. As a
result, it follows from the third characterisation that each piece of
tin has the property of being either made of tin or married in an
intrinsic fashion, despite this property being extrinsic. 

Two plausible principles linking the local and global concepts of
intrinsicality are (GTL) and (LTG) (see Humberstone 1996, p. 228).

(GTL)

If FFF is an intrinsic property, then it is necessary that
every xxx that has FFF has FFF in an intrinsic
fashion

(LTG)

If it is necessary that every xxx that has FFF has
FFF in an intrinsic fashion, then FFF is an intrinsic
property



In addition to the two-place predicate ‘has … in an
intrinsic fashion’, we can introduce a modifier
‘intrinsically’, where, adapting one of the
characterisations above, xxx is intrinsically FFF iff
xxx is FFF in virtue of how xxx itself, and nothing
else, is. (cf. Humberstone 1996, p. 228). This modifier takes
predicates as arguments rather than names of properties or variables
ranging over properties. Nominalists, who don’t believe in
properties, might attempt to use this modifier to capture the
intuitive distinctions associated with intrinsicality without
committing themselves to properties. For example, a nominalist might
claim that a table is intrinsically rectangular, while claiming to
consistently hold that there is no property of being rectangular. (For
simplicity, we will assume in the following that nominalism is false
and that there are abundantly many properties and relations, some of
which are intrinsic and some of which are extrinsic.)

There might be further reasons to employ either the two place
predicate ‘has … in an intrinsic fashion’, or the
modifier ‘intrinsically’, rather than the one-place
predicate ‘is intrinsic’. For example, one might think
that at least one of the former two notions is more fundamental than
the latter notion, or that the latter notion is misguided in some way
that at least one of the former notions isn’t. (See, for
example, Figdor 2008.)
1.3 Relations 

While this article focuses on the distinction between intrinsic and
extrinsic one-place properties, it is important to recognize that the
distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic also applies to multiple
place relations. As in the case of one-place properties, the
distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic multiple place relations
can be introduced by characterisations and examples. One
characterisation is the following:

An nnn-place intrinsic relation is an nnn-place relation
that nnn things stand in in virtue of how they are and how they
are related to each other, as opposed to how they are related to
things outside of them and how things outside of them are; whereas,
this is not the case for extrinsic nnn-place relations.


Examples of extrinsic two-place relations include being as popular
as, and having the same cousin as. Possible examples of
intrinsic two-place relations include being 1 m away from and
being made of the same type of metal as. (The claim that
distance relations like being 1 m away from are intrinsic
will be denied by philosophers who deny that shape properties are
intrinsic.) 

As well as the global notion of an nnn-place relation being
intrinsic, there is the local notion of nnn things standing in
a relation in an intrinsic fashion. A characterisation of this local
notion is:

nnn things stand in a relation RRR in an intrinsic fashion
iff the nnn things stand in RRR in virtue of how they are
and how they are related to each other, as opposed to how they are
related to things outside of them and how things outside of them are.

2. Notions of Intrinsicality

A number of different distinctions have been called the
intrinsic/extrinsic distinction. As J. Michael Dunn (1990) notes, some
authors have used ‘intrinsic’ and ‘extrinsic’
to mean ‘essential’ and ‘accidental’. Dunn is
surely right in saying that this is a misuse of the terms. A more
interesting distinction is noted by Brian Ellis (1991; discussed in
Humberstone 1996: 206). (See also Figdor 2008 and Figdor 2014 for a
discussion of a related notion of intrinsicality.) Ellis suggests we
should distinguish between properties that objects have independently
of any outside forces acting on them (what we will call the
Ellis-intrinsic properties), and those that they have in virtue of
those outside forces (the Ellis-extrinsic properties). For many
objects (such as, say, a stretched rubber band) their shape will be
dependent on the outside forces acting on them, so their shape will be
Ellis-extrinsic. If one is committed to the idea that shapes are
intrinsic, one should think this means that the distinction between
the Ellis-intrinsic and Ellis-extrinsic properties is not the same as
the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction. Such a judgement may seem a
little hasty, but in any case we will turn now to distinctions that
have received more attention in the philosophical literature.
2.1 Relational vs. Non-Relational Properties

Many writers, especially in the literature on intrinsic value, use
‘relational’ for the opposite of intrinsic. This seems to
be a mistake since many properties seem to be both be relational and
intrinsic. For example, most people have the property having
longer legs than arms, and indeed seem to have this property in
an intrinsic fashion, even though the property consists in a certain
relation being satisfied. Maybe the property is not intrinsic if
whether or not something is an arm or a leg is extrinsic, so perhaps
this isn’t a conclusive example, but it seems troubling. And, in
any case, there are other examples that can’t be responded to in
this way. For example, the property of having a proper part is surely
intrinsic, but it also appears to be a relational property.

As Humberstone 1996 notes, some might respond by suggesting that a
relational property is one such that if an object has it, then it
bears some relation to a non-part of it. But this won’t do
either. Not being within a mile of a rhododendron is clearly
relational, but does not consist in bearing a relation to any
non-part, as we can see by the fact that a non-rhododendron all alone
in a world can satisfy it. 

A further response might be to say that a relational property should
be a property that involves a relation that can only relate wholly
distinct things, and that, given this construal of a relational
property, non-intrinsic properties are relational properties. However,
this response faces difficulties also. For example, this account would
presumably classify the property of being such that there is a cube as
being intrinsic. This property, however, is not intrinsic. 

While the notion of a relational property should be distinguished from
the notion of a non-intrinsic property, it might be that the notion of
intrinsic properties can be given an account in terms of
relationality. One such account due to Francesscotti is discussed in
the supplement:

The Relational Account of Intrinsicality.
 
2.2 Local vs. Non-Local Properties

We now turn to the notion of intrinsicality characterised by the
characterisations listed in section
 1.
 Or perhaps better, we now turn to the notions of
intrinsicality characterised by these characterisations, since, while
Lewis thought that each of these characterisations characterise a
single notion of intrinsically, it is plausible that they characterise
different notions. In this subsection, we will discuss the notion
characterised by the first characterisation which involves aboutness.
In the next two subsections, we will discuss the notions characterised
by the other two characterisations.

Lewis’s first characterisation is:

A sentence or statement or proposition that ascribes intrinsic
properties to something is entirely about that thing; whereas an
ascription of extrinsic properties to something is not entirely about
that thing, though it may well be about some larger whole which
includes that thing as part. (Lewis 1983a: 111–2)


As Marshall 2016a points out, the notion of aboutness employed in this
characterisation is plausibly that of intrinsic aboutness,
where intrinsic aboutness can be intuitively characterised by (1).

(1)

A state of affairs sss is intrinsically about a thing
xxx iff sss (either truly or falsely) describes how xxx
and its parts are and how they are related to each other, as opposed
to how xxx and its parts are related to other things and how
other things are.



Using the notion of intrinsic aboutness, Lewis’s first
characterisation can be more precisely stated by the schema (2).

(2)

The property of being FFF is intrinsic iff, necessarily, for
any xxx, the state of affairs of xxx being FFF is
intrinsically about xxx.


For any predicate FFF expressing a property ppp, and any
name nnn referring to an xxx, define the ascription of
ppp to xxx to be the state of affairs expressed by
┌Fn┐⌜Fn⌝\ulcorner Fn\urcorner. Using this definition, we can replace the
schema (2) with the sentence (3).

(3)

For any property p,pp,pp, p is intrinsic iff,
necessarily, for any xxx, the ascription of ppp to xxx
is intrinsically about xxx.


(3) plausibly classifies being a cube as intrinsic, since,
for any xxx, the state of affairs of xxx being a cube
plausibly describes how xxx and its parts are and how they are
related to each other, as opposed to how they are related to other
things and how other things are. In contrast, (3) plausibly classifies
being an uncle as non-intrinsic, since its ascription to a
thing is not only about how it and its parts are and how they are
related to each other, but also about how it is related to things
outside of it. (3) also plausibly classifies being Obama as
non-intrinsic since the ascription of being Obama to Clinton, namely
the state of affairs of Obama being identical to Clinton, is not
wholly about Clinton, but is also about Obama. Finally, (3) also
appears to classify being such that there is a number as
non-intrinsic, even if it is necessary that there are numbers. This is
because the ascription of this property to Clinton, namely the state
of affairs that Clinton is such that there is a number, appears to be
not wholly about how Clinton is, but is also about how things wholly
distinct from Clinton are. (We will assume that the intuition
underlying this judgement is correct. However, this is not
uncontroversial. See Sider 1996 for a rejection of a closely related
intuition and Eddon 2011 for a reply to this rejection.) 

In the following, we will call the properties classified as intrinsic
by (3) local properties, and call the properties classified
by (3) as not intrinsic non-local properties. (This notion of
a local property needs to be distinguished from the local conception
of something having a property in an intrinsic fashion discussed in
section
 1.2.)
2.3 Interior vs. Exterior Properties

The second characterisation listed in the quote by Lewis in section
 1
 was “A thing has its intrinsic properties in virtue of the way
that thing itself, and nothing else, is”. This
characterisation can be stated more precisely by schema (4), where
‘how xxx is intrinsically’ abbreviates ‘how xxx
and its parts are and how they are related to each other, as opposed
to how xxx and its parts are related to other things and how other
things are’.


(4)

Being FFF is intrinsic iff, necessarily, for any xxx, if xxx
is FFF then xxx is FFF in virtue of how xxx is
intrinsically.



Call the properties that are classified as intrinsic by (4)
interior properties, and call the properties that are
classified as non-intrinsic by (4) exterior properties. An
important question is what meaning ‘in virtue’ is meant to
have in (4). One possible answer is that it is meant to have a reading
corresponding to metaphysical grounding, where metaphysical grounding
is a non-causal explanatory relation on states of affairs, such that,
if one state of affairs metaphysically grounds another state of
affairs then it metaphysically necessitates it. Under such a reading
of ‘in virtue’, (5) is necessarily true. 

(5)

‘φφ\varphi in virtue of it being the case that
ϕϕ\phi’ is true iff the state of affairs expressed by ϕϕ\phi
metaphysically grounds the state of affairs expressed by
φφ\varphi.



While it might be initially appealing to think that ‘in
virtue’ in (4) expresses metaphysical grounding, Marshall (2015,
2016a) has argued that (4) fails to characterise a notion of
intrinsicality when ‘in virtue’ has this reading.
Marshall’s argument relies on (6) being necessarily true and (7)
being true on any notion of intrinsicality.

(6)

‘φφ\varphi in virtue of how xxx is intrinsically’
is true iff there is a sentence ϕϕ\phi that expresses a true state
of affairs that is intrinsically about xxx such that
‘φφ\varphi in virtue of it being the case that ϕϕ\phi’
is true.



(7)

It is possible for there to be a sentence ‘aaa is
FFF’, where FFF expresses an intrinsic property and
‘aaa is FFF’ expresses a foundational fact in the
sense of being a fact that is not metaphysically grounded by any other
fact.



Marshall’s argument is the following. Suppose, for reductio,
that (4) characterises a notion of intrinsicality when ‘in
virtue’ expresses metaphysical grounding. It follows from this,
and the necessity of (5) and (6), that (8) is necessarily true.

(8)

Being FFF is intrinsic iff, necessarily, for any xxx, if xxx
is FFF then there is a true state of affairs sss that is
intrinsically about xxx such that sss metaphysically grounds xxx
being FFF.



By (7), it is possible for a sentence ┌a⌜a\ulcorner a is
F┐F⌝F\urcorner to express a foundational fact, where FFF expresses
an intrinsic property. Hence, it follows from (7) and the necessity of
(8) that (9) is possibly true.

(9)

aaa being FFF is a foundational fact and there is a state of
affairs sss that is intrinsically about aaa such that sss
metaphysically grounds aaa being FFF.



However, (9) is necessarily false, since foundational facts cannot be
metaphysically grounded by any facts. Hence, the assumption that (4)
characterises a notion of intrinsicality when ‘in virtue’
expresses metaphysical grounding is false.

Given ‘in virtue’ doesn’t express metaphysical
grounding in (4) on its intended use, what does it express? One
attractive option is to think that ‘in virtue’ in (4) is
meant to be understood as having the same effect as ‘is a matter
of’ and that, on this reading, it expresses the identity
relation. On this reading, ‘φφ\varphi in virtue of it being
the case that ψψ\psi’ is true iff the state of affairs
expressed by ϕϕ\phi is identical to the state of affairs expressed
by φφ\varphi. Since it follows from (6) that, on this reading
‘φφ\varphi in virtue of how xxx is intrinsically’
is true iff there is a sentence ϕϕ\phi that expresses a true state
of affairs that is intrinsically about xxx, (10) follows from (4)
on this reading of ‘in virtue’. 

(10)

Being FFF is intrinsic iff, necessarily, for any xxx,
if xxx is FFF then the state of affairs of xxx being
FFF is intrinsically about xxx.



An alternative option, which is investigated in Marshall 2016a, is to
hold that ‘in virtue’ may express a number of different
reflexive determination, or entailment, relations in (4), and that
each of these relations determines a different notion of
intrinsicality. In addition to identity, such entailment relations
might include metaphysical necessitation, nomic necessitation, and
weak metaphysical grounding, where ppp weakly metaphysically
grounds qqq iff either p=qp=qp=q or ppp metaphysically
grounds qqq. Given these relations determine different notions of
intrinsicality for each relation RRR, we may call the notion of
interiority corresponding to RRR ‘RRR
interiority’. So, for example, the notion of intrinsicality
obtained from (4) by interpreting ‘in virtue’ as
expressing the identity relation might be called identity interiority,
while the notion of interiority obtained from metaphysical
necessitation might be called metaphysical necessitation interiority,
and the notion of interiority obtained from nomic necessitation might
be called nomic necessitation interiority. (Marshall uses a different
terminology, calling the RRR interior properties the possession
intrinsic properties.)

If ‘in virtue’ expresses the relation RRR, then
‘φφ\varphi in virtue of it being the case that ϕϕ\phi’
is true iff the state of affairs of it being the case that ϕϕ\phi
stands in RRR to the state of affairs of it being the case the
φφ\varphi. As Marshall notes, it follows from this, (4) and (6) that
the RRR interior properties satisfy (11).

(11)

Being FFF is RRR interior iff, necessarily, for any
xxx, if xxx is FFF then there is a true state of
affairs sss that is intrinsically about xxx such that
sss stands in RRR to the state of affairs of it being the
case that xxx is FFF.



Just as being cubical is intuitively a local property, while being an
uncle and being such that there is a number are intuitively non-local
properties, the former property is intuitively an identity interiority
property, while the latter properties are both intuitively not
identity interior. (Those that claim that being such that there is a
number is a local property, however, are likely to also claim that
this property is identity interior. See, for example, Sider (1993a),
Eddon (2011), Vallentyne (1997) and Francescotti (2014) for the
relevant debate.) The identity interior properties, however, plausibly
do not coincide with the local properties, since, while being
identical to Obama is not a local property, it is plausibly an
identity interior property. This is because, necessarily, for any
xxx that is identical to Obama, the state of affairs of xxx
being identical to Obama is plausibly about how xxx and its parts
are and how they are related to each other, as opposed to how they are
related to other things and how other things are.

Since each identity interior property is also an RRR interior
property, for each reflexive relation RRR, the RRR interior
properties also do not coincide with the local properties for each
RRR. The RRR interior properties also differ from the
identity interior properties for at least some RRR. For example,
the metaphysical necessitation interior properties plausibly differ
from the identity interior properties since, while being such that
there is a number is plausibly not identity interior, it is
metaphysical necessitation interior. This is because, given the
assumption that numbers necessarily exist, any xxx is such that
how it is intrinsically necessitates that xxx is such that there
is a number.
2.4 Duplication Preserving vs. Duplication Non-Preserving Properties

The third characterisation Lewis lists when isolating the concept of
intrinsicality is that duplicates never differ with respect to their
intrinsic properties. Lewis holds a further principle that may not be
obvious from the above quote: that any property with respect to which
duplicates never differ is intrinsic. Adding this further principle to
the characterisation gives us (12).

(12)

FFF is intrinsic iff FFF never differs between duplicates.



(12), however, has the following problem. Assume that no man has a
mass of 500 kg (although it is possible for a man to have a mass of
500 kg). Since nothing has the property of being a popular man who is
500 kg, given this assumption, no two duplicates differ in whether
they have this property. (12) therefore falsely classifies being a
popular man who is 500 kg as intrinsic.

David Lewis doesn’t face this problem due to his concretist
theory of possible worlds. Lewis holds that, in addition to the world
we live in, there are many other concrete worlds of the same kind as
the world we live in. Moreover, he holds that contained in some of
these worlds are 500 kg duplicate men, some of whom are popular, and
some of whom are not. Given Lewis’s concretist theory of
possible worlds, then, being a popular man who is 500 kg is classified
as extrinsic by (12).

Philosophers who instead endorse standard abstractionist theories of
possible worlds, however, can’t accept (12). According to
standard abstractionist theories of possible worlds, possible worlds
do not contain concrete entities such as 500 kg men as parts.
According to standard abstractionists, then, there are no 500 kg men,
there are only possible worlds that represent that there are 500 kg
men. Philosophers who endorse standard abstractionist theories of
possible worlds, however, can replace (12) with (13) (see Moore 1922
and Francescotti 1999). (Or at least, they can replace (12) with (13)
given they hold that there are things that exist according to
non-actual possible worlds that don’t exist according to the
actual world. Abstractionists who deny this will have to further
modify (13).)

(13)

FFF is intrinsic iff, for any xxx and yyy, and for
any possible worlds uuu and vvv such that xxx at
uuu is a duplicate of yyy at v,xv,xv, x has FFF
at uuu iff yyy has FFF at vvv



Given a standard abstractionist theory of possible worlds, there is a
possible world uuu that represents there being a popular 500 kg
man xxx, and there is another possible world vvv that
represents there being an unpopular 500 kg man yyy, where
xxx at uuu has the same intrinsic properties as yyy at
vvv, and hence xxx at uuu is a duplicate of yyy at
vvv. Given this, (13) classifies being a popular man who is
500 kg as extrinsic.

Putting aside for the moment the question of whether (13) correctly
characterises a genuine notion of intrinsicality, let us call the
notion it does characterise duplication preservation. (13), understood
as a characterisation of duplication preservation has two important
consequences. First, it has the consequence that identity properties,
such as being Obama, aren’t duplication preserving. The reason
for this is that, since Obama could have had a duplicate distinct from
himself, there is a possible world at which Obama has a duplicate who
is not Obama, and hence there is a possible world at which something
having the property of being Obama has a duplicate which lacks this
property. 

A more general consequence can be stated using the distinction between
qualitative and non-qualitative properties, where a qualitative
property is intuitively a property that doesn’t concern any
particular entities, while a non-qualitative property is a property
that does concern one or more particular entities. Examples of
qualitative properties include the property of being cubical and the
property of being next to a tin, while examples of non-qualitative
properties include the property of being Obama and the property of
being next to Clinton. It plausibly follows from (13), understood as a
characterisation of duplication preservation, that any non-qualitative
property that is possibly instantiated is not a duplication preserving
property.

Say that a property is indiscriminately necessary iff it is
necessarily had by everything. The second consequence of (13),
understood as a characterisation of duplication preservation, is that
any two properties that are indiscriminately necessary are duplication
preserving. Consider, for example, the indiscriminately necessary
property of being such that there is a number (where we are assuming
that numbers necessarily exist). Since all things at all possible
worlds have this property, it is a duplication preserving
property.

Since being such that there is a number is neither a local property or
an identity interior property, but is a duplication preserving
property (given numbers necessarily exist), the duplication preserving
properties do not coincide with either the local properties or the
identity interior properties. Since being Obama is a metaphysical
necessitation interior property, but is not a duplication preserving
property, the duplication preserving properties don’t coincide
with the metaphysical necessitation interior properties either. (Moore
(1922) and Dunn (1990), in effect, both distinguish duplication
preservation from interiority on these grounds.) Hence, we have at
least four distinct kinds of properties that are characterised by
Lewis’s three characterisations: local properties, identity
interior properties, metaphysical necessitation interior properties,
and duplication preserving properties.

If Lewis’s three characterisations concerning intrinsicality
characterise different notions, the three characterisations described
in section
 1.2
 concerning having a property in an intrinsic fashion also
characterise different notions. In order to distinguish these notions,
we may employ these characterisations to define having a property in a
duplication preserving fashion, having a property in an interior
fashion (relative to different entailment relations), and having a
property in a local fashion.
2.5 Which is the real distinction?

In the last three subsections, we distinguished a number of distinct
notions that are characterised by Lewis’s three
characterisation: locality, duplication preservation, and several
different kinds of interiority. We now need to address the question of
whether there is a single notion of intrinsicality, and, if there is,
which of these notions is it? More precisely, we need to determine
whether there is a single notion that philosophers typically use
‘intrinsic’ to express, and, if so, which notion is
it.

One might attempt to answer this question by first noting that it is
much more common for philosophers to use Lewis’s second
“in virtue” characterisation (or some variant of it), than
either of the other two characterisations when explaining what they
mean by ‘intrinsic’. (For example, as far as we know,
Lewis uses the “in virtue” characterisation whenever he
explains what he means by ‘intrinsic’, but only uses the
other characterisations once.) This suggests that philosophers
typically use ‘intrinsic’ to express a notion of
interiority rather than either of the notions of locality or
duplication preservation.

Given philosophers typically use ‘intrinsic’ to express
some notion of interiority, there are several reasons to think that
the notion of interiority they typically express is that of identity
interiority. First, identity interiority is more fundamental, or
simpler, than the other notions of interiority, and philosophers are
often interested in employing more fundamental notions than less
fundamental notions. Second, the intrinsic properties of a thing
should be the properties that thing has “in itself”,
rather than merely the properties that are metaphysically
necessitated, or nomically necessitated, or metaphysically explained,
by the properties the thing has “in itself”. But this
suggests that the intrinsic properties should be the identity interior
properties, rather than the metaphysical necessitation interior
properties, or the nomic necessitation interior properties, or the
weak grounding interior properties. Finally, while the identity
interiority of necessarily coextensive properties can intuitively
differ, this is not true for at least some of the other notions of
interiority, such as metaphysical necessitation interiority and nomic
necessitation interiority. Since it is a widespread intuition that
necessarily coextensive properties can differ in whether they are
intrinsic, this suggests these other notions of interiority
aren’t what philosophers typically express by
‘intrinsic’. (This last reason also provides a further
reason to think that duplication preservation isn’t the notion
of intrinsicality philosophers typically employ, since it also does
not differ among necessarily equivalent properties.)

There are therefore reasons to think that the notion philosophers
typically use ‘intrinsic’ to express is identity
interiority. These reasons, however, are not decisive. First,
philosophers often take intrinsic properties to be qualitative, and
use ‘intrinsic’ to distinguish only among qualitative
properties. (See Sider 1996.) Since each local property and each
duplication preserving property is qualitative, but this is not true
for interior properties, this possibly suggests that at least some
philosophers at least some of the time use ‘intrinsic’ to
express either locality or duplication preservation. Secondly, while
identity interiority can do much of the theoretical work
intrinsicality is meant to do, it arguably cannot do all of it, with
some of this work being better done by some of the other notions of
intrinsicality described above. For example, Sider (1996) and Marshall
(2016a) have both argued that notions of intrinsicality other than
identity interiority are better able to be used to define
individualism about mental states, with Sider arguing that duplication
preservation is the notion better placed to do this job, while
Marshall arguing that the better placed notion is nomic necessitation
interiority. Finally, the failure of many philosophers to clearly
distinguish which notion of intrinsicality they are employing provides
at least some reason to suspect that those philosophers have often
used ‘intrinsic’ indeterminately to express a multiplicity
of notions of intrinsicality.

In the next section, we will consider a number of attempts to analyse
‘intrinsic’. Unless otherwise made clear, we will use
‘intrinsic’ to express identity interiority, and we will
assume that identity interiority is the most dominant notion of
intrinsicality among philosophers. As we will see, however, a number
of these attempts are most charitably seen as attempts to analyse
notions of intrinsicality other than identity interiority.
3. Attempts at Analysis

We will look at several attempts to analyse the distinction between
intrinsic and extrinsic properties. One reason to attempt such an
analysis is that the orientating characterisations of intrinsicality
discussed in section
 1
 and sections
 2.2
 –
 2.4
 are all to some degree circular. (Cf Lewis 1983a and Yablo 1999.) For
example, a property ppp whose ascription to a thing xxx is
about xxx is intrinsic only if it is about how xxx is
intrinsically; ppp is not intrinsic if the ascription of
ppp to xxx is about how xxx is extrinsically.
Similarly, a property ppp that is had by xxx in virtue of
how xxx is is intrinsic only if xxx has ppp in virtue
of how xxx is intrinsically; ppp need not be
intrinsic if xxx has ppp in virtue of how xxx
is extrinsically.

Some of the following attempts to analyse intrinsicality are best seen
as attempts to analyse the distinction between duplication preserving
and duplication non-preserving properties, while others are best seen
as attempts to analyse the distinction between interior and exterior
properties, or between local and non-local properties. (For a more
detailed discussion of a number of the attempted analyses below, see
Hoffmann-Kolss 2010a, Marshall 2012, and Marshall 2013. For a
discussion of whether we need an analysis of intrinsicality, see
Skiles 2014.)
3.1 Broadly Logical Theories

It would be good if we could analyse intrinsicality using only broadly
logical notions, where broadly logical notions are exhausted by the
narrowly logical notions of conjunction, negation and existential
quantification, the modal notion of metaphysical possibility, the
mereological notion of parthood, and the basic notions associated with
property theory and set theory, such as the notions expressed by
‘state of affairs’, ‘property’,
‘relation’, ‘possible world’,
‘instantiates’, ‘is a member of’ and
‘set’. (The locution ‘state of affairs’ is
used differently by different philosophers. Here it is being used to
refer to the zero-place analogues of one-place properties and multiple
place relations. Just as a property is a way of a thing is or fails to
be, a state of affairs, under our usage, is a way things are or fail
to be.)

It is at least initially appealing to think that, if an object has a
property in an intrinsic fashion, then it has it independently of the
way the rest of the world is. The rest of the world could disappear,
and the object might still have that property. Hence a lonely
object, an object that doesn’t coexist with any contingent
objects wholly distinct from it, could have the property. Many
extrinsic properties, on the other hand, cannot be possessed by lonely
objects – no lonely object has the property of being six metres
from a rhododendron, for example. This suggests an analysis of
intrinsicality: FFF is an intrinsic property iff it is possible
for a lonely object to be FFF. This analysis is usually
attributed to Kim (1982) (e.g. in  Lewis 1983a and Sider 1993),
though Humberstone (1996) dissents from this interpretation. If this
analysis is successful then it would constitute a broadly logical
analysis, since the expressions on the right hand side of the account
can each be defined using only broadly logical vocabulary.

The major problem with this analysis is that the ‘if’
direction of the biconditional is clearly false. As Lewis (1983)
pointed out, it is possible for a lonely object to have the property
of being lonely, but the property of being lonely is not
intrinsic.

One might try to deal with this problem by adding extra modal
conditions to the above account. Say that a property FFF is
independent of accompaniment iff the following four
conditions (taken from Langton and Lewis 1998) are met:

Possibly, there exists a lonely FFF
Possibly, there exists a lonely non-FFF
Possibly, there exists an accompanied (i.e. not lonely)
FFF
Possibly, there exists an accompanied non-FFF


At first glance, if FFF is intrinsic, then whether or not an
object has FFF should not depend on whether it is lonely. If this
is right, then all four of these conditions should be satisfied. We
might therefore try to give the following broadly logical analysis:
FFF is intrinsic iff FFF is independent of
accompaniment.

As Langton and Lewis (1998) point out, however, this strengthened
analysis still fails (see also Lewis 1983a). Given intrinsic
properties, such as being a cube, are independent of accompaniment,
the extrinsic property of being either a lonely cube or an accompanied
non-cube is also independent of accompaniment. Hence, provided the
strengthened analysis correctly classifies being a cube as
intrinsic, it will falsely classify being either a lonely cube or
an accompanied non-cube as intrinsic.

In the face of this failure, we might still hope that a yet more
sophisticated broadly logical analysis might succeed. An argument due
to Marshall and Parsons, however, shows that, given standard views
about what is possible, and given the absence of special assumptions
about the abundance and structure of properties, no such analysis can
be given. Marshall and Parsons consider the intrinsic property of
being an electron and the extrinsic property of being either an
accompanied electron or a lonely positron. They then show that, given
certain common views about properties and possibility, these
properties have the same pattern of instantiation through logical,
mereological and set-theoretic space. Since formulas containing only
broadly logical expressions cannot distinguish between properties
having the same such pattern, it then follows that no broadly logical
analysis of intrinsically is possible. (This argument was developed
jointly by Marshall and Parsons, and then presented briefly in Parsons
2001 and in more depth in Marshall 2009.) 

To give more of an idea of how this argument works, suppose for
simplicity that there are only three possible worlds, w1w1w_1, w2w2w_2
and w3w3w_3, and only four possible individuals x1x1x_1, x2x2x_2,
x3x3x_3 and x4x4x_4, and that 

At w1w1w_1, x1x1x_1 and x2x2x_2 are the only things that exist,
x1x1x_1 is an electron and x2x2x_2 is a positron


At w2w2w_2, x3x3x_3 is the only thing that exists and x3x3x_3 is
an electron


At w3w3w_3, x4x4x_4 is the only thing that exists and x4x4x_4 is a
positron.


Now assume a possible worlds theory of properties, according to
which the property of being F={⟨x,w⟩∣x is F at w}F={⟨x,w⟩∣x is F at w}F = \{\langle x, w\rangle \mid x \text{ is } F \text{ at } w\}. Given this theory of
properties:

q1q1q_1 = Being an electron = {⟨x1,w1⟩,⟨x3,w2⟩}.{⟨x1,w1⟩,⟨x3,w2⟩}.\{\langle x_1,
w_1 \rangle, \langle x_3, w_2\rangle\}.


q2q2q_2 = Being either an accompanied electron or a lonely
positron = {⟨x1,w1⟩,⟨x4,w3⟩}.{⟨x1,w1⟩,⟨x4,w3⟩}.\{\langle x_1, w_1\rangle,
\langle x_4, w_3\rangle\}.


Suppose, for reductio, that the notion of an intrinsic property can be
analysed in terms of broadly logical notions. Then, since analyses
must be necessary, there is a formula φ(p)φ(p)\varphi(p) such that (14) is
necessarily true, where φφ\varphi contains only broadly logical
vocabulary, such as variables, brackets, ‘&’,
‘∨∨\vee’, ‘∃∃\exists’, ‘is a
possible world’, ‘at’ and ‘∈∈\in’.

(14)

ppp is intrinsic iff φ(p)φ(p)\varphi(p).



Since q1q1q_1 is necessarily intrinsic, while q2q2q_2 is necessarily
not intrinsic, it follows from the necessity of (14) that
φ(q1)φ(q1)\varphi(q_1) is necessarily true, while φ(q2)φ(q2)\varphi(q_2) is
necessarily false. In other words, if there is a broadly logical
analysis of intrinsicality, then there is a formula φφ\varphi
contining only broadly logical vocabulary that necessarily applies to
q1q1q_1, and necessarily does not apply to q2q2q_2. However, it can be
proved that there is no such formula. For example, while
‘∃w1∃w2∃x1∃x2∃x3∃w1∃w2∃x1∃x2∃x3\exists w_1 \exists w_2 \exists x_1 \exists x_2 \exists
x_3(p ={<w1,x1>,<w2,x3>})={<w1,x1>,<w2,x3>})= \{\lt w_1, x_1\gt ,
\lt w_2, x_3\gt \})’
applies to q1q1q_1, it also applies to q2q2q_2. Hence, the reductio
assumption is false, and there is no broadly logical analysis of
intrinsicality. This argument can easily be adapted to show that there
is no broadly logical analysis of intrinsicality given more realistic
assumptions about what possible worlds there are.

It is important to note that, despite this argument, one might still
be able to analyse intrinsicality in terms of broadly logical notions
if one is prepared to make special (and controversial) assumptions
about properties. As an illustration of this, suppose one assumes that
all intrinsic properties have no proper parts while all extrinsic
properties do have proper parts. Then one might give a broadly logical
analysis of intrinsicality by giving account (15).

(15)

ppp is an intrinsic property iff ppp is a property that
has no proper parts.


Even if an analysis like this one is true, however, its utility will
be limited. For example, unless we already know somehow which
properties have proper parts and which properties do not have proper
parts, (15) will be useless in helping us to determine which
properties are intrinsic and which properties are non-intrinsic. 

Two more sophisticated attempts to give a broadly logical analysis of
intrinsicality are Yablo’s contractionist account discussed in
section
 3.4,
 and Francescotti’s relational account, which is discussed in
the supplementary document:

The Relational Account of Intrinsicality.
 

Both these accounts rely on controversial assumptions about properties
or related entities such as possible worlds.

Given we cannot give a satisfactory account of intrinsicality using
only broadly logical notions, it is natural to investigate whether we
can give a satisfactory account using a larger set of notions. In the
next four subsections, we will consider whether intrinsicality can be
analysed in terms of the notions of perfect naturalness,
non-disjunctivity, possible world contractions, and metaphysical
grounding.
3.2 Perfect Naturalness Theories

The most influential attempt to analyse intrinsicality over the last
30 years has arguably been Lewis’s account of intrinsicality in
terms of perfect naturalness. As Marshall 2012 explains, Lewis
actually gave two importantly different accounts of intrinsicality in
terms of perfect naturalness which philosophers often fail to
distinguish: the first in Lewis 1983b, and the second in Lewis 1986a.
Since the later Lewis 1986a account has been much more influential
than the earlier Lewis 1983b account, we will restrict the following
discussion to the later account. (For discussion of the earlier
account, see Marshall 2012.)

The perfectly natural properties and relations are the fundamental
properties and relations. Lewis wrote:


Sharing of [the perfectly natural properties] makes for qualitative
similarity, they carve at the joints, they are intrinsic, they are
highly specific, the set of their instances are ipso facto not
entirely miscellaneous, there are only just enough of them to
characterise things completely and without redundancy. Physics has its
short list of ‘fundamental physical properties’: the
charges and masses of particles, also their is so-called
‘spins’ and ‘colours’ and
‘flavours’, and maybe a few more that have yet to be
discovered. (Lewis 1986b, p. 60, author’s emphasis)]


The notion of a perfectly natural, or fundamental, property or
relation suggests an appealing approach to analysing intrinsicality.
Consider the non-intrinsic property of being an uncle. It is appealing
to think that the reason this property fails to be intrinsic is that
it can be analysed in terms of more fundamental relations, such as
being a sibling of and being a child of, in a manner that reveals how
something being an uncle is at least partly a matter of how it is
related to things that aren’t part of it. In particular, it is
plausible to think that the reason being an uncle is non-intrinsic is
that for xxx to be an uncle is for xxx to have a sibling
that has a child, where this child fails to be part of xxx. More
generally, it is plausible that, if being FFF is a non-intrinsic
property, then the fact that it is non-intrinsic can be revealed by
analysing being FFF in terms of more fundamental properties and
relations in a manner that reveals how something being FFF may
partly be a matter of being related to a non-part or may be partly a
matter of how non-parts are. If this is true, then it has the
following two consequences. First, it follows that every fundamental
property is intrinsic (since it being non-intrinsic cannot be revealed
by analysis in terms of more fundamental properties and relations.
Secondly, and even more importantly, it follows that whether a
property is intrinsic should be analysable in terms of how that
property can be analysed in terms of the fundamental properties and
relations. 

Lewis in effect adopts the above approach to analysing intrinsicality
by analysing intrinsicality in terms of a particualr kind of
supervenience on the fundamental properties and relations.
Lewis’s 1986 account (formulated so as to be compatible with
standard abstractionist theories of possible worlds) consists of (16)
and (17). 

(16)

ppp is an intrinsic property iff (i) ppp is a property,
and (ii) for any xxx and yyy, and for any worlds w1w1w_1 and
w2w2w_2 such that xxx at w1w1w_1 is a duplicate of yyy at
w2w2w_2, xxx has ppp at w1w1w_1 iff yyy has ppp at
w2w2w_2.


(17)

xxx at w1w1w_1 is a duplicate of yyy at w2w2w_2 iff
there is a one-to-one correspondence fff between xxx’s
parts at w1w1w_1 and yyy’s parts at w2w2w_2 such that, for
any perfectly natural property or relation RRR, for any x1,x2,…x1,x2,…x_1,
x_2,\ldots that are part of xxx at w1w1w_1: x1,x2…x1,x2…x_1, x_2\ldots
stand in RRR at w1w1w_1 iff f(x1),f(x2)…f(x1),f(x2)…f(x_1), f(x_2)\ldots stand in
RRR at w2w2w_2.



Lewis’s account is best seen as an attempt at analysing
duplication preservation, rather than identity interiority which we
argued in section
 2.5
 is the dominant notion of intrinsicality in philosophy. Lewis’s
account rests heavily on the claim that all perfectly natural
properties are intrinsic, and, implicitly, that the perfectly natural
properties and relations are sufficient to characterise the world
completely. The last assumption is needed because the theory rules out
the possibility that there are two things having no proper parts that
share all their perfectly natural properties, but differ with respect
to some of their intrinsic properties.

The first assumption that all perfectly natural properties are
intrinsic has been rejected by Weatherson (2006). (See also Yablo 1999
who holds that, even if every perfectly natural property is intrinsic,
this fact is at best a lucky accident, and that this renders
Lewis’s account unsuccessful as a philosophical account of
intrinsicality.) Weatherson claims that it is metaphysically possible
for the instantiated perfectly natural properties to be vector
properties. He then argues that, since vector properties must be
extrinsic, it follows that at least some perfectly natural properties
fail to be intrinsic, namely the perfectly natural properties
instantiated at such worlds. The claim that vector properties need to
be extrinsic, however, is highly contentious. It is natural to
understand a vector property to be a property that is usefully
represented for theoretical purposes by a certain kind of mathematical
object, namely a vector. Given this construal, however, there is no
reason to think that vector properties cannot be intrinsic. For
example, due to the similarity relationships between colours
represented by the colour solid it might be useful to represent
colours by vectors. However, doing this is compatible with
metaphysical theories of colour on which colours are intrinsic. There
might be other conceptions of being a vector property on which vector
properties cannot be intrinsic. However, it is unclear whether there
an conception of vector properties on which they cannot be intrinsic,
but can be fundamental. (See Busse (2009) and Marshall (2016b) for
more discussion.)

The second assumption, that the perfectly natural properties and
relations are sufficient to characterise each possible world, has been
rejected by Sider (1995) and Schaffer (2004). Both claim that it is
metaphysically possible for there to be endless sequences of more and
more natural properties, without any set of perfectly natural
properties out of which all the other properties can be defined. In
response to this problem, Sider (1993b) has proposed a modification of
Lewis’s account which he claims is consistent with there being
such endless sequences of more and more natural properties. Sider
(2011) and Marshall (2016b) have recently argued in favour of the
second assumption, with Sider’s argument appealing to his Humean
theory of metaphysical possibility.

As noted above, Lewis’s account fails to provide an account of
the standard notion of intrinsicality (which is identity interiority),
and at best provides an analysis of duplication preservation. Marshall
has recently provided an account in terms of perfect naturalness that,
if successful, instead provides an analysis of identity interiority.
If Marshall’s account works, then it can also be modified to
provide successful analyses of the other notions of intrinsicality
described in section
 2.4.

The basic idea behind Marshall’s account is that the ascription
of a property to a thing is intrinsically about that thing iff the
ascription can be expressed in fundamental terms while only referring
to, and quantifying over, the parts of xxx. More formally, the
account first analyses intrinsicality in terms of intrinsic aboutness
by (3), and then provides an account of intrinsic aboutness in terms
of perfect naturalness by (18). (In (18), perfectly natural operators
and quantifiers are fundamental operators and quantifiers.)

(3)

ppp is intrinsic iff, necessarily, for any xxx, the
ascription of ppp to xxx is intrinsically about
xxx.



(18)

sss is intrinsically about xxx iff sss is a
non-qualitative state of affairs that can be expressed by a sentence
ϕϕ\phi containing at most brackets, commas, lambda abstractors,
names referring to parts of xxx, predicates expressing perfectly
natural relations, operator expressions expressing perfectly natural
operators, and quantifier expressions that express perfectly natural
quantifiers and whose occurrences in ϕϕ\phi quantify only over parts
of xxx.



(18), as it stands, fails to provide a completely specified account of
intrinsic aboutness, since it contains the locution ‘quantifies
only over parts of xxx’ which needs to be defined, and it
is not straightforward to give the needed definition of this locution.
Marshall’s account of ‘quantifying over parts of
xxx’ can be simplified if we assume mereological essentialism
and the view that ‘some’ is the only perfectly natural
quantifier. (Mereological essentialism is the view that necessarily,
for any xxx, necessarily, for any yyy, if yyy is part
of xxx, then necessarily if xxx exists, then yyy is
part of xxx.) Given the simplifying assumption of mereological
essentialism, Marshall endorses (19), where FFF and GGG are
predicates expressing properties and ‘≤≤\leq’ symbolises
‘is part of’.

(19)

The initial occurrence of ‘Some’ in
┌[Some v|Fv]Gv┐⌜[Some v|Fv]Gv⌝\ulcorner [\text{Some } v|Fv]Gv\urcorner
quantifies only over parts of xxx iff, under any assignment ggg to
vvv, ┌Fv┐⌜Fv⌝\ulcorner Fv\urcorner necessitates ┌v≤a┐⌜v≤a⌝\ulcorner v\leq
a\urcorner, where aaa refers to xxx.



More generally, Marshall endorses (20).

(20)

For any formulas ϕϕ\phi and ψψ\psi, the initial occurrence of
‘Some’ in  ┌[Some v∣ϕ]ψ┐⌜[Some v∣ϕ]ψ⌝\ulcorner [\text{Some }v\mid \phi]\psi\urcorner
quantifies only over parts of xxx iff, under any assignment
ggg to vvv and the free variables in ϕϕ\phi, ϕϕ\phi
necessitates ┌⋁{v≤u∣u is a free variable in ϕ other than v}∨(v≤a)┐⌜⋁{v≤u∣u is a free variablein ϕ other than v}∨(v≤a)⌝\ulcorner\bigvee\{v\leq u \mid u \text{ is a free variable
in } \phi \text{ other than } v\} \vee (v\leq a)\urcorner, where aaa
refers to xxx. 



Given the simplifying assumption that ‘some’ is the only
perfectly natural quantifier expression, (3), (18) and (20) provide a
complete account of the notion of an intrinsic property.

As with Lewis’s original account, Marshall’s account
assumes that each perfectly natural property is intrinsic and that the
perfectly natural properties and relations are able to completely
describe every possible world. If someone rejects these assumptions,
they will therefore be unable to endorse this account.
3.3 Non-Disjunctivity Theories

Instead of analysing intrinsicality in terms of perfect naturalness,
one might try to analyse it in terms of non-disjunctivity, where
non-disjunctivity is regarded as an objective metaphysical feature of
properties rather than merely a syntactical feature of predicates. The
most prominent attempt to do this is the account of Langton and Lewis
1998. (A similar theory is in an appendix to Zimmerman 1997.) 

Langton and Lewis’s account involves the following three steps.
First, they analyse the non-disjunctive properties as follows:

[T]he disjunctive properties [are] those properties that can
be expressed by a disjunction of (conjunctions of) natural properties;
but that are not themselves natural properties. (Or, if naturalness
admits of degrees, they are much less natural than the disjuncts in
terms of which they can be expressed.) (Langton and Lewis 1998: 61,
author’s emphasis)


Secondly, they say a property is basic intrinsic iff it is
non-disjunctive and independent of accompaniment. Finally, they say
that (i) two objects are duplicates iff they share the same basic
intrinsic properties, and (ii) FFF is an intrinsic property iff
two duplicates never differ with respect to it.

The last step of their account is in a form that requires
Lewis’s concretist theory of possible worlds. The last step in a
form suitable for a typical abstractionist theory of possible worlds
is instead:

xxx at uuu is a duplicate of yyy at vvv iff,
for any basic intrinsic property P,xP,xP, x has PPP at
uuu iff yyy has PPP at vvv; and
FFF is intrinsic iff, for any xxx and yyy, and for
any possible worlds uuu and vvv such that xxx at
uuu is a duplicate of yyy at v,xv,xv, x has FFF
at uuu iff yyy has FFF at vvv.


Note that (ii) is just the abstractionist version of the duplication
characterisation for intrinsicality given by (13) in section
 2.4.

Langton and Lewis claim their account works given a variety of ways of
understanding ‘natural’ and ‘more natural
than’ in their analysis of ‘non-disjunctive’. In
particular, they hold that the account will work if
‘natural’ is understood to express the notion of perfect
naturalness, or fundamentality, in the Lewis (1986a) account, and
‘more natural than’ is understood to mean ‘is more
fundamental than’. They also claim that the account will work if
the natural properties are those taken to correspond to Armstrongian
universals, or the properties expressed by the predicates in canonical
formulations of physics, or the properties expressed by the predicates
in canonical formulations of common-sense. Langton and Lewis say that
it should not matter how we draw the distinction between natural and
non-natural properties for present purposes, as long as we have it,
and properties like being lonely and round or accompanied and
cubical are not natural. As a result of this, Langton and Lewis
think that their account is more neutral than Lewis’s earlier
account and should therefore should appeal to a larger range of
philosophers than the earlier account.

Langton and Lewis put forward their account as only an analysis of
qualitative intrinsic properties, rather than intrinsic properties in
general. Their account, however, arguably fails as an account of
qualitative identity interior properties since, given numbers
necessarily exist, it classifies being such that there is a number as
intrinsic. Therefore, like the Lewis 1986a account, the Langton and
Lewis account is arguably most charitably interpreted as an account of
duplication preservation, or perhaps of qualitative metaphysical
necessitation interiority.

In addition to failing to give an account of the standard notion of
intrinsicality, there are reasons to think that Langton and Lewis
cannot be as neutral as they claim with respect to what account of
naturalness is combined with their account. As noted above, Langton
and Lewis claim that their account of intrinsicality is compatible
with any construal of naturalness on which the natural properties are
those that play a special role in our thinking. On one such conception
of naturalness, the natural properties include those properties for
which we have simple words or concepts, which do not strike us as
strange or odd, and on which we have relied in past inductions (Sider
2001: 362). Given this conception of naturalness, the property of
being a rock is a natural property, and hence is classified as
intrinsic on the Langton and Lewis account. However, as Sider 2001
argues, being a rock is plausibly not an intrinsic property. Just as
an object that is qualitatively intrinsically the same as a house and
is a large part of a house is not itself a house, an object that is
qualitatively intrinsically the same as a rock and is a large part of
a rock is not itself a rock. Hence, whether something is a rock is
partly a matter of what is the case outside of it. Hence, contra the
combination of the Langton and Lewis account with the above conception
of naturalness, being a rock is not intrinsic. 

Another objection to the Langton and Lewis account is that there
appear to be counterexamples to the account, even given Lewis’s
favoured conception of naturalness. On this conception, the perfectly
natural properties and relations are the fundamental properties and
relations, and a property ppp is more natural than a property
qqq iff the shortest definition of ppp in terms of the
perfectly natural properties and relations is shorter than the
shortest definition of qqq in terms of the perfectly natural
properties and relations. (See (Lewis 1986: 61).) As Marshall and
Parsons 2001 argue, given this construal of naturalness, the property
of being such that there is a cube appears to be neither a disjuntive
property nor the negation of a disjunctive property according to
Langton and Lewis’s account of disjunctivity. If this is the
case, however, then, since being such that there is a cube is
independent of accompaniment, the Langton and Lewis account classifies
this property as a basic intrinsic property, and hence classifies it
as an intrinsic property. This property, however, is clearly not
intrinsic.

Langton and Lewis 2001 have responded to this objection by claiming
that being such that there is a cube is less natural than both being a
cube and being accompanied by a cube, since (I) being such that there
is a cube can be expressed as the disjunction ‘being either a cube
or accompanied by a cube’, (II) disjoining unrelated properties
always reduces naturalness, and (III) being a cube and being
accompanied by a cube are unrelated properties. As Marshall 2012 fn.
35 points out, however, this response is far from convincing. First,
it is not clear why (II) is meant to be true given Lewis’s
favoured conception of naturalness above, or what other notion of
naturalness it might be true of. Second, even granting (II) is true,
it is not clear what it is for two properties to be unrelated in the
sense that is at issue in (II). As a result, it is not clear why being
a cube and being accompanied by a cube are meant to be unrelated.

A prominent attempt to design a theory of intrinsicality in terms of
non-disjunctivity that avoids these last two objections is that of
Brian Weatherson (2001). In his theory, combinatorial principles of
possibility are not used to derive characteristics of individual
intrinsic properties, as Langton and Lewis do, but characteristics of
the whole set of intrinsic properties. He argues that this set, call
it SISISI, will have the following properties:

If F∈SIF∈SIF \in SIand G∈SIG∈SIG \in SI, then FFF and G∈SIG∈SIG \in
SI and FFF or G∈SIG∈SIG \in SI and not F∈SIF∈SIF \in
SI
If F∈SIF∈SIF \in SI then Having nnn
parts that are F∈SIF∈SIF \in SI and Being
entirely composed of exactly nnn things that are
F∈SIF∈SIF \in SI
If F∈SIF∈SIF \in SI and
G∈SIG∈SIG \in SI and there is a possible world
with n+1n+1n+1 pairwise distinct things, and something in some
world is FFF and something in some world is GGG, then
there is a world with exactly n+1n+1n+1 pairwise distinct things
such that one is FFF and the other nnn are
GGG.
If F∈SIF∈SIF \in SI and
G∈SIG∈SIG \in SI and it is possible that
regions with shapes d1d1d_1 and d2d2d_2
stand in relation AAA, and it is possible that an FFF
wholly occupy a region with shape d1d1d_1 and a
GGG wholly occupy a region with shape d2d2d_2,
then there is a world where regions with shapes d1d1d_1
and d2d2d_2 stand in AAA, and an FFF
wholly occupies the region with shape d1d1d_1 and a
GGG wholly occupies the region with shape
d2d2d_2.


The first two principles are closure principles on the set. The third
principle says that any two intrinsic properties that can be
instantiated can be instantiated together any number of times. And the
fourth says that if objects having two intrinsic properties can be in
two regions, and those two regions can be in a particular spatial
relation, then the regions can be in that relation while filled by
objects having those properties. The third principle suffices to show
that being such that a cube exists could not be in
SISISI, and the fourth to show that being a rock could
not be.

Weatherson’s theory still requires an appeal to a concept of
naturalness. Without such an appeal, then if FFF and GGG
are intrinsic properties that atoms could have, nothing in his theory
rules out the property being simple, lonely and FFF or being GGG
from being intrinsic. There are a few ways for the appeal to go at
this point, see Weatherson (2001) and Lewis (2001) for a few
suggestions. The following moves, taken directly from Langton and
Lewis, will probably work if any will. Say that the basic intrinsic
properties are those non-disjunctive properties such that their
membership in SISISI is consistent with the above four
principles. Two objects are duplicates if they do not differ with
respect to basic intrinsic properties. A property is intrinsic iff it
never differs between duplicates.

Unfortunately, Weatherson’s theory still faces apparent
counterexamples, similar to those faced by Langton and Lewis’s
account. While Weatherson’s account might successfully classify
being such that there is a cube as extrinsic, it arguably fails to
correctly classify other similar quantificational properties. One
example discussed by Hawthorne 2001 is the property of standing in
relation RRR to something, where RRR is a perfectly natural
relation a thing can stand in to itself and to things wholly distinct
from it. Another example discussed by Marshall (2012), which relies on
less controversial assumptions about what types of perfectly natural
relations there are, is the property of having a part that is 1 m away
from something. Both these properties are arguably non-disjunctive.
Given the set of intrinsic properties satisfy the above conditions for
SISISI, both these properties plausibly satisfy them as well, and
hence are plausibly falsely classified as intrinsic by
Weatherson’s account.

A further problem that applies to both Langton and Lewis’s
account and Weatherson’s account is that they are incompatible
with certain metaphysical views that posit necessary connections
between wholly distinct entities. On a popular view of sets, for
example, each thing xxx is wholly distinct from its singleton set
{x}{x}\{x\}, and is such that, necessarily, it exists iff its singleton
{x}{x}\{x\} exists. Given this view, however, no contingently existing
things can be lonely, and hence no intrinsic property that can only be
had by contingently existing things can be independent of
accompaniment. Given being made of tin is such a property, it follows
that each of the above combinatorial accounts falsely classifies being
made of tin as extrinsic, given the above view of sets. (See Cameron
2008, 2009 for more discussion.)

An account that does not appeal to non-disjunctivity, but which uses
principles similar to those used in the accounts described above, has
been proposed by Denby 2010. (This account is a modified version of an
earlier account given in Denby 2006 which takes into account
objections made by Hoffman-Kolss 2010b.) Instead of appealing to
naturalness or non-disjunctiveness, Denby’s account employs the
notion of an object instantiating a property under a relation. Denby,
however, gives very little explanation of what this technical notion
is meant to mean, and it is therefore not clear what to make of
Denby’s account.
3.4 Contractionist Theories

One attractive idea is that a thing’s intrinsic properties are
those properties it would have if it were alone in the world. An
elegant theory of intrinsicality that develops this idea is that of
Peter Vallentyne (1997). 

Vallentyne defines a contraction of a world as “a world
‘obtainable’ from the original one solely by
‘removing’ objects from it.” (211) As a special case
of this, an x−tx−tx-t contraction, where xxx is an
object and ttt a time, is “a world
‘obtainable’ from the original one by, to the greatest
extent possible, ‘removing’ all objects wholly distinct
from xxx, all spatial locations not occupied by xxx, and
all times (temporal states of the world) except ttt, from the
world”, as well as all laws of nature from the world. (211)
Vallentyne claims that FFF is intrinsic iff, for any thing
xxx, for any time ttt, and for any worlds uuu and
www such that uuu is an x−tx−tx-t contraction of
w,xw,xw, x has FFF at ttt at uuu iff xxx
has FFF at ttt at www. In short, a property is
intrinsic to an object iff removing the rest of the world
doesn’t change whether the object has the property.
Vallentyne’s account classifies identity properties, like being
Obama, as intrinsic. It is therefore best seen as an account of
interiority. The account also classifies all indiscriminately
necessary properties as intrinsic. It is therefore arguably most
charitably interpreted as an account of metaphysical necessitation
interiority

As Vallentyne notes, this definition will not be very enlightening
unless we understand the idea of a contraction. This seems related to
the objection Langton and Lewis (1998) urge against Vallentyne. They
say that Vallentyne’s account reduces to the claim that a
property is intrinsic iff possession of it never differs between an
object and its lonely duplicates, a claim they think is true but too
trivial to count as an analysis. Their position is that we cannot
understand contractions without understanding duplication, but if we
understand duplication then intrinsicality can be easily defined, so
Vallentyne’s theory is no advance.

This criticism might be too quick. Stephen Yablo (1999) has argued
that Vallentyne should best be understood as working within a very
different metaphysical framework than Lewis. For Lewis, no (ordinary)
object exists at more than one world, so Vallentyne’s
contractions, being separate worlds, must contain separate objects.
Hence x−tx−tx-t contractions can be nothing other than
lonely duplicates, and the theory is trivial. Yablo suggests that the
theory becomes substantive relative to a metaphysical background in
which the very same object can appear in different worlds. If this is
the case then we can get a grip on contractions without thinking about
duplications — the x−tx−tx-t contraction of a world
is the world that contains xxx itself, and as few other things
as possible.

There are, however, problems with Yablo’s defense of
Vallentyne’s contractionist approach to intrinsicality. One
problem, discussed in Parsons 2007 and Marshall 2014, is that, on
Yablo’s version of contractionism, we need to be able to make
sense of sentences like ‘In www, Prince Philip is not a
husband’, where www is the world consisting of just
Prince Philip. Making sense of such sentences, however, is difficult
without appealing to the distinction between intrinsic and
non-intrinsic properties. Appealing to this distinction when
interpreting Yablo’s account, however, would render it circular.
Further criticism and discussion of Yablo’s account is given in
Parsons 2007 and Marshall 2014. For further discussion of
Vallentyne’s account, see Marshall 2013.
3.5 Grounding Theories

Over the last few years, there have been a number of attempts to
analyse intrinsicality in terms of metaphysical grounding, a prominent
instance of which is that of Rosen (2010). Other accounts of
intrinsicality in terms of grounding include those of Witmer, Butchard
and Trogdon (2005), Trogdon (2009), Bader (2013), and Witmer (2014).
For a discussion of the first two of these accounts, see the
supplementary document:

More on Grounding Theories of Intrinsicality.
 

The state of affairs of it being the case that AAA is grounded by
the state of affairs of it being the case that BBB iff AAA
in virtue of it being the case that BBB, where the relevant
notion of “in virtue” is meant to be a metaphysically
explanatory one. Grounding is supposed to be a metaphysical analogue
of causation: just as causation is what connects the explanans of an
explanation with its explanandum in causal explanation, grounding is
meant to be what connects the explanans of an explanation with its
explanandum in metaphysical explanation. An example of a metaphysical
explanation would be an explanation of why a certain type of act is
wrong in terms of more fundamental moral facts.

Rosen’s account presupposes Russellianism about facts, according
to which facts are structured out of things, properties and operators
in the same kind of way sentences are built up out of names,
predicates and operator expressions. Given this background,
Rosen’s analysis can be stated as follows:

FFF is an intrinsic property iff, necessarily, for any xxx:
(i) if the ascription of FFF to xxx is grounded by a fact
with constituent yyy, then yyy is part of xxx; and (ii)
if the negation of the ascription of FFF to xxx is grounded
by a fact with constituent yyy, then yyy is part of xxx


Given the negation of the ascription of being Obama to Clinton is
grounded by the negation of the ascription of identity to Obama and
Clinton (a claim plausibly required by Rosen’s account) the
account classifies being Obama as non-intrinsic since Obama is not
part of Clinton. The analysis also classifies intuitively
non-intrinsic indiscriminately necessary properties, such as the
property of being such that there is a number, as non-intrinsic. Being
such that there is a number is classified as non-intrinsic by the
account since, for example, its ascription to Obama is grounded by the
fact that 2 is a number, which has a constituent, namely the number 2,
that is not part of Obama. These consequences of the account suggest
that it is best thought of as an account of the distinction between
local and non-local properties.

Marshall (2015) has given the following objection to Rosen’s
account. (The objection is meant to generalise to all attempts to
analyse intrinsically in terms of grounding, including the attempts of
Witmer, Butchard and Trogdon (2005), Trogdon (2009), Bader (2013) and
Witmer (2014). For an objection that is meant to apply to
Rosen’s account, but not Bader’s account, see Bader
2013:fn. 53.) According to Marshall’s objection: a) there is
nothing incoherent in supposing that a state of affairs that is
intrinsically about xxx might ground a state of affairs that is
intrinsically about something that is wholly distinct from xxx,
and b) on a number of popular metaphysical theories, there are such
grounding relationships. If there are such grounding relationships,
however, Rosen’s account fails.

To consider an example of such a grounding relationship, let us assume
that standard set theory is necessarily true, and that existence is a
local property. (If one thinks that existence is not a local property,
perhaps because one thinks that existence is the non-local
quantificational property of being such that, among all the things
there are, there is something that is identical to one, replace
existence with the property of being such that, among all the parts of
one, there is something identical to one, which is intuitively local.)
Let us also assume the common (though not universal) view that members
of sets are not literally parts of those sets. (See Lewis (1986a) for
an example of a prominent theory of sets that denies members of sets
are parts of those sets.) Given these assumptions, it is plausible
that the fact that  {Obama}{Obama}\{Obama\} exists is grounded by the fact that
Obama exists. However, if this is correct, then, since the fact that
Obama exists has a constituent that is not part of {Obama}{Obama}\{Obama\}, 
it follows that Rosen’s account falsely classifies existence as a
non-local property.

Borrowing from the recent account of Witmer (2014) (which is similar
to Rosen’s account), we might attempt to fix Rosen’s
account by replacing parthood in the account with ontological
dependence, where the relation of ontological dependence is defined by
(21).

(21)

xxx ontologically depends on yyy iff the fact that
yyy exists at least partly grounds the fact that xxx
exists.


Applying this modification to Rosen’s account results in
(22).

(22)

FFF is an intrinsic property iff, necessarily, for any
xxx: (i) if the ascription of FFF to xxx is grounded by
a fact with constituent yyy, then xxx ontologically depends
on yyy; and (ii) if the negation of the ascription of FFF to
xxx is grounded by a fact with constituent yyy, then
xxx ontologically depends on yyy.


This modified version of Rosen’s account appears to correctly
classify existence as a local property given the above metaphysical
theses. Given these metaphysical theses, however, it ends up
classifying too many properties as local. In particular, given the
above theses, it appears to falsely classify the non-local property of
having a member as a local property. It does this, since, given the
above metaphysical theses, necessarily, if xxx has a member, then
the fact that xxx has a member is plausibly be grounded by the
fact that yyy is a member of xxx, where yyy is some
member of xxx, and where xxx is ontologically dependent on
yyy.

A defender of the above modified version of Rosen’s account
might respond to this objection by claiming that the account
shouldn’t be understood as attempting to analyse the notion of a
local property. Instead, such a proponent might argue, it should be
understood as attempting to account for a further notion of
intrinsicality not discussed in sections
 2.2
 –
 2.4.
 This notion of intrinsicality might be called the notion of a local*
property, where the notion of a local* property is characterised by
(23) and (24).

(23)

A state of affairs sss is intrinsically* about a thing
xxx iff sss (either truly or falsely) describes how xxx
and the things it is ontologically dependent on are and how
they are related to each other, as opposed to how xxx and the
things it is ontologically dependent on are related to other
things and how other things are.


(24)

The property of being FFF is local* iff, necessarily, for any
xxx, the state of affairs of xxx being FFF is
intrinsically* about xxx.


A problem with this response is that there doesn’t appear to be
any reason to regard the notion of a local* property as a notion of
intrinsicality. While it is common to intuitively characterise
intrinsicality by either explicitly using talk of parts or using talk
that very plausibly makes reference to parts, this is not the case for
ontological dependence talk. As a result, the notion of a local*
property seems no more a notion of intrinsicality than, for example,
the notion of a local** property, which is characterised by (25) and
(26). 

(25)

A state of affairs sss is intrinsically** about a thing
xxx iff sss (either truly or falsely) describes how xxx
and the things it is less than 1 meter from are and how they
are related to each other, as opposed to how xxx and the
things it is less than 1 meter from are related to other things
and how other things are.


(26)

The property of being FFF is local** iff, necessarily, for
any xxx, the state of affairs of xxx being FFF is
intrinsically** about xxx.


Since the notion of being a local** property is clearly not a notion
of intrinsicality, the notion of being a local* property appears also
not to be one.