Isaiah Berlin (1909–97) was a British philosopher, historian of
ideas, political theorist, educator and essayist. For much of his life
he was renowned for his conversational brilliance, his defence of
liberalism, his attacks on political extremism and intellectual
fanaticism, and his accessible, coruscating writings on the history of
ideas. His essay Two Concepts of Liberty (1958) contributed
to a revival of interest in political theory in the English-speaking
world, and remains one of the most influential and widely discussed
texts in that field: admirers and critics agree that Berlin’s
distinction between positive and negative liberty remains, for better
or worse, a basic starting-point for theoretical discussions of the
meaning and value of political freedom. Late in his life, the greater
availability of Berlin’s numerous essays began to provoke increasing
scholarly interest in his work, and particularly in the idea of value
pluralism; that Berlin’s articulation of value pluralism contains many
ambiguities and even obscurities has only encouraged further work on
the subject by other philosophers. 
 
1. Life

Isaiah Berlin was born in 1909 in Riga (then in the Russian Empire,
now capital of Latvia), the son of Mendel Berlin, a prosperous timber
merchant, and his wife Marie, née Volshonok. In 1915 the family
moved to Andreapol, in Russia, and in 1917 to Petrograd (now
St Petersburg), where they remained through both the Russian
Revolutions of 1917, which Isaiah would remember witnessing. Despite
early harassment by the Bolsheviks, the family was permitted to
return to Riga with Latvian citizenship in 1920; from there they
emigrated, in 1921, to Britain. They lived in and around London;
Isaiah attended St Paul’s School and Corpus Christi College, Oxford,
where he studied Greats (classical languages, ancient history, and
philosophy) and PPE (politics, philosophy and economics). In 1932 he
was appointed a lecturer at New College; the same year he became the
first Jew to be elected to a Prize Fellowship at All Souls, considered
one of the highest accolades in British academic life.

Throughout the 1930s Berlin was deeply involved in the development of
philosophy at Oxford; his friends and colleagues included J. L.
Austin, A. J. Ayer and Stuart Hampshire, all of whom met (with others)
to discuss philosophy in Berlin’s rooms. However, he also evinced an
early interest in a more historical approach to philosophy, and in
social and political theory, as reflected in his intellectual
biography of Karl Marx (1939), still in print over 75 years later.

During the Second World War Berlin served in the British Information
Services in New York City (1940–2) and at the British Embassy in
Washington, DC (1942–6), where he was responsible for drafting
weekly reports on the American political scene. In 1945–6 Berlin
visited the Soviet Union; his meetings there with surviving but
persecuted members of the Russian intelligentsia, particularly the
poets Anna Akhmatova and Boris Pasternak, reinforced his staunch
opposition to Communism, and formed his future intellectual agenda.
After the war Berlin returned to Oxford. Although he continued to
teach and write on philosophy throughout the later 1940s and into the
early 1950s, his interests had shifted to the history of ideas,
particularly Russian intellectual history, the history of Marxist and
socialist theories, and the Enlightenment and its critics. He also
began to publish widely-read articles on contemporary political and
cultural trends, political ideology, and the internal workings of the
Soviet Union. In 1950, election to a Research Fellowship at All Souls
allowed him to devote himself to his historical, political and
literary interests, which lay well outside the mainstream of
philosophy as it was then practiced at Oxford. He was, however, one of
the first of the founding generation of Oxford philosophers to make
regular visits to American universities, and played an important part
in spreading ‘Oxford philosophy’ to the USA.

In 1957, a year after he had married Aline Halban (née de
Gunzbourg), Berlin was elected Chichele Professor of Social and
Political Theory at Oxford; his inaugural lecture, delivered in 1958,
was Two Concepts of Liberty. He resigned his chair in 1967,
the year after becoming founding President of Wolfson College, Oxford,
which he essentially created, retiring in 1975. In his later years he
hoped to write a major work on the history of European romanticism,
but this hope was disappointed. From 1966 to 1971 he was also a
visiting Professor of Humanities at the City University of New York,
and he served as President of the British Academy from 1974 to 1978.
Berlin was knighted in 1957, and was appointed to the Order of Merit
in 1971. Collections of his writings, edited by Henry Hardy and
others, began appearing in 1978; there are, to date, fourteen such
volumes (plus new editions of two works published previously by
Berlin), as well as an anthology, The Proper Study of
Mankind, and a four-volume edition of his letters. Berlin
received the Agnelli, Erasmus and Lippincott Prizes for his work on
the history of ideas, and the Jerusalem Prize for his lifelong defence
of civil liberties, as well as numerous honorary degrees. He died in
1997.
1.1 Intellectual Development

Berlin was early influenced by British Idealism, as expounded by
Green, Bosanquet and Bradley, which was then on the wane. While an
undergraduate he was converted to the Realism of G. E. Moore and John
Cook Wilson. By the time he began teaching philosophy he had joined a
new generation of rebellious empiricists, some of whom (most notably
A. J. Ayer) embraced the logical positivist doctrines of the Vienna
Circle and Wittgenstein’s earlier writings. Although Berlin was always
sceptical towards logical positivism, its suspicion of metaphysical
claims and its preoccupation with the nature and authority of
knowledge strongly influenced his early philosophical enquiries.
These, combined with his historical bent, led him back to the study of
earlier British empiricists, particularly Berkeley and Hume, on both
of whom he lectured in the 1930s and late ’40s, and about both of whom
he contemplated writing books (which were never written).

Berlin was also influenced by Kant and his successors. His first
philosophical mentor was an obscure Russian Jewish Menshevik
émigré named Solomon Rachmilevich, who had studied
philosophy at several German universities, and who introduced Berlin
to the great ideological quarrels of Russian history, as well as to
the history of German philosophy since Kant. Later, at Oxford, R. G.
Collingwood fostered Berlin’s interest in the history of ideas,
introducing him in particular to such founders of historicism as Vico
and Herder. Collingwood also reinforced Berlin’s belief—heavily
influenced by Kant—in the importance to human life of the basic
concepts and categories by which human beings organise and analyse
their experience.

While working on his biography of Marx in the mid-1930s, Berlin came
across the works of two Russian thinkers who would be important
influences on his political and historical outlook. One of these was
Alexander Herzen, who became a hero, and to whom Berlin would
sometimes attribute many of his own beliefs about history, politics
and ethics. The other was the Russian Marxist publicist and historian
of philosophy G. V. Plekhanov. Despite his opposition to Marxism,
Berlin admired and praised Plekhanov both as a man and as a historian
of ideas. It was initially by reading Plekhanov’s writings that Berlin
became interested in the naturalistic, empiricist and materialist
thinkers of the Enlightenment, as well as their Idealist and
historicist critics. Plekhanov was also an early source for Berlin’s
absorption in the political debates of nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century Russian liberals and radicals of various stripes,
which informed his concern with both the philosophy of history and the
ethics of political action.

During the Second World War, separated from his Oxford philosophical
brethren, and exposed to political action, Berlin began to drift away
from his early philosophical concerns. His doubts were encouraged by a
meeting with the Harvard logician H. M. Sheffer, who asserted that
progress was possible only in such subfields of philosophy as logic
and psychology. His meeting with Sheffer led Berlin to realise that he
lacked the passion and the belief in his own ability to continue
pursuing pure philosophy. He concluded that as a philosopher proper he
would make no original contributions, and would end his life knowing
no more than he did when he began. He therefore determined to switch
to the history of ideas, in which (he believed) originality was less
essential, and which would allow him to learn more than he already
knew. Berlin’s approach to the history of ideas would, however, remain
deeply informed by his philosophical persona, as well as by his
political beliefs. 

Berlin had always been a liberal; but from the early 1950s the defence
of liberalism became central to his intellectual concerns. This
defence was, characteristically, closely related to his moral beliefs
and to his preoccupation with the nature and role of values in human
life. In his thinking about these issues Berlin would develop his idea
of value pluralism, which assumed prominence in his work in the 1960s
and ’70s. In the early 1960s Berlin’s focus moved from the more
political concerns that occupied him in the 1950s to an examination of
the nature of the human sciences. Throughout the 1950s and ’60s he was
working on the history of ideas, and from the mid-1960s nearly all of
his writings took the form of essays on this subject, particularly on
the romantic and reactionary critics of the Enlightenment. 

By the early 1950s Berlin’s central beliefs had emerged out of the
confluence of his philosophical preoccupations, historical studies,
and political and moral commitments and anxieties; and his major ideas
were either already fully formed, or developing. Such essays of the
late ’50s as ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’ served as the
occasion for a synthesis and solidification of his thoughts.
Thereafter, he would continue to refine and re-articulate his ideas,
but his course was set, and he appears to have been largely unaffected
by later intellectual developments.
2. Philosophy of Knowledge and the Human Sciences
2.1 Conception of Philosophy

Berlin’s conception of philosophy was shaped by his early exposure to,
and rejection of, both Idealism and logical positivism. With the
former he associated an excessively exalted view of philosophy as the
‘queen of the sciences’, capable of establishing
fundamental, necessary, absolute and abstract truths. With the latter
he associated the reductionist and deflationary view of philosophy as,
at best, a handmaiden to the natural sciences, and at worst a sign of
intellectual immaturity bred of confusion and credulity.

Berlin’s approach combined a sceptical empiricism with neo-Kantianism
to offer a defence of
 philosophy.[1]
 Like Giambattista Vico and Wilhelm Dilthey, as well as neo-Kantians
such as Heinrich Rickert and Wilhelm Windelband, Berlin insisted on
the fundamental difference between the natural and human sciences. He
classed philosophy among the human sciences; but even there its status
was unique. If earlier thinkers had regarded philosophy as a
scientia scientiarum, Berlin regarded it as a scientia
nescientiarum, the form of enquiry concerning those things which
cannot be objects of empirical knowledge. 

In the case of non-philosophical questions, even if the answer is
unknown, the means for discovering the answer is known, or accepted,
by most people. Thus questions of empirical fact can be answered by
observation. Other questions can be answered deductively, by referring
to established rules; this is the case, for example, with mathematics,
grammar and formal logic. For example, even if we do not know the
solution to a particularly difficult mathematical problem, we do know
the rules and techniques that should lead us to the answer. 

According to Berlin, philosophy concerns itself with questions of a
special, distinctive character. To such questions not only are the
answers not known, but neither are the means for arriving at answers,
or the standards of judgement by which to evaluate whether a suggested
answer is plausible or implausible. Thus the questions ‘How long
does it take to drive from x to y?’ or
‘What is the cube root of 729?’ are not philosophical;
while ‘What is time?’ or ‘What is a number?’
are. ‘What is the purpose of human life?’ or ‘Are
all men brothers?’ are philosophical questions, while ‘Do
most of such-and-such a group of men think of one another as
brothers?’ or ‘What did Luther believe was the purpose of
life?’ are not. 

Berlin related this view to Kant’s distinction between matters of fact
and those conceptual structures or categories in terms of which we
make sense of facts. Philosophy, being concerned with questions that
arise from our attempts to make sense of our experiences, involves
consideration of the concepts and categories through which experience
is perceived, organised and explained. 

While Kant saw these organising categories as fixed and universal,
Berlin believed that at least some of them are varying, transient or
malleable. Not all categories are wholly prior to, or independent of,
experience. Rather, the ideas through which we make sense of the world
are closely tied up with our experiences: they shape those
experiences, and are shaped by them, and as experience varies from one
time and place to another, so do basic
 concepts.[2]
 Recognition of these basic categories of human experience differs
both from the acquisition of empirical information and from deductive
reasoning, for the categories are logically prior to both.

Philosophy involves the study of these
‘thought-spectacles’ through which we view the world; and
since at least some of these categories change over time, at least
some philosophy is necessarily historical. Because these categories
are so important to every aspect of our experience,
philosophy—even if it is always tentative and often seems
abstract and esoteric—is a crucially important activity, which
responds to the vital, ineradicable human need to describe and explain
the world of experience. 

Berlin insisted on philosophy’s social usefulness, however indirect
and
 unobtrusive.[3]
 By bringing to light often subconscious presuppositions and models,
and scrutinising their validity, philosophy identifies errors and
confusions that lead to misunderstanding, distort experience, and thus
do real harm. Because philosophy calls commonly accepted assumptions
into question, it is inherently subversive, opposed to all orthodoxy,
and often troubling; but this is inseparable from what makes
philosophy valuable, and indeed indispensable, as well as liberating.
Philosophy’s goal, Berlin concluded, was ‘to assist men to
understand themselves and thus operate in the open, and not wildly, in
the dark’ (1978b, 11).
2.2 Basic Propositions: Epistemology, Metaphysics, Logic

Perhaps the most important work Berlin did in ‘pure’
philosophy, in the light of his most significant later ideas,
concerned ‘logical 
 translation’[4]. 
In his essay of that title (reprinted in 1978b), Berlin criticised the
assumption that all statements, to be genuine and meaningful, or to
claim correctness, must be capable of being translated into a single,
‘good’ type of proposition, and asserted that the ideal of
a single proper type of proposition was illusory and misleading. He
identified two different and opposed approaches based on this
erroneous assumption.  One was the ‘deflationary’
approach, which sought to assimilate all propositions to one true
type. Thus phenomenalism sought to reduce all statements to statements
about immediately perceived sense-data. The other was the
‘inflationary’ approach, which posited entities
corresponding to all statements, thus ‘creating’ or
asserting the existence of things that (Berlin believed) didn’t
exist at all. Both of these errors rested on the demand for the
‘forcible assimilation’ of all propositions to a single
type. Berlin suggested that this demand was based, not on a true
perception of reality, but rather on the psychological need for
certainty, as well as what he termed the ‘Ionian Fallacy’,
the assumption that everything is made out of, or can be reduced to or
understood in terms of, one and the same substance or
 type.[5]

Berlin insisted that there is no single criterion of meaningfulness,
no absolutely incorrigible type of knowledge. He insisted that the
quest for certainty was self-defeating: to restrict oneself to saying
only that which could be said without any doubt or fear of being
mistaken was to sentence oneself to silence. To say anything about the
world requires bringing in something other than immediate
experience:

Most of the certainties on which our lives are founded […] the
vast majority of the types of reasoning on which our beliefs rest, or
by which we should seek to justify them […] are not reducible
to formal deductive or inductive schemata, or a combination of them
[…] The web is too complex, the elements too many and not, to
say the least, easily isolated and tested one by one […] we
accept the total texture, compounded as it is out of literally
countless strands […] without the possibility, even in
principle, of any test for it in its totality. For the total texture
is what we begin and end with. There is no Archimedean point outside
it whence we can survey the whole and pronounce upon it […] the
sense of the general texture of experience […] is itself not
open to inductive or deductive reasoning: for both these methods rest
upon it (1978b, 114–15).


At the heart of Berlin’s philosophy was an awareness of the awesome
variety and complexity of reality, which we can only begin to
comprehend: the many strands that make up human experience are
“too many, too minute, too fleeting, too blurred at the edges.
They criss-cross and penetrate each other at many levels
simultaneously, and the attempt to prise them apart […] and pin
them down, and classify them, and fit them into their specific
compartments turns out to be impossible” (1978b, 119).

These two closely related propositions—that absolute certainty
is an impossible ideal (Berlin once wrote that, if his work displayed
any single tendency, it was a “distrust of all claims to the
possession of incorrigible knowledge […] in any sphere of human
behaviour”; 2008, x), and that not everything can or should be
reduced or related to a single ideal, model, theory or
standard—might be considered the centrepieces of Berlin’s
philosophy. They are central to his view of language and knowledge;
they are equally important to his ethics and his philosophy of the
human sciences. Also central to these different facets of his thought
was Berlin’s individualism or nominalism, his emphasis on the
importance, and indeed priority, of particular things as objects of
knowledge and of individual people as moral subjects.
2.3 The Distinction between Natural and Human Science

Berlin’s individualism, the influence on him of neo-Kantianism, and
what one scholar (Allen 1998) has called his
anti-procrusteanism—his opposition to attempts dogmatically and
inappropriately to impose standards or models on aspects of human
experience which they don’t fit—shaped his view of the nature of
the human sciences, and their relationship to the natural
 sciences.[6]


Berlin criticised the positivist view of the natural sciences as the
paradigmatic form of knowledge, which the human sciences should
measure themselves by and seek to emulate. He argued that the human
sciences differed fundamentally from the natural sciences both in the
nature of the subject of their study (as Vico and Dilthey had
maintained), and in the sort of knowledge that they sought (as Rickert
insisted). As a result, different methods, standards and goals were
appropriate to each.

Most obviously, the human sciences study the world that human beings
create for themselves and inhabit, while the natural sciences study
the physical world of nature. Why should this make a difference to the
way they are studied? One answer is that the two worlds are
fundamentally different in themselves. But this seems under-theorised.
Berlin preferred the argument that the human and natural worlds must
be studied differently because of the relationship between the
observer or thinker and the object of study. We study nature from
without, culture from within. In the human sciences, the scholar’s own
ways of thinking, the fabric of the scholar’s life, every facet of his
or her experience, is part of the object of study. The natural
sciences, on the other hand, aim to understand nature objectively and
dispassionately. The natural scientist must take as little for granted
as possible, preferring hard evidence to ‘common sense’
when they diverge. But in the human sciences one cannot act in this
manner: to study human life, it is necessary to begin from our
understanding of other human beings, of what it is to have motives and
feelings. Such understanding is based on our own experience, which in
turn necessarily involves certain ‘common sense’
assumptions, which we use to fit our experience into patterns which
make it explicable and comprehensible. These patterns may be more or
less accurate; and we can judge their accuracy by seeing how well they
fit experience as we know it. But we cannot divest ourselves entirely
of the assumptions that underlie them. 

Berlin asserted that the human sciences also differed from the natural
sciences in that the former were concerned with understanding the
particulars of human life in and of themselves, while the natural
sciences sought to establish general laws which could explain whole
classes of phenomena. The natural sciences are concerned with types,
the human sciences with individuals. Natural scientists concentrate on
similarities and look for regularities; at least some human
scientists—historians, in particular—are interested in
differences. To be a good historian requires a ‘concentrated
interest in particular events or persons or situations as such, and
not as instances of a generalisation’ (1978b, 138). The human
sciences should not aim to emulate the natural sciences by seeking
laws to explain or predict human actions, but should concern
themselves with understanding the uniqueness of every particular human
phenomenon. In the case of a natural science we think it more rational
to put our trust in general laws than in specific phenomena; in the
case of the human sciences, the opposite is true. If someone claims to
have witnessed a phenomenon that contradicts well-established laws of
science, we seek an explanation that will reconcile that perception
with science; if none is possible, we may conclude that the witness is
deceived. In the case of history we do not usually do this: we look at
particular phenomena and seek to explain them in
 themselves.[7]
 There are, Berlin claimed, “more ways than one to defy
reality”. It is unscientific to “defy, for no good logical
or empirical reason, established hypotheses and laws”. But it is
unhistorical, on the other hand, to “ignore or twist […]
particular events, persons, predicaments, in the name of laws,
theories, principles derived from other fields, logical, ethical,
metaphysical, scientific, which the nature of the medium renders
inapplicable” (1978b, 141–2). 

Berlin emphasised the importance to a sense of history of the idea of
its ‘one-directional’ flow. This sense of historical
reality makes it seem not merely inaccurate, but implausible, and
indeed ridiculous, to suggest, for example, that Hamlet was
written in the court of Genghis Khan. The historical sense involves,
not knowledge of what happened—this is acquired by empirical
means—but a sense of what is plausible and implausible, coherent
and incoherent, in accounting for human action (1978b, 140). There is
no a priori shortcut to such knowledge. Historical thinking
is much more like the operation of common sense, involving the weaving
together of various logically independent concepts and propositions,
and bringing them to bear on a particular situation as best we can,
than the application of laws or formulae. The ability to do this is an
empirical knack—judgement, or a sense or reality (1978b, 116).


Understanding of history is based on knowledge of humanity, which is
derived from direct experience, consisting not merely of
introspection, but of interaction with others. This is the basis for
Verstehen, or imaginative understanding: the
“recognition of a given piece of behaviour as being part and
parcel of a pattern of activity which we can follow […] and
[…] describe in terms of the general laws which cannot possibly
all be rendered explicit (still less organised into a system), but
without which the texture of normal human life—social or
personal—is not conceivable” (1978b, 128). The challenge
of history is the need for the individual to go beyond his or her own
experience, which is the basis of his or her ability to conceive of
human behaviour. We must reconstruct the past not only in terms of our
own concepts and categories, but in terms of how past events must have
looked to those who participated in them. The practice of history thus
requires gaining knowledge of what consciousness was like for other
persons, in situations other than our own, through an
“imaginative projection of ourselves into the past” in
order to “capture concepts and categories that differ from those
of the investigator by means of concepts and categories that cannot
but be his own. […] Without a capacity for sympathy and
imagination beyond any required by a physicist, there is no vision of
either past or present, neither of others nor of ourselves”
(1978b, 135–6). Historical reconstruction and explanation
involves ‘entering into’ the motives, principles, thoughts
and feelings of others; it is based on a capacity for knowing like
that of knowing someone’s character or face (1978b, 132–3).
2.4 Free Will and Determinism

The sort of historical understanding Berlin sought to depict was
‘related to moral and aesthetic analysis’. It conceives of
human beings not merely as organisms in space, but as “active
beings, pursuing ends, shaping their own and others’ lives, feeling,
reflecting, imagining, creating, in constant interaction and
intercommunication with other human beings; in short, engaged in all
the forms of experience that we understand because we share in them,
and do not view them purely as external observers”. For Berlin,
the philosophy of history was tied not only to epistemology, but to
ethics. The best-known and most controversial facet of his writings on
the relationship of history to the natural sciences was his discussion
of the problem of free will and determinism, which in his hands took
on a distinctly moral
 cast.[8]
 In Historical Inevitability Berlin attacked determinism (the
view that human beings do not possess free will, that their actions
and indeed thoughts are predetermined by forces beyond their control)
and historical inevitability (the view that all that occurs in the
course of history does so because it must, that history pursues a
particular course which cannot be altered, and which can be
discovered, understood and described through laws of historical
development). In particular he attacked the belief that history is
controlled by impersonal forces beyond human control.

Berlin did not assert that determinism was untrue, but rather that to
accept it required a radical transformation of the language and
concepts we use to think about human life—especially a rejection
of the idea of individual moral responsibility. To praise or blame
individuals, to hold them responsible, is to assume that they have
some control over their actions, and could have chosen differently. If
individuals are wholly determined by unalterable forces, it makes no
more sense to praise or blame them for their actions than it would to
blame someone for being ill, or praise someone for obeying the laws of
gravity. Indeed, Berlin suggested that acceptance of
determinism—that is, the complete abandonment of the concept of
human free will—would lead to the collapse of all meaningful
rational activity as we know it.

Berlin also insisted that belief in historical inevitability was
inspired by psychological needs, and not required by known facts; and
that it had dangerous moral and political consequences, justifying
suffering and undermining respect for the ‘losers’ of
history. A belief in historical inevitability served as an
‘alibi’ for evading responsibility and blame, and for
committing enormities in the name of necessity or reason. It provided
an excuse both for acting badly and for not acting at
 all.[9]

Berlin’s insistence on the importance of the idea of free will, and
the incompatibility of consistent and thoroughgoing determinism with
our basic sense of ourselves and our experience as human beings, was
closely tied to his liberalism and pluralism, with their emphasis on
the importance, necessity and dignity of individual choice. This
insistence involved him in a number of fierce debates with other
philosophers and historians in the 1950s and early 1960s, and helped
to provoke a spate of writing in the English-speaking world on the
philosophy of history, which might otherwise have languished.

Also controversial was Berlin’s claim that the writing and
contemplation of history necessarily involves moral evaluation. He did
not, as some of his critics charged (e.g., Carr 1961), mean this as a
call for sententious moralising on the part of historians. Berlin’s
argument was that, first, our normal way of regarding human beings as
choice-making agents involves moral evaluation; to eliminate moral
evaluation from our thinking completely would be to alter radically
the way that we view the world. Nor would such an alteration truly
move beyond moral evaluation; for such strenuous attempts at
objectivity are themselves motivated by a moral commitment to the
ideal of objectivity. Furthermore, given the place of moral evaluation
in ordinary human thought and speech, an account couched in morally
neutral terms will not be understood as morally neutral, nor will it
accurately reflect the experience or self-perception of the historical
actors in question. This last argument was particularly important to
Berlin, who believed that historical writing should reflect and convey
past actors’ understanding of their situation, so as to provide
explanations of why, thinking as they did, they acted as they did. He
therefore insisted that the historian must attend to the moral claims
and perceptions underlying historical events.
3. The History of Ideas

Berlin’s emphasis on the subversive, liberating, anti-orthodox nature
of philosophy was accompanied by a particular interest in moments of
radical change in the history of ideas, and in original and marginal
thinkers, while his emphasis on the practical consequences of ideas
led him to focus on those transformations and challenges which, in his
view, had wrought particularly decisive changes in people’s moral and
political consciousness, and in their behaviour. Finally, his concern
with the conflicts of his own day led him to concentrate mainly on
modern intellectual history, and to trace the emergence of certain
ideas that he regarded as particularly important, for good or ill, in
the contemporary
 world.[10]


Many of Berlin’s writings on the history of ideas were connected to
his philosophical work, and to one another, in their pursuit of
certain overarching themes. These included the relationship between
the sciences and humanities and the philosophy of history; the origins
of nationalism and socialism; the revolt against what Berlin called
‘monism’ in general, and rationalism in particular, in the
early nineteenth century and thereafter; and the vicissitudes of ideas
of liberty.

The narrative of the history of ideas that Berlin developed and
refined over the course of his works began with the Enlightenment, and
focused on the initial rebellion against what Berlin regarded as that
epoch’s dominant
 assumptions.[11]


In Berlin’s account, the thinkers of the Enlightenment believed human
beings to be naturally either benevolent or malleable. This created a
tension within Enlightenment thought between the view that nature
dictates human ends, and the view that nature provides more or less
neutral material, to be moulded rationally and benevolently
(ultimately the same thing) by conscious human
efforts—education, legislation, rewards and punishment, the
whole apparatus of
 society.[12]
 Berlin also attributed to the Enlightenment the beliefs that all
human problems, both of knowledge and ethics, can be resolved through
the discovery and application of the proper method (generally reason,
the conception of which was based on the methods of the natural
sciences, particularly Newtonian physics); and that genuine human
goods and interests were ultimately compatible, so that conflict, like
wickedness, was the result of ignorance, or of deception and
oppression practiced by corrupt authorities (particularly the
 Church).[13]


Berlin saw the school (or schools) of thought that began to emerge
shortly before the French Revolution, and became ascendant during and
after it, particularly those in Germany, as profoundly antagonistic
towards the Enlightenment. He was most interested in German
romanticism, but also looked at other members of the larger tendency
he referred to as the ‘Counter-Enlightenment’.
 [14]
 Berlin’s account sometimes focused on a attack on the Enlightenment’s
benevolent and optimistic liberalism by nationalists and
reactionaries; sometimes on the rejection of moral and cultural
universalism by champions of pluralism; and sometimes on the critique
of naturalism and scientism by thinkers who advocated a historicist
view of society as essentially dynamic, shaped not by the laws of
nature, but by the contingencies of history. 

Berlin has been viewed both as an adherent of the Enlightenment who
showed a fascination, whether peculiar or admirable, with its critics;
and as a critic and even opponent of the Enlightenment, who frankly
admired its enemies. There is some truth in both of these pictures,
neither of which does justice to the complexity of Berlin’s views.
Berlin admired many of the thinkers of the Enlightenment, and
explicitly regarded himself as “on their side”
(Jahanbegloo 1992, 70); he believed that much of what they had
accomplished had been for the good; and, as an empiricist, he
recognised them as part of the same philosophical tradition to which
he belonged. But he also believed that they were wrong, and sometimes
dangerously so, about some of the most important questions of society,
morality and politics. He regarded their psychological and historical
vision as shallow and naïve; and he traced to the Enlightenment a
technocratic, managerial view of human beings and political problems
to which he was profoundly opposed, and which, in the late 1940s and
early ’50s, he regarded as one of the gravest dangers facing the
world.

Berlin regarded the Enlightenment’s enemies as in many ways dangerous
and deluded. He attacked or dismissed their metaphysical beliefs,
particularly the philosophies of history of Hegel and his successors.
He was also wary of the aesthetic approach to politics that many
romantics had practised and fostered. And, while appreciative of some
elements in the romantic conception of liberty, he saw romanticism’s
influence on the development of the idea of liberty as largely
perverting. At the same time, he thought the Enlightenment’s opponents
had pointed to many important truths that the Enlightenment had
neglected or denied, both negative (the power of unreason, and
particularly the darker passions, in human affairs) and positive (the
inherent value of variety and of personal virtues such as integrity
and sincerity, and the centrality to human nature and dignity of the
capacity for choice). Romanticism rebelled in particular against the
constricting order imposed by reason, and championed the human will.
Berlin was sympathetic to this stance, but also believed that the
romantics had gone too far both in their protests and in their
celebrations. He remained committed to the goal of understanding the
world so as to be able to “act rationally in it and on it”
(1990, 2).
4. Ethical Thought and Value Pluralism

The republication in thematic collections of Berlin’s numerous essays,
beginning with Four Essays on Liberty (1969) and Vico and
Herder (1976), and continuing at an increased pace from 1978
under the general editorship of Henry Hardy, revealed as a central
dimension of Berlin’s thought his advocacy of the doctrine of value
pluralism. Since the early 1990s value pluralism has come to be seen
by many as Berlin’s ‘master idea’, and has become the most
discussed, most praised and most controversial of his ideas. Value
pluralism was at the centre of Berlin’s ethical thought; but there is
more to that thought than value pluralism alone. Berlin defined
ethical thought as “the systematic examination of the relations
of human beings to one another, the conceptions, interests and ideals
from which human ways of treating one another spring, and the systems
of value on which such ends of life are based […] beliefs about
how life should be lived, what men and women should be and do”
(1990, 2–3). Just as Berlin’s conception of philosophy was based
on a belief about the importance of concepts and categories in
people’s lives, his conception of ethics was founded on his belief in
the importance of normative or ethical concepts and
categories—especially
 values.[15]


Berlin did not set out a systematic theory about the nature of values,
and so his view must be gleaned from his writings on the history of
ideas. His remarks on the status and origins of values are ambiguous,
though not necessarily irreconcilable with one another. He seems,
first, to endorse the romantic view—which he traces to Kant
(although he also sometimes attributes it to Hume)—that values
are not discovered ‘out there’, as
‘ingredients’ in the universe, not deduced or derived from
nature. Rather, they are human creations, and derive their authority
from this fact. From this followed a theory of ethics according to
which human beings are the most morally valuable things, so that the
worth of ideals and actions should be judged in relation to the
meanings and impact they have for and on individual human beings. This
view underlay Berlin’s passionate conviction of the error of looking
to theories rather than human realities, of the evil of sacrificing
living human beings to abstractions; it also related to Berlin’s
theory of liberty, and his belief in liberty’s special importance.

Yet while Berlin sometimes suggests that values are human creations,
at other times he seems to advance what amounts almost to a theory of
natural law, albeit in minimalist, empirical dress. In such cases he
suggests that there are certain unvarying features of human beings, as
they have been constituted throughout recorded history, that make
certain values important, or even necessary, to them. This view of the
origin of values also comes into play in Berlin’s defence of the value
of liberty, when he suggests that the freedom to think, to enquire and
to imagine without constraint or fear is valuable because human beings
need to be able to have such mental freedom; to deny it to them is a
denial of their nature, which imposes an intolerable burden.

In an attempt to reconcile these two strands, one might say that, for
Berlin, the values that humans create are rooted in the nature of the
beings who pursue them. But this is simply to move the question back a
step, for the question then immediately arises: Is this human nature
itself something natural and fixed, or something created and altered
over time through conscious or unconscious human action? Berlin’s
answer (see, e.g., 2004c) comes in two parts. He rejects the idea of a
fixed, fully specified human nature, regarding natural essences with
suspicion. Yet he does believe (however under-theorised, unsystematic
and undogmatic this belief may be) in boundaries to, and requirements
made by, human nature as we know it, highly plastic as it may be. This
common human nature may not be fully specifiable in terms of a list of
unvarying characteristics; but, while many characteristics may vary
from individual to individual or culture to culture, there is a limit
on the variation—just as the human face may vary greatly from
person to person in many of its properties, while remaining
recognisably human; at the same time it is possible to distinguish
between a human and a non-human face, even if the difference between
them cannot be reduced to a formula. Indeed, at the core of Berlin’s
thought was his insistence on the importance of humanity, or the
distinctively human, both as a category and as a moral reality, which
does not need to be reduced to an unvarying essence in order to have
descriptive and normative force.

There is a related ambiguity about whether values are objective or
subjective. One might conclude from Berlin’s view of values as human
inventions that he would regard them as subjective. Yet he insisted,
on the contrary, that values are objective, even going so far as to
label his position ‘objective pluralism’. It is unclear
what exactly he meant by this, or how this belief relates to his view
of values as human creations. There are at least two accounts of the
objectivity of values that can be plausibly attributed to Berlin. The
first is that values are ‘objective’ in that they are
simply facts about the people who hold them—so that, for
instance, liberty is an ‘objective’ value because I value
it, and would feel frustrated and miserable without at any rate a
minimal amount of it. The second is that the belief in or pursuit of
certain values is the result of objective realities of human
nature—so that, for instance, liberty is an
‘objective’ value because certain facts about human nature
make liberty good and desirable for human beings. These views are not
incompatible with one another, but they are distinct; and the latter
provides a firmer basis for the minimal moral universalism that Berlin
espoused.

Finally, Berlin insisted that each value is binding on human beings by
virtue of its own claims, in its own terms, and not in terms of some
other value or goal. This view was one of the central tenets of
Berlin’s pluralism.
4.1 Berlin’s Definition of Value Pluralism

Berlin’s development and definition of pluralism both began
negatively, with the identification of the opposing position, which he
referred to usually as monism, and sometimes as ‘the Ionian
fallacy’ or ‘the Platonic ideal’. His definition of
monism may be summarised as follows:

All genuine questions must have a true answer, and one only; all
other responses are errors.
There must be a dependable path to discovering the true answers,
which is in principle knowable, even if currently unknown. 
The true answers, when found, will be compatible with one another,
forming a single whole; for one truth cannot be incompatible with
another. This, in turn, is based on the assumption that the universe
is harmonious and coherent. 


We have seen that Berlin explicitly denied that the first two of these
assumptions characterised human knowledge as it now is, or ever has
been. In his ethical pluralism he pushed these denials further, and
added a forceful denial of the third assumption. According to Berlin’s
pluralism, genuine values are many, and may—and often
do—come into conflict with one another. When two or more values
clash, it does not mean that one or another has been misunderstood;
nor can it be said, a priori, that any one value is always
more important than another. Liberty can conflict with equality or
with public order; mercy with justice; love with impartiality and
fairness; social and moral commitment with the disinterested pursuit
of truth or beauty (the latter two values, contra Keats, may
themselves be incompatible); knowledge with happiness; spontaneity and
free-spiritedness with dependability and responsibility. Conflicts of
values are ‘an intrinsic, irremovable element in human life’;
‘the idea of total human fulfilment is a […] chimera’. ‘These
collisions of values are of the essence of what they are and what we
are’; a world in which such conflicts are resolved is not the
world we know or understand (2002b, 213; 1990, 13). Berlin further asserted that
values may be not only incompatible, but incommensurable. There has
been considerable controversy over what Berlin meant by this, and
whether his understanding of incommensurability was either correct or
coherent. In speaking of the incommensurability of values, Berlin
seems to have meant that there is no common measure, no ‘common
currency’ for comparison, in judging between any two values in
the abstract. Thus, one basic implication of pluralism for ethics is
the view that a quantitative approach to ethical questions (such as
that envisaged by Utilitarianism) is impossible. In addition to
denying the existence of a common currency for comparison, or a
governing principle (such as the utility principle), value
incommensurability holds that there is no general procedure for
resolving value conflicts—there is not, for example, a lexical
priority rule (that is, no value always has priority over
another).

Berlin based these assertions on empirical grounds—on “the
world that we encounter in ordinary experience”, in which
“we are faced with choices between ends equally ultimate, and
claims equally absolute, the realisation of some of which must
inevitably involve the sacrifice of others” (2002b,
213–14). Yet he also held that the doctrine of pluralism
reflected necessary rather than contingent truths about the nature of
human moral life and the values that are its ingredients. The idea of
a perfect whole, the ultimate solution, is not only unattainable in
practice, but also conceptually incoherent. To avert or overcome
conflicts between values once and for all would require the
transformation, which amounted to the abandonment, of those values
themselves.

Berlin’s pluralism was not free-standing; it was modified and guided
by other beliefs and commitments. One of these, discussed below, was
liberalism. Another was humanism—the view that human beings are
of primary importance, and that avoiding harm to human beings is the
first moral priority. Berlin therefore held that, in navigating
between conflicting values, the first obligation is to avoid extremes
of suffering. He insisted that moral collisions, even if unavoidable,
can be softened, claims balanced, compromises reached. The goal should
be the maintenance of a precarious equilibrium that avoids, as far as
possible, desperate situations and intolerable choices. Philosophy
itself cannot tell us how to do this, though it can help by bringing
to light the problem of moral conflict and all of its implications,
and by weeding out false solutions. But in dealing with conflicts of
values, the concrete situation is everything (1990, 17–18).

One of the main features of Berlin’s account of pluralism is the
emphasis placed on the act of choosing between values. Pluralism holds
that, in many cases, there is no single right answer. Berlin used this
as an argument for the importance of liberty—or, perhaps more
precisely, an argument against the restriction of liberty in order to
impose the ‘right’ solution by force. Berlin also made a
larger argument about making choices. Pluralism involves conflicts,
and thus choices, not only between particular values in individual
cases, but between ways of life. While Berlin seems to suggest that
individuals have certain inherent traits—an individual nature,
or character, which cannot be wholly altered or obscured—he also
insisted that they make decisions about who they will be and what they
will do. Choice is thus both an expression of an individual
personality, and part of what makes that personality; it is essential
to the human self.
4.2 Value Pluralism before Berlin

Berlin provided his own (somewhat peculiar) genealogy of pluralism. He
traced the rebellion against monism first to Machiavelli, and depicted
Vico and Herder as decisive figures. Yet he acknowledged that
Machiavelli wasn’t really a pluralist, but a dualist; and other
scholars have questioned his identification of Vico and Herder as
pluralists, when both avowed belief in a higher, divine or mystical,
unity behind variety. Other scholars have credited other figures in
the history of philosophy, such as Aristotle, with pluralism (Nussbaum
1986, Evans 1996). James Fitzjames Stephen advanced something that
looks very much like Berlin’s pluralism (Stephen 1873), though he
allied it to a conservative critique of Mill’s liberalism. In Germany,
Dilthey came close to pluralism, and Max Weber towards the end of his
life presented a dramatic, forceful picture of the tragic conflict
between incommensurable values, belief systems and ways of life (Weber
1918, esp. 117, 126, 147–8, 151–3; cf. Weber 1904, esp.
17–18). Ethical pluralism first emerged under that name,
however, in America, inspired by William James’s pluralistic view of
the universe. John Dewey and Hastings Rashdall both approximated
pluralism in certain writings (Dewey 1908, Rashdall 1907); but
pluralism was apparently first proposed, under that name, and as a
specifically ethical doctrine, in language strikingly similar to
Berlin’s, by Sterling Lamprecht, a naturalist philosopher and scholar
of Hobbes and Locke, in two articles (1920, 1921), as well as,
somewhat later, by A. P. Brogan (1931). The dramatic similarities
between not only Berlin and Lamprecht’s ideas, but also their
language, makes it difficult to believe that Lamprecht was not an
influence on Berlin. However, there is no evidence that Berlin knew
Lamprecht’s work; and Berlin’s tendency was more often to credit his
own ideas to others than to claim the work of others as his own. A
version of pluralism was also advocated by Berlin’s contemporary
Michael Oakeshott (although Oakeshott seems to have attributed
conflicts of values to a mistakenly reflective approach to ethical
issues, and suggested that they could be overcome through relying on a
more habitual, less self-conscious, ethical approach).
4.3 The Emergence of Value Pluralism in Berlin’s Work

Some of the elements of value pluralism are detectable in Berlin’s
early essay ‘Some Procrustations’, published while he was
still an undergraduate at Oxford. This essay, drawing on Aristotle,
and focusing on literary and cultural criticism rather than philosophy
proper, made the case for epistemological and methodological, rather
than ethical, pluralism. Berlin criticised the belief in, and search
for, a single method or theory, which could serve as a master key for
understanding all experience. He insisted that, on the contrary,
different standards, values and methods of enquiry are appropriate for
different activities, disciplines and facets of life. In this can be
seen the seeds of his later work on the differences between the
sciences and the humanities, of his attacks on systematic explanatory
schemes, and of his value pluralism; but all these ideas had yet to be
developed or applied. Berlin was further nudged towards pluralism by
discovering a suggestion by Malebranche that happiness and goodness
are incompatible; this struck him at the time as an “odd
interesting view”, but it stuck, and he became convinced of its
central and pregnant truth (2004, 72). Berlin set out his basic
account of what he would later label monism in his biography of Marx
(1939), but did not explicitly criticise it or set out a pluralistic
alternative to it (although his lecture ‘Utilitarianism’,
dating from the late 1930s, does set out an argument that anticipates
his later claim that values are incommensurable). The basic crux of
pluralism, and Berlin’s connection of it to liberalism, is apparent in
rough, telegraphic form in Berlin’s notes for his lecture
‘Democracy, Communism and the Individual’ (1949), and
pluralism is also advanced in an aside, not under that name, in
‘Historical Inevitability’ (1954). Berlin referred to
pluralism and monism as basic, conflicting attitudes to life in 1955
(Berlin et al., 1955). But his use of the term and his explication of
the concept did not fully come together, it appears, until Two
Concepts of Liberty (1958; even then, his articulation of
pluralism is absent from the first draft of the essay).

Thereafter, variations on Berlin’s account of pluralism appear
throughout his writings on romanticism. Late in his life, taking stock
of his career, and trying to communicate what he felt to be his most
important philosophical insights, Berlin increasingly devoted himself
to the explicit articulation and refinement of pluralism as an ethical
theory. He had referred to the discovery of the basic incompatibility
and incommensurability of values as his one genuine discovery in a
private letter of 1969; he devoted the lecture he gave in accepting
the Agnelli Prize in 1988, ‘The Pursuit of the Ideal’, to
explaining what pluralism meant, and this remains the most eloquent
and concentrated summary of pluralism. Berlin also discussed pluralism
in many interviews and printed exchanges with other scholars from the
1970s onward, in an attempt to work through the conflicts,
controversies and confusions to which his ideas gave rise; but many of
these resisted Berlin’s attempts at resolution, and continue to figure
in, and sometimes dominate, discussions of his work.
4.4 Value Pluralism after Berlin: Some Controversies

Since the 1990s, pluralism has become the most widely and hotly
debated of Berlin’s ideas. This is due in part to Berlin’s work, and
in part to that of later philosophers who, either as followers or
allies of Berlin or independently, have also articulated and advanced
value pluralism or similar
 positions.[16]
 Although pluralism achieved its current prominence in interpretations
of Berlin’s work later in his life, it was identified earlier as a key
component in his thought by a few prescient readers. Two of these
readers advanced what remains one of the most common criticisms of
Berlin’s pluralism: that it is indistinguishable from relativism
(Strauss 1961; Momigliano 1976; see MacCallum 1967a and Kocis 1989 for
other early
 critiques).[17]


One problem that has bedevilled the debate is a persistent failure to
define the terms at issue with adequate clarity. Pluralism, of course,
has been the subject of repeated definition by Berlin and others (the
repetition not always serving a clarifying purpose). However, the term
‘relativism’ often remains underanalysed in these
discussions. Whether pluralism can be distinguished from relativism
depends largely on how relativism is defined, as well as on how
certain obscure or controversial components of pluralism are treated.
It should also be noted that the question of whether values are plural
is logically distinct from the question of whether they are objective,
despite the frequent elision of the two topics in the literature on
this subject.

One way of defining relativism is as a form of subjectivism or moral
irrationalism. This is how Berlin defined it in his attempts to refute
the charge of relativism brought against his pluralism. For Berlin,
the model of a relativist statement is ‘I like my coffee white,
you like yours black; that is simply the way it is; there is nothing
to choose between us; I don’t understand how you can prefer black
coffee, and you cannot understand how I can prefer white; we cannot
agree.’ Applied to ethics, this same relativist attitude might
say: ‘I like human sacrifice, and you do not; our tastes, and
traditions, simply differ.’ Pluralism, on the other hand, as
Berlin defines it, holds that communication and understanding of moral
views is possible among all people (unless they are so alienated from
normal human sentiments and beliefs as to be considered really
deranged). Relativism, in Berlin’s definition, would make moral
communication impossible; while pluralism vindicates the possibility
of (and acceptance of pluralism may facilitate) moral
communication.

Another (related) way of differentiating pluralism and relativism,
employed by Berlin and others, holds that pluralism accepts a basic
‘core’ of human values, and that these and other values
adopted alongside them in a particular context fall within a
‘common human horizon’. This ‘horizon’ sets
limits on what is morally permissible and desirable, while the
‘core’ of shared or universal values allows us to reach
agreement on at least some moral issues. This view rests on a belief
in a basic, minimum, universal human nature beneath the widely diverse
forms that human life and belief have taken across time and place. It
may also involve a belief in the existence of a specifically moral
faculty or sense inherent to human beings. Berlin seems to have
believed in such a faculty, and identified it with empathy, but did
not develop this view in his writings. 

Yet another way of defining relativism is to view it as holding that
things have value only relative to particular situations;
nothing is intrinsically good—that is, valuable in and for
itself as an end in itself. A slightly different way of putting this
would be to maintain that there are no such things as values that are
always valid; values are valid in some cases, but not others. For
instance, liberty may be a value at one place and time, but has no
status as a value at another. Here, again, Berlin’s pluralism seems
opposed to relativism, since it is premissed on a belief that, for
human beings, at least some values are intrinsically rather than
instrumentally good, and that at least some values are universally
valid, even if others aren’t—and even if this universal validity
isn’t recognised. Berlin admitted that liberty, for instance, had
historically been upheld as an ideal only by a small minority of human
beings; yet he still held it to be a genuine value for all human
beings, everywhere, because of the way that human beings are
constituted, and, so far as we know, will continue to be constituted.
Similarly, Steven Lukes has suggested that relativism seeks to avoid
or dismiss moral conflict, to explain it away by holding that
different values hold for different people, and by denying that the
competing values may be, and often are, binding on all people.
Pluralism, on the other hand, sees conflicts of values as occurring
both within, and across, cultures, and (at least in Lukes’s
formulation) maintains that custom or relatively valid belief-systems
or ways of life cannot be appealed to as ways of overcoming
value-conflict (Lukes 1989). This is not a position that Berlin
explicitly advances; but his later writings suggest a sympathy for
it.

Yet the charge that pluralism is equivalent to relativism is not so
easily refuted, given certain ambiguities in Berlin’s account. These
centre on the nature and origins of values, the related question of
the role of cultural norms, and the meaning of
‘incommensurability’. 

As stated above, Berlin held both that values are human creations, and
that they are ‘objective’; and the foundation for this
latter claim is ambiguous in Berlin’s work. The claim that values are
objective in being founded on (or expressions of) and limited by
certain realities of human nature would seem to provide a defence
against relativism, in holding that there is an underlying, common
human nature which makes at least some values non-relative. However,
the argument that values are objective simply because they are pursued
by human beings seems to allow for relativism, since it makes the
validity of values dependent on nothing but human preferences, and
allows any values actually pursued by human beings (and, therefore,
any practices adopted in pursuing those values) to claim
 validity.[18]


One of the knottiest dimensions of Berlin’s pluralism is the idea of
incommensurability, which has been open to diverging interpretations.
One can make a three-way distinction, between weak incommensurability,
moderate incommensurability and radical incommensurability. Berlin
goes beyond weak incommensurability, which holds that values cannot be
ranked quantitatively, but can be arranged in a qualitative hierarchy
that applies consistently in all cases. It is not, however, clear
whether he presents a moderate or a radical vision of
incommensurability. The former holds that there is no single, ultimate
scale or principle with which to measure values—no ‘moral
slide-rule’ or universal unit of normative measurement. This
view is certainly consistent with all that Berlin wrote from 1931
onwards. Such a view does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that
it is impossible to make judgements between values on a case-by-case
basis, or that values, just because they can’t be compared or ranked
in terms of one master-value or formula, can’t be compared or
deliberated between at all. 

Berlin does sometimes offer more starkly dramatic accounts of
incommensurability, which make it hard to rule out a more radical
interpretation of the concept, according to which incommensurability
is more or less synonymous with incomparability. The latter states
that values cannot be compared at all, since there is no ‘common
currency’ in terms of which to compare them: each value, being
sui generis, cannot be judged in relation to any other value, because
there is nothing in relation to which both can be judged or measured.
As a result, choices among values cannot be based on (objectively
valid) evaluative comparisons, but only on personal preference, or on
an act of radical, arbitrary choice. If this view is adopted, it is
difficult to see how pluralism’s practical consequences would differ
from those of relativism, although some scholars—most notably
John Gray—have attempted to work out a version of pluralism that
will both accommodate this more radical interpretation of
incommensurability, and yet be differentiated from relativism.

A related question concerns the role of reason in moral deliberation.
If values are incommensurable, must all choices between conflicting
values be ultimately subjective or irrational? If so, how does
pluralism differ from radical relativism and subjectivism? If not,
how, exactly, does moral reasoning work? How can we rationally make
choices between values when there is no system or unit of measurement
that can be used in making such deliberations? One possible answer to
the last question is to offer an account of practical, situational
reasoning that is not quantitative or rule-based. This is what Berlin
suggests; but, once again, he does not offer a systematic explanation
of the nature of non-systematic reason. (On incommensurability see
Chang 1997 and Crowder 2002.) 

In the area of political philosophy, the most widespread controversy
over pluralism concerns its relationship to liberalism. This debate
overlaps with that regarding pluralism’s relationship to relativism,
to the extent that liberalism is regarded as resting on a belief in
certain universal values and fundamental human rights, a belief which
relativism undermines. However, there are some who maintain that,
while pluralism is distinct from, and preferable to, relativism, it is
nevertheless too radical and subversive to be reconciled to liberalism
(or, conversely, that liberalism is too universalistic or absolutist
to be compatible with pluralism). The main proponent of this view, who
is more responsible than any other thinker for the emergence and wide
discussion of this issue, is John Gray (see, especially, Gray 1995).
Gray asserts that pluralism is true, that pluralism undermines
liberalism, and that therefore liberalism, at least as it has
traditionally been conceived, should be
 abandoned.[19]


Gray’s case has spawned a vast literature, concerning both Berlin’s
treatment of the relationship between pluralism and liberalism in
particular, and this issue in general. Some theorists have agreed with
Gray (Kekes, 1993, 1997); others have sought to show that pluralism
and liberalism are reconcilable, although this reconciliation may
require modifications to both liberalism and
pluralism—modifications that are, however, justifiable, and
indeed inherently desirable. The most extensive discussions to date
are those by George Crowder and William Galston (Crowder 2002, 2004,
Galston 2002,
 2004).[20]

Berlin himself was devoted both to pluralism and to liberalism, which
he saw not as related by logical entailment, but as interconnected and
harmonious. The version of pluralism he advanced was distinctly
liberal in its assumptions, aims and conclusions, just as his
liberalism was distinctly pluralist. As Michael Walzer has remarked,
Berlin’s pluralism is characterised by “receptivity, generosity,
and scepticism”, which are, “if not liberal values, then
qualities of mind that make it […] likely that liberal values
will be accepted” (Galston 2002, 60–1; Walzer 1995, 31).

5. Political Thought
5.1 Political Judgement and Leadership

Apart from his better-known writings on liberty and pluralism,
Berlin’s political thought centred on two topics: the nature of
political judgement, and the ethics of political action. Berlin
addressed the former subject both directly and through his writings on
individual statesmen who embodied models of different sorts of
successful political judgement (for these, see the portraits collected
in Berlin 1998, and Hanley 2004). 

Berlin disputed the idea that political judgement was a body of
knowledge which could be reduced to rules. Political action should be
based on a ‘sense of reality’ founded on experience,
empathetic understanding of others, sensitivity to the environment,
and personal judgement about what is true or untrue, significant or
trivial, alterable or unalterable, effective or useless, etc. Such
judgement necessarily involves personal instinct and flair,
‘strokes of unanalysable genius’. In the realm of
political action, laws are few and skill is all (1996, 43). 

Like the study of history, political judgement involves reaching an
understanding of the unique set of characteristics that constitute a
particular individual, atmosphere, state of affairs or event (1996,
45). This requires a capacity for integrating “a vast amalgam of
constantly changing, multicoloured, evanescent, perpetually
overlapping data”, a “direct, almost sensuous contact with
the relevant data”, and “an acute sense of what fits with
what, what springs from what, what leads to what […] what the
result is likely to be in a concrete situation of the interplay of
human beings and impersonal forces” (1996, 46). Such a sense is
qualitative rather than quantitative, specific rather than
general.

The faculty that allows for such judgement is, Berlin insists, not
metaphysical, but ‘ordinary, empirical, and
quasi-aesthetic’. This sense is distinct from any sort of
ethical sense; it could be possessed or lacked by both virtuous and
villainous politicians. Recognition of the importance of this sense of
political reality should not discourage the spirit of scientific
enquiry or serve as an excuse for obscurantism. But it should
discourage the attempt to transform political action into the
application of scientific principles, and government into technocratic
 administration.[21]


Berlin intended his writings on political judgement as a warning to
political theorists not to overreach themselves. Political theory can
do much good in helping us to think through politics. But political
action is a practical matter, which should not, and cannot, be founded
on, or dictated by, general principles established through abstract
theorising. 

Berlin’s writings on political judgement, activity and leadership are
of a piece with his larger epistemological project: to bring to light
the tension between the application of abstract or a priori
theory and the recognition of direct perception; and to warn against
the dangers of the former and assert the importance of the latter.
While he acknowledged that it was impossible to think without the use
of analogies and metaphors, that thought necessarily involves
generalisation and comparison, he warned that it was important to be
cautious, self-conscious and critical in the use of general models and
analogies (see 1978b, 158). These writings also reassert the message
of the youthful essay ‘Some Procrustations’: that the same
rules should not be automatically applied to every facet of human
life. Rationality consists of the application, not of a single
technique or set of rules, but of those methods that have proven to
work best in each particular field or situation. This view of
political judgement also relates to Berlin’s attempt to vindicate the
importance of individual agency and personality, by insisting that
political judgement is a personal quality, and effective political
activity a matter of personal consideration, decision and action
rather than impersonal administration or the deployment of
institutional machinery.
5.2 Political Ethics: Ends, Means, Violence

While Berlin emphasised the place of questions about the proper ends
of political action in the subject-matter of political theory, he also
recognised the importance of discussions of the proper means to
employ, and the relationship between these and the ends at which they
aim. Berlin did not treat this question—the question of
political ethics—directly in his work; nor did he offer simple
or confident answers to the perennial questions of the morality of
political action. Nevertheless, he did advance some theses about this
branch of morality; and these were among his most heartfelt
pronouncements.

Berlin’s primary mouthpiece for these messages was Alexander Herzen,
the nineteenth-century Russian radical
 publicist.[22]
 The words of Herzen that Berlin repeated most insistently were those
condemning the sacrifice of human beings on the altar of abstractions,
the subordination of the realities of individual happiness or
unhappiness in the present to glorious dreams of the future (Berlin 1990, 16; Berlin
also quoted similar sentiments from Benjamin Constant: see Berlin
2002b, 3, as well as 2008, 93–129 and 212–40
passim). The first principle of Berlin’s political ethics was an
opposition to such subordination, which Berlin viewed as the essence
of fanaticism, and a recipe for inhumanity that was as futile as it
was horrible.

Berlin, like Herzen, believed that ‘the end of life is life
itself’, and that each life and each age should be regarded as
its own end and not as a means to some future goal. To this Berlin
added a caution (evocative as much of Max Weber as of Herzen) about
the unpredictability of the future. Berlin’s belief in the power of
human agency was qualified by an awareness of how the consequences of
any course of action are unknowable, and likely to be quite different
from what was intended. This led Berlin, on the one hand, to stress
the need for caution and moderation; and, on the other, to insist that
uncertainty is inescapable, so that all action, however carefully
undertaken, involves the risk of error and disastrous, or at least
unexpected and troubling, consequences. The result was an ethic of
political humility, similar to Weber’s ethic of responsibility, but
lacking its tone of grim, stoic grandeur.

Berlin often noted the dangers of Utopianism, and stressed the need
for a measure of political pragmatism. He may therefore appear to have
been staunchly in the tradition of political realism. Yet this was not
quite the case: Berlin sought to warn against the dangers of idealism,
and chasten it, so as to save it from itself and better defend it
against cynicism. Berlin’s pluralism points the way to a politics of
compromise; yet Berlin also warned against the dangers of certain
types of compromise, particularly those involving the employment of
dubious means to achieve desired ends. Indeed, the problem of the
relationship between ends and means runs through Berlin’s writings.
Berlin, characteristically, warned both against an insistence on total
political purity—for, when values conflict and consequences are
often unexpected, purity is an impossible ideal—and against a
disregard for the ethical niceties of political means. Berlin regarded
such an attitude as not only morally ugly, but foolish: for good ends
have a tendency to be corrupted and undermined by being pursued
through unscrupulous means. Furthermore, since the consequences of
actions are so uncertain, it is often the case that political actors
don’t achieve their goals, or achieve them imperfectly; it is best not
to make too many sacrifices along the way to accomplishing one’s
political goals, since that accomplishment is uncertain. To the
realist argument that ‘You cannot make an omelette without
breaking eggs’, Berlin responded: “The one thing we can be
sure of is the reality of the sacrifice, the dying and the dead. But
the ideal for which they die remains unrealised. The eggs are broken,
and the habit of breaking them grows, but the omelette remains
invisible” (1990, 16). 

Berlin was thoroughly anti-absolutist; but he did insist that there
were certain actions that were, except in the most drastic of
situations, unacceptable. Foremost among these were the manipulation
and humiliation of individuals by others, to the extent that those who
are ‘got at’ or ‘tampered with’ by others are
deprived of their humanity (see 2002b, 339–43). Berlin also
warned particularly against the use of violence. He acknowledged that
the use of force was sometimes necessary and justified; but he also
reminded his readers that violence has particularly volatile and
unpredictable consequences, and tends to spiral out of control,
leading to terrible destruction and suffering, and undermining the
noble goals it seeks to achieve. He also stressed the dangers of
paternalistic, or otherwise humiliating and disempowering, attempts to
institute reform or achieve improvement, which had a tendency to
inspire a backlash of hatred and resistance.

Berlin’s political ethics are best summarised in his own words:

Let us have the courage of our admitted ignorance, of our doubts and
uncertainties. At least we can try to discover what others […]
require, by […] making it possible for ourselves to know men as
they truly are, by listening to them carefully and sympathetically,
and understanding them and their lives and their needs, one by one
individually. Let us try to provide them with what they ask for, and
leave them as free as possible (2008, 296).


For Berlin the acceptance of uncertainty was a call not only to
cultivate humility, but to foster liberty.
5.3 The Concept of Liberty

Berlin’s best-known contribution to political theory has been his
essay on the distinction between positive and negative liberty. This
distinction is explained, and the vast literature on it summarised,
elsewhere in this encyclopaedia; the following therefore focuses only
on Berlin’s original argument, which has often been misunderstood, in
part because of ambiguities in Berlin’s account.

In Two Concepts of Liberty Berlin sought to explain the
difference between two (not, he acknowledged, the only two) different
ways of thinking about political liberty which had run through modern
thought, and which, he believed, were central to the ideological
struggles of his day. Berlin called these two conceptions of liberty
negative and
 positive.[23]
 Berlin’s treatment of these concepts was less than fully even-handed
from the start: while he defined negative liberty fairly clearly and
simply, he gave positive liberty two different basic definitions, from
which still more distinct conceptions would branch out. Negative
liberty Berlin initially defined as freedom from, that is,
the absence of constraints on the agent imposed by other people.
Positive liberty he defined both as freedom to, that is, the
ability (not just the opportunity) to pursue and achieve willed goals;
and also as autonomy or self-rule, as opposed to dependence on
others.

Berlin’s account was further complicated by combining conceptual
analysis with history. He associated negative liberty with the
classical liberal tradition as it had emerged and developed in Britain
and France from the seventeenth to the early nineteenth centuries.
Berlin later regretted that he had not made more of the evils that
negative liberty had been used to justify, such as exploitation under
laissez-faire capitalism; in Two Concepts itself, however,
negative liberty is portrayed favourably, and briefly. It is on
positive liberty that Berlin focused, since it was, he claimed, both a
more ambiguous concept, and one which had been subject to greater and
more sinister transformation, and ultimately perversion.

Berlin traced positive liberty back to theories that focus on the
autonomy, or capacity for self-rule, of the
 agent.[24]
 Of these, Berlin found Rousseau’s theory of liberty particularly
dangerous. For, in Berlin’s account, Rousseau had equated freedom with
self-rule, and self-rule with obedience to the ‘general
will’. By this, Berlin alleged, Rousseau meant, essentially, the
common or public interest—that is, what was best for all
citizens qua citizens. The general will was quite independent of, and
would often be at odds with, the selfish wills of individuals, who,
Rousseau charged, were often deluded as to their own interests. 

This view went against Berlin’s political and moral outlook in two
ways. First, it posited the existence of a single ‘true’
public interest, a single set of arrangements that was best for all
citizens, and was thus opposed to the main thrust of pluralism.
Second, it rested on a bogus transformation of the concept of the
self. In his doctrine of the general will Rousseau moved from the
conventional and, Berlin insisted, correct view of the self as
individual to the self as citizen—which for Rousseau meant the
individual as member of a larger community. Rousseau transformed the
concept of the self’s will from what the empirical individual actually
desires to what the individual as citizen ought to desire,
that is, what is in the individual’s real best interest, whether he or
she realises it or not.

This transformation became more sinister still in the hands of Kant’s
German disciples. Fichte began as a radically individualist liberal.
But he came to reject his earlier political outlook, and ultimately
became an ardent, even hysterical, nationalist—an intellectual
forefather of Fascism and even Nazism. Once again, this involved a
move from the individual to a collective—in Fichte’s case, the
nation, or Volk. In this view, the individual achieves
freedom only through renunciation of his or her desires and beliefs as
an individual and submersion in a larger group. Freedom becomes a
matter of overcoming the poor, flawed, false, empirical
self—what one appears to be and want—in order to realise
one’s ‘true’, ‘real’, ‘noumenal’
self. This ‘true’ self may be identified with one’s best
or true interests, either as an individual or as a member of a larger
group or institution; or with a cause, an idea or the dictates of
rationality (as in the case, Berlin argued, of Hegel’s definition of
liberty, which equated it with recognition of, and obedience to, the
laws of history as revealed by reason). Berlin traced this sinister
transformation of the idea of freedom to the totalitarian movements of
the twentieth century, both Communist and Fascist-Nazi, which claimed
to liberate people by subjecting—and often
sacrificing—them to larger groups or principles. As we have
seen, to do this was for Berlin the greatest of political evils; and
to do so in the name of freedom, a political principle that Berlin, as
a genuine liberal, especially cherished, struck him as a particularly
monstrous deception. Against this, Berlin championed, as ‘truer
and more humane’, negative liberty and an empirical view of the
self.

This account is subject to serious and plausible objections, on both
historical and conceptual grounds. But beyond the considerable debates
concerning the conceptual validity and historical accuracy of Berlin’s
account (extensively documented in Harris 2002), there is considerable
misunderstanding of Berlin’s own attitudes to the concepts he
discussed, and of the goals of his lecture. Berlin has often been
interpreted, not unreasonably, as a staunch enemy of the concept of
positive liberty. But this was never wholly the case. Berlin regarded
both concepts of liberty as centring on valid claims about what is
necessary and good for human beings; both negative and positive
liberty were for him genuine values, which might in some cases clash,
but in other cases could be combined and might even be mutually
interdependent. Indeed, Berlin’s own earlier articulations of his
political values included a notable component of positive liberty
alongside negative liberty (see e.g., 2002b, 336–44). What Berlin
attacked was the many ways in which positive liberty had been used to
justify the denial, betrayal or abandonment of both negative liberty
and the truest forms of positive liberty itself. Berlin’s main targets
were not positive liberty as such, but the metaphysical or
psychological assumptions which, combined with the concept of positive
liberty, had led to its perversion: monism, and a metaphysical or
collective conception of the self. Two Concepts of Liberty,
and Berlin’s liberalism, are therefore not based on championing
negative liberty against positive liberty, but on advocating
individualism, empiricism and pluralism against collectivism, holism,
rationalistic metaphysics and monism.
5.4 Liberty and Pluralism

In Berlin’s account, the main connection between pluralism and
liberalism is the centrality of choice to both. Berlin’s argument is
as follows. The conflicts between values and ways of life that are the
matter of pluralism require people to make choices. These choices are
of the utmost importance, because they involve the most basic and
essential questions of human life—what one is to be and do.
Those who have to make such choices are therefore likely to care about
them, and to want some say in making them. Furthermore, the ability to
make one’s own choices between conflicting values is the crux of one’s
identity as a moral agent. (This step of the argument, it should be
noticed, does not follow from pluralism itself; but it is an
assumption central to Berlin’s moral individualism, which Berlin
imports into his pluralism.)

Why might one deny individuals the opportunity to make choices for
themselves? One answer (though not the only possible one) is that
individuals may make the wrong choices, so that it is necessary to
coerce or manipulate them to choose correctly. But pluralism holds
that in cases where there are conflicts between genuine values, there
may be no single right choice—more than one choice (though not
necessarily all possible choices) may equally serve genuine human
values and interests, even if they also involve the sacrifice or
violation of other values or interests that are no more or less true
and important. Similarly, there is no single ideal life, no single
model of how to think or behave or be, to which people should attempt,
or be brought, to conform as far as possible.

Pluralism, then, for Berlin, represents an argument that both
undermines one of the main rationales for violating freedom of choice,
and vindicates the importance and value of being able to make choices
 freely.[25]
 Some interpreters have argued that Berlin’s vindication of the
freedom to choose, while it rests in part on his pluralism, also
requires the addition of moral principles, ideals and assumptions
external to pluralism (though this need not, contra John Gray, mean
that pluralism is incompatible with, or necessary undermines,
liberalism); while others (such as George Crowder) have argued that
Berlin’s liberalism can be deduced from his pluralism alone.

At the same time, while pluralism is an important ingredient in
Berlin’s argument for the importance of liberty, it also modifies and
moderates his liberalism, and prevents Berlin from being (as many
proponents of negative liberty in the twentieth century and after have
been) an unqualified classical liberal or libertarian. Negative and
positive liberty are both genuine values which must be balanced
against each other; and liberty of any sort is one value among many,
with which it may conflict, and against which it needs to be balanced.
Therefore Berlin was more sensitive than many classical liberal or
libertarian thinkers to the possibility that genuine liberty may
conflict with genuine equality, or justice, or public order, or
security, or efficiency, or happiness, and therefore must be balanced
with, and sometimes sacrificed in favour of, other values. Berlin’s
liberalism includes both a conservative or pragmatic appreciation of
the importance of maintaining a balance between different values, and
a social-democratic appreciation of the need to restrict liberty in
some cases so as to promote equality and justice and protect the weak
against victimisation by the strong (see 2002b, 214–15).
Nevertheless Berlin remains a liberal in maintaining that preserving a
certain minimum of individual liberty is a primary political priority.
He justifies this view by an appeal to an empiricist version of a
natural law argument, writing of the existence of ‘natural
rights’ based on the way that human beings are constituted,
mentally or physically; to attempt to alter or limit human life in
certain ways is to block the desires, goals, aspirations inherent in
being human as we know it (1996, 73–4). To deprive human beings
of certain basic rights is to dehumanise them. While liberty should
not be the only good pursued by society, and while it should not
always trump other values, ethical pluralism lends it a special
importance: for people must be free in order to allow for the
recognition and pursuit of all genuine human values. Society should
therefore make it a priority to provide the liberty necessary for
Millian ‘experiments in living’ and for the perpetuation
of social and personal variety (see Berlin 2002b, 218–51).
5.5. Nationalism

Berlin used the term ‘nationalism’ somewhat confusingly,
to refer to two quite distinct, and morally very different, phenomena.
The first of these was the sense of belonging, of collective identity,
of which Herder had written. The second was the ‘inflamed’
form of this sentiment, which, feeding off of resentment, frustration
and humiliation, became ‘pathological’. Berlin was
sympathetic to the former, critical of the latter; but he recognised
the relationship of the two, and was thus aware of the power and
allure of nationalism. 

Berlin insisted that the struggles for national liberation that marked
his own day—primarily in the late 1940s, ’50s and
’60s—were not struggles for either negative or positive liberty
as such, but rather expressed a craving for collective recognition,
for status, for the sense of living among and being
governed—however harshly—by members of one’s own group.
Berlin credited Herder with the insight that belonging, and the sense
of self-expression that membership bestows, are basic human needs; but
it seems unlikely that he would have had to learn this lesson from
Herder—it is more probable that it was his own appreciation of
these needs that attracted him to that author in the first place. He
was sharply aware of the pain of humiliation and dependency, the
hatefulness and hurtfulness of paternalistic rule. His individualism
and emphasis on liberty were qualified by his understanding of the
human need for a sense of belonging to a community—an awareness
sharpened, if not generated, by his own experience of exile, as well
as by the influence of his mother’s passionate
 Zionism.[26]

6. Conclusion

Berlin’s life and work continue to be the subject of considerable
scholarly attention. This attention has yet to yield a settled
consensus about the merits or the meaning of Berlin’s work—and
not only because Berlin evokes strong personal reactions, attracting
admiration and affection, if not outright veneration, as a liberal
saint (see e.g., Annan 1980, 1990, 1999; Hausheer 1979 and 2004), and
inspiring hostility from critics on both the right and left, who have
detected in Berlin’s stance complacency, hypocrisy, a want of courage,
and an excess of tolerance (see, e.g., Scruton 1989, Hitchens 1998).
This is to be expected, given Berlin’s fierce opposition to Communism,
combined with his refusal to ally himself to extreme anti-Communism,
as well as his ambivalence or hesitancy on many divisive political
issues of his own day.

However, even as the ideological battles of the Cold War recede into
the past, Berlin remains the object of varying interpretations and
evaluations. This may appear odd in a thinker who wrote clearly, and
without any attempt at secrecy or obscurity. But it is unsurprising,
given the complexity of Berlin’s vision, his aversion to systematic
exposition or theorising, the multifaceted nature of his work, and the
uniqueness of his position in the intellectual life of his times.
These qualities make it difficult not only to evaluate Berlin, but
also to situate him in the history of ideas; for he appears at once
typical and atypical of the period in which he lived, and also both
ahead of his time and extremely old-fashioned.

In his youth, Berlin’s intellectual development followed that of
English-language philosophy, and he was at one point deeply involved
in the advance of analytic philosophy; yet he drifted away from this,
and his later writings and concerns are a world away from most
Anglo-American philosophy of their time. On the other hand, for all
his range of historical and cultural reference and concern with moral
and aesthetic questions, and despite the influence of Kant and Kant’s
successors on his thought, Berlin seems out of place in the world of
Continental philosophy. Yet it would be a mistake to accept Berlin’s
own judgement that he had departed from the realm of philosophy
altogether. For both the views he had formed while working as a
professional philosopher, and his tendency to connect political,
historical and cultural issues to deeper moral and epistemological
questions, set his work apart from that of other historians and
‘public intellectuals’ of his day (to whom he otherwise
bore a certain resemblance).

Berlin was, for much of his life, an intellectually lonely figure,
pursuing the history of ideas in an academic setting that was
unreceptive to it, and advocating a moderate liberalism in a time
dominated by ideological extremism. And yet this plea for moderation
and advocacy of liberalism was shared and taken up by many others at
the
 time.[27]
 His interest in political philosophy and dedication to the defence of
liberalism anticipated the work of John Rawls (who had been influenced
by Berlin during a stay at Oxford while a young academic); yet the
resurgence of political theory initiated by Rawls’s work coincided
with a period of eclipse in Berlin’s reputation. Berlin’s concern with
the problem of culture anticipated the centrality in political theory
of questions of identity and membership that began in the 1990s; his
sympathy for the sentiments and needs underlying nationalism, which
set him apart from many liberal theorists of his own time, presaged
the revival of ‘liberal nationalism’ in the works of
younger thinkers such as Michael Walzer, David Miller, Yael Tamir and
Michael Ignatieff. His attack on monism, on the quest for certainty
and the project of systematic knowledge, has led him to be embraced by
some proponents of anti-foundationalism such as Richard Rorty. Yet
Berlin’s work remains difficult to assimilate to intellectual
movements or projects such as postmodernism or multiculturalism, the
excesses and obscurities of which provoked quizzical scepticism in him
towards the end of his life.

Nor is Berlin easy to identify seamlessly with those intellectual
positions that he explicitly propounded—liberalism and
pluralism. Berlin’s place in the history of political thought is
therefore, at present, paradoxical and unsettled. He appears as an
important, and indeed emblematic, exponent of liberalism—along
with Rawls, the most important liberal theorist of his
century—whose ideas may nevertheless in the end undermine, or at
least be difficult to reconcile with, liberalism. This question has
come to preoccupy many readers of Berlin’s work, and predominate in
discussions of his legacy, to the extent of threatening to overshadow
other aspects of his thought.

The debate over pluralism and liberalism raises important conceptual
issues; yet it becomes somewhat misleading, both in itself and
particularly as a guide to Berlin’s thought, if pluralism and
liberalism are taken to be comprehensive doctrines, or if they are
reified into independently existing, systematic entities.
‘Pluralism’ and ‘liberalism’ as general terms
are abstractions which can be helpfully used to group, analyse and
compare the positions of different thinkers, or to characterise
different facets of the thought of a single thinker. Neither, however,
is likely to capture the whole of an individual position; and neither
in itself, even if linked to the other, encompasses or sums up
Berlin’s own outlook. 

Berlin himself insisted that political and ethical theories arise from
a thinker’s basic conception of human nature, which in turn is founded
on an entire philosophical outlook, a conception of the nature of the
universe, reality, knowledge etc. The vision underlying Berlin’s
political and ethical theory, while it may have been coherent (this is
itself arguable), was not systematic, and it cannot be accurately
characterised simply as pluralistic or liberal, if these terms are to
have any specific meaning or any use in analysing positions other than
Berlin’s own. ‘Pluralism’ can be used, more narrowly, to
describe Berlin’s theory of values. It can also be employed more
broadly, to capture something of his vision of reality, the universe
and human nature—that is, the view that all of these things are
complexes made up of separate and conflicting parts: that the self is
protean and open-ended, that the universe is not a harmonious cosmos,
that reality presents many separate aspects, which can and should be
viewed from different perspectives. But pluralism, as explicitly
defined by Berlin and others, does not cover Berlin’s empiricism, or
his historicism, or his awareness of the fallibility of human
knowledge, or his belief in the primary importance of individuals as
opposed to generalisations and abstractions, or his emphasis on the
importance of free choice (which, while he sought to found it on
pluralism, in fact appears to be independent of it). Nor does
pluralism, with its emphasis on the place of tragic conflict and loss
in human life, capture the affirmative zest for life and delighted
enthusiasm for human beings that was central to Berlin’s persona as a
man and thinker. Berlin’s thought, like his writing, is made up both
of swathes of sharp colour and of minutely variegated and subtle
shades of light and darkness; it thus resists summary and simple
conclusions, and repays persistent and open-ended study.