James of Viterbo (c. 1255–1308) is one of a number of highly
significant theologians who were active in the last quarter of the
thirteenth century, alongside Godfrey of Fontaines, Henry of Ghent and
Giles of Rome, three authors whose views he constantly discusses and
with whom he often disagrees. Though decidedly influenced by the work
and outlook of St. Augustine, James was very much an independent
thinker, whose originality was fuelled by his attentive reading of the
Greek and Arab commentators on Aristotle. On several issues, such as
cognition, the love of self over God, the relation between the
spiritual and temporal powers, James held strikingly original and often
controversial positions.
 
1. Life and Writings


James was born in Viterbo around 1255. Nothing is known about the
early years of his life. It is presumed that he joined the order of the
Hermits of St. Augustine somewhere around 1272. He is first mentioned
in 1283 in the capitular acts of the Roman province of his order as a
recently appointed lecturer (lector) in the Augustinian
Convent of Viterbo. This means that he must have spent the previous
five years (i.e., 1278–83) in Paris, as the Augustinian order required
its lecturers to be trained in theology in that city for a period not
exceeding five years. James returned to Paris not long after his
appointment in Viterbo, for he is mentioned again in the capitular acts
in 1288, this time as baccalaureus parisiensis, i.e., as
holding a bachelor of theology degree from the University of Paris.
After completing his course of studies, James was appointed Master of
Theology in 1292 (Wippel 1974) or 1293 (Ypma 1974), teaching in Paris
for the next seven years. His output during that time was considerable.
All of his works in speculative theology and metaphysics date from the
Parisian period. In 1299–1300, he was named definitor
(i.e., member of the governing council) of the Roman province by the
general chapter of his order, and in May of 1300 he became regent
master of the order's studium generale in Naples.
 These would be the last two years of his academic career,
however, for in September 1302 he was named Archbishop of Benevento by
Pope Boniface VIII, possibly in gratitude for the support James had
shown for the papal cause in his great treatise, De regimine
christiano (On Christian Rulership). In December of
the same year, at the request of the Angevin King, Charles II, he was
transferred to the Archbishopric of Naples. He remained in Naples
until his death, in 1307 or 1308.


James wrote the bulk of his philosophically relevant work while in
Paris. Nothing remains of his early production in that city. His
commentary on Peter Lombard's Sentences has been lost,
although still extant is an Abbreviatio in I Sententiarum Aegidii
Romani (Summary of the First Book of the Sentences of Giles of
Rome) probably a very early work (Ypma 1975 and 1980; but see
Gutiérrez 1939 and Giustiniani 1979) written while he was still
a lecturer in Viterbo. Also lost are a treatise on the animation of the
heavens (De animatione caeli), as well as a commentary on
Aristotle's Metaphysics (Expositio primae
philosophiae), which Ypma surmises must have been written when
James was a baccalaureus formatus, i.e., between 1288 and 1292
(Ypma 1975).


Soon after his inception as regent master, James held a series of
seven Quaestiones disputatae de verbo (Disputed Questions
on the Divine Word), only one of which has been edited so far
(Scanzillo 1972). He then held a series of four quodlibetal questions
as well as thirty-four disputed questions on the categories as they
pertain to divine matters (Quaestiones de praedicamentis in
divinis), although five of them have actually nothing to do with
theology or the categories, as they deal with the human will and the
habits (see Ypma 1975 for a possible explanation regarding their
inclusion in the Quaestiones). These two works constitute the
most important sources for our knowledge of James' philosophical
thought.


In Naples, James wrote the work for which he is arguably best known
(Gutiérrez 1939: 61–2), the De regimine christiano, a
work of great importance in the history of late medieval political
thought, and the only philosophical work written by James in the last
eight or so years of his life.


The following table provides the list of James' authentic
works (Ypma 1974; Gutiérrez 1939). Single asterisks mark those
which have been fully edited; double asterisks indicate those for which
there exist only partial editions:

Lectura super IV libros Sententiarum

Quaestiones Parisius disputatae De praedicamentis in
divinis**

Quaestione de animatione caeli

Quaestiones disputatae de Verbo**

Quodlibeta quattuor*

Abbreviatio In Sententiarum Aegidii Romani**

De perfectione specierum

De regimine christiano*

Summa de peccatorum distinctione*

Sermones diversarum rerum

Concordantia psalmorum David

De confessione

De episcopali officio

2.  Philosophical Theology
2.1  Theology as a Practical Science


Like many of his contemporaries, James devotes serious attention to
determining the status of theology as a science and to specifying its
object, or rather, as the scholastics say, its subject. In
Quodlibet III, q. 1, he asks whether theology is principally a
practical or a speculative science. Unsurprisingly, perhaps, for an
Augustinian, James responds that the end of theology resides
principally not in knowledge but in the love of God. The love of God,
informed by grace, is what distinguishes the way in which Christians
worship God from the way in which pagans worship their deities. For
philosophers—James has Cicero in mind—religion is a
species of justice; worship is owed to God as a sign of submission. For
the Christian, by contrast, there can be no worship without an internal
affection of the soul, i.e., without love. James allows that there is
some recognition of this fact in Book X of the Nicomachean
Ethics, for the happy man would not be “most beloved of
God,” as Aristotle claims he is, if he did not love God by making
him the object of his theorizing. In this sense, it can be said that
philosophy as well sees its end as the love of God as its principal
subject. But there is a difference, James contends, in the way in which
a science based on natural reason aims for the love of God and the way
in which sacred science does so: sacred science tends to the love of
God in a more perfect way. One way in which James illustrates the
difference between both approaches is by contrasting the ways in which
God is the “highest” object for metaphysics and for
theology. The proper subject of metaphysics is being, not God, although
God is the highest being. Theology, on the other hand, views God as its
subject and considers being in relation to God. Thus, James concludes,
“theology is called divine or of God in a much more excellent and
principal way than metaphysics, for metaphysics considers God only in
relation to common being, whereas theology considers common being in
relation to God” (Quodl. III, q. 1, p. 20, 370–374). Another way in
which James illustrates the difference between natural theology and
sacred science is by using St. Anselm's distinction between the
love of desire (amor concupiscientiae) and the love of
friendship (amor amicitiae). The love of desire is the love by
which we desire an end; the love of friendship is the love by which we
wish someone well. The love of God philosophers have in mind, James
contends, is the love of desire; it cannot, by the philosophers'
own admission, be the love of friendship, for according to Aristotle,
at least in the Magna Moralia, friendship involves a form of
community or sharing between the friends that cannot possibly obtain
between mere mortals and the gods. Now although James concedes that a
“community of life” between God and man cannot be achieved
by natural means, it is possible through the gift of grace. The
particular friendship grace affords is called charity and it is to the
conferring of charity that sacred scripture is principally ordered.
2.2 Divine Power


Like all scholastics since the early thirteenth century, James
subscribes to the distinction between God's ordained power,
according to which “he can only do what he preordained he would
do according to wisdom and will” (Quodl. I, q. 2, p. 17,
35–37) and his absolute power, according to which he can do whatever is
“doable,” i.e., whatever does not imply a contradiction.
Problems concerning what God can or cannot do arise only in the latter
case. James considers several questions: can God add an infinite number
of created species to the species already in existence (Quodl.
I, q. 2)? Can he make matter exist without form (Quodl. IV, q.
1)? Can he make an accident subsist without a substrate
(Quodl. II, q. 1)? Can he create the seminal reason of a
rational soul in matter (Quodl. III, q. 10)? In response to
the first question, James explains, following Giles of Rome but against
the opinion of Godfrey of Fontaines and Henry of Ghent, that God can by
his absolute power add an infinite number of created species ad
superius, in the ascending order of perfection, if not in
actuality, then at least in potency. God cannot, however, add even one
additional species of reality ad inferius, between prime
matter and pure nothingness, not because this exceeds his power but
because prime matter is contiguous to nothingness and leaves, so to
speak, no room for God to exercise his power (Côté 2009).
James is more hesitant about the second question. He is sympathetic
both to the arguments of those who deny that God can make matter
subsist independently of form and to the arguments of those who claim
he can. Both positions can reasonably be held, because each argues from
a different (and valid) perspective. Proponents of the first position
argue from the point of view of reason: because they rightly believe
that God cannot make what implies a contradiction, and because they
believe (rightly or wrongly) that making matter exist without form does
involve a contradiction, they conclude that God cannot make matter
exist without form. Proponents of the second group argue from the
perspective of God's omnipotence which transcends human reason:
because they rightly assume that God's power exceeds human
comprehension, they conclude (rightly or wrongly) that making matter
exist without form is among those things exceeding human comprehension
that God can make come to pass.


Another question James considers is whether God can make an accident
subsist without a subject or substrate. The question arises only with
respect to what he calls “absolute accidents,” namely
quantity and quality, as opposed to relational accidents—the
remaining categories of accident. God clearly cannot make relational
accidents exist without a subject in which they inhere, for this would
entail a contradiction. This is so because relations for James, as we
will see in section 3.3 below, are modes, not
things. What about absolute accidents? As a Catholic theologian, James
is committed to the view that some quantities and qualities can
subsist without a subject, for instance extension and color, a view
for which he attempts to provide a philosophical justification. His
position, in a nutshell, is that accidents are capable of existing
independently if they are thing-like (dicunt rem). Numbers,
place (locus), and time are not thing-like and are thus not
capable of independent existence; extension, however, is and so can be
made to exist without a subject. The same reasoning applies to
quality. This is somewhat surprising, for according to the traditional
account of the Eucharist, whereas extension may exist without a
subject, the qualities, color, odor, texture, necessarily cannot; they
inhere in the extension. James, however, holds that just as God can
make thing-like quantities to exist without a subject, so too must he
be able to make a thing-like quality exist without the subject in
which it inheres. Just which qualities are capable of existing without
a subject is determined by whether or not they are “modes of
being,” i.e., by whether or not they are relational.  This seems
to be the case with health and shape: health is a proportion of the
humors, and so, relational; likewise, shape is related to parts of
quantity, without which, therefore, it cannot exist. Colors and
weight, by contrast, are non-relational, according to James, and are
thus in principle capable of being made to exist without a
subject.


The fourth question James considers in relation to God's
omnipotence raises the interesting problem of whether the rational soul
can come from matter. James proceeds carefully, claiming not to provide
a definitive solution but merely to investigate the issue (non
determinando sed investigando). The upshot of the investigation is
that although there are many good reasons (the soul's
immortality, its spirituality and its per se existence) to say
that God cannot produce the seminal reason of the rational soul in
matter, in the end, James decides, with the help of Augustine, that
such a possibility must be open to God. Thus, it is true that in the
order which God has de facto instituted, the soul's
incorruptibility is repugnant to matter, but this is not so in absolute
terms: if God can miraculously cause something to come to existence
through generation and confer immortality upon it (James is presumably
thinking of the birth of Christ), then he can make it come to pass that
souls are produced through generation without being subject to
corruption. Likewise, although it appears inconceivable that something
material could generate something endowed with per se
existence, it is not impossible absolutely speaking: if God can confer
separate existence upon an accident—despite the fact that
accidents naturally inhere in their substrates—then, in like
manner, he can confer separate existence upon a soul, although it has a
seminal reason in matter.
2.3 Divine Ideas


Scholastics held that because God is the creative cause of all
natural beings, he must possess the ideas corresponding to each of his
creatures. But because God is eternal and is not subject to change, the
ideas must be eternally present in him, although creatures exist for
only a finite period of time. This doctrine of course raised many
difficulties, which each author addressed with varying degrees of
success. One difficulty had to do with reconciling the multiplicity of
ideas with God's unity: since there are many species of being,
there must be a corresponding number of ideas; but God is one and,
hence, cannot contain any multiplicity. Another, directly related,
difficulty had to do with the ontological status of ideas: do ideas
have any reality apart from God? If one denied them any kind of
reality, it was hard to see how they could function as exemplar causes
of things; but to attribute full-blown essential reality to them was to
run the risk of introducing multiplicity in God. 


One influential solution to these difficulties was provided by
Thomas Aquinas, who argued that divine ideas are nothing else but the
diverse ways in which God's essence is capable of being imitated,
so that God knows the ideas of things by knowing his essence. Ideas are
not distinct from God's essence, though they are distinct from
the essences of the things God creates (De veritate, q. 2, a.
3).


One can discern two answers to the problem of divine ideas in the
works of James of Viterbo. At an early stage of his career, in the
Abbreviatio in Sententiarum Aegidii
Romani­—assuming one accepts, as seems reasonable, the
early dating suggested by Ypma (1975)—James defends a position
that is almost identical to that of Thomas Aquinas (Giustiniani
1979). In his
Quodlibeta, however, he moves to a position closer to that of
Henry of Ghent. In the following I will sketch James' position in
the Quodlibeta as it provides the most mature statement of his
views.


Although James agreed with the notion that ideas are to be viewed as
the differing ways in which God can be imitated, he did not think that
one could make sense of the claim that God knows other things by
cognizing his own essence unless one supposed that the essences of
those things preexist in some way (aliquo modo) in God.
James' solution is to distinguish two ways in which ideas are in
God's intellect. They are in God's intellect, firstly, as
identical with it, and, secondly, as distinct from it. The first mode
of being is necessary as a means of acknowledging God's unity;
but the second mode of being is just as necessary, for, as James puts
it (Quodl. I, q. 5, p. 64, 65–67), “if God knows
creatures before they exist, even insofar as they are other than him
and distinct (from him), that which he knows is a cognized object,
which must needs be something; for that which nowise exists and is
absolutely nothing cannot be understood.”  But James also
thinks that the necessity of positing distinct ideas in God follows
from a consideration of God's essence. God enjoys the highest
degree of nobility and goodness. His mode of knowledge must be
commensurate with his nature. But according to Proclus, an author James
is quite fond of quoting, the highest form of knowledge is knowledge
through a thing's cause. That means that God knows things through
his own essence. However, he does so by knowing his essence as
a cause, and that is possible only by knowing “something
(aliquid) through a cause, not merely by knowing that which is
the cause (i.e., God)”.


Although James' insistence on the distinctness of ideas with
respect to God's essence is reminiscent of Henry of Ghent's
teaching, it is important to note, as has been stressed by M. Gossiaux
(2007), that James does not conceive of this distinctness as Henry
does. For Henry, ideas possess esse essentiae; James, by
contrast, while referring to divine ideas as things (res), is
careful to add that they are not things “in the absolute sense
but only determinately,” viz., as cognized objects
(Quodl. I, q. 5, p. 63, 60). Thus, divine ideas for James
possess a lesser degree of distinction from God's essence than do
Henry of Ghent's. Nevertheless, because James did consider ideas
to be distinct in some sense from God, his position would be viewed by
some later authors—e.g., William of Alnwick—as
compromising divine unity.
3.  Metaphysics
3.1 Analogy


The concept of being, all the medievals agreed, is common. What was
debated was the nature of the commonness. According to James of
Viterbo, all commonness is founded on some agreement, and this
agreement can be either merely nominal or grounded in reality.
Agreement is nominal when the same name is predicated of wholly
different things, without there being any objective basis for the
application of the common name; such is the case of equivocal names.
Agreement is real in the following two cases: (1) if it is based on
some essential resemblance between the many things to which a
particular concept applies, in which case the concept applies to these
many things by virtue of the self same ratio and is said of
them univocally; or (2) if that concept is truly common to the many
things of which it is said, although it is not said of them relative to
the same nature (ratio), but as prior to one and posterior to
the others, insofar as these are related in a certain way to the first.
A concept that is predicated of things in this way is said to be
analogous, and the agreement displayed by the things to which it
applies is said to be an agreement of attribution (convenientia
attributionis). James believes that it is according to this sense
of analogy that being is said of God and creatures, and of substance
and accident (Quaestiones de divinis praedicamentis I, q. 1,
p. 25, 674–80). For being is said in a prior sense of God and in a
posterior sense of creatures by virtue of a certain relation between
the two; likewise, being is said first of substance and secondarily of
accidents, on account of the relation of posteriority accidents have to
substance. The reason why being is said in a prior sense of God and in
a secondary sense of creatures and, hence, the reason why the
‘ratio’ or nature of being is different in the two
cases is that being, in God, is “the very thing which God
is” (Quaestiones de divinis praedicamentis, q. 1, p. 16,
412), whereas created being is only being through something added to
it. From this first difference follows a second, namely, that created
being is being by virtue of being related to an agent, whereas
uncreated being has no relation. These two differences can be
summarized by saying that divine being is being through itself (per
se), whereas created being is being through another (per
aliud) (Quaestiones de divinis praedicamentis, q. 1, p.
16, 425–6). In sum, being is said of God and creature, but according to
a different ratio: it is said of God according to the proper
and perfect nature of being, but of creatures in a derivative or
secondary way.
3.2 The Distinction of Being and Essence


James' most detailed discussion of the distinction between
being and essence occurs in the context of a question that asks if
creation could be saved if being (esse) and essence were not
different (Quodl. I, q. 4). His answer is that although he
finds it difficult to see how one could account for creation if being
and essence were not really different, he does not believe it is
necessary to conceive of the real distinction in the way in which
“certain Doctors” do. Which Doctors does he have in
mind? In Quodl. I, q. 4, he summarizes the views of three
authors: Godfrey of Fontaines, according to whom the distinction is
only conceptual (secundum rationem); Henry of Ghent, for whom
esse is only intentionally different from essence, a
distinction that is less than a real distinction but greater than a
rational distinction; and finally, Giles of Rome, for whom
esse is one thing (res), and essence another. Thus,
James agrees with Giles, and disagrees with Henry and Godfrey, that the
distinction between being and essence is real; however, he disagrees
with Giles about the proper way of understanding the real distinction.


The starting point of his analysis is Anselm's statement in
the Monologion that the substantive lux (light), the
infinitive lucere (to emit light), and the present participle
lucens (emitting light) are related to each other in the same
way as essentia (essence), esse (to be), and
ens (being). The relation of lucere to lux,
he tells us, is the relation of a concrete term to an abstract one.
To-emit-light denotes light as an act, just as to-be (esse)
denotes essence from the point of view of an act. Now, a concrete term
signifies more things than the corresponding abstract term, e.g.,
esse signifies more things than essence, for essence signifies
only the form, whereas esse signifies the form principally and
the subject secondarily. By ‘subject’ James means the
actually existing thing, which he also calls the aggregate or supposit
(Wippel 1981). Esse and essence thus signify the same thing
principally, but differ in terms of what they signify secondarily.
Although this difference is only conceptual in the case of God, it is
real in the case of creatures. It is this difference that explains why
one does not predicate to-emit-light (lucere) of light itself
(lux) or being of essence: what properly exists is that which
has essence, viz., the supposit. Esse denotes essence as
existing in a supposit.


The kernel of James' solution, then, lies in the distinction
between what terms signify primarily and secondarily. To his mind, this
is what makes his solution closer in spirit to Giles of Rome than to
either Godfrey or Henry, without committing him to a conception of the
distinction as rigid as that of Giles. The distinction is real for
James, but in a qualified way (Gossiaux 1999). Because identity or
difference between things is determined to a greater degree by primary
rather than by secondary signification, it follows that essence and
existence are primarily and absolutely the same (idem) and
conditionally or secondarily distinct. Yet, although the distinction is
conditional or secondary, it is nonetheless necessary and points to a
real composition in creatures. 
3.3 Relations


James devotes five of his Quaestiones de divinis
praedicamentis (qq. 11–15), representing some 270 pages of edited
text, to the question of relations. It is with a view to
providing a proper account of divine relations, he explains, that it is
“necessary to examine the nature of relation with such
diligence” (Quaestiones de divinis praedicamentis, q.
11, p. 12, 300–301). But before turning to Trinitarian relations, James
devotes the whole of q.11 to the status of relations in general. The
following account focuses exclusively on q. 11. James in essence adopts
Henry of Ghent's “modalist” solution, which was to
exercise considerable influence among late thirteenth-century thinkers
(Henninger 1989), although he disagrees with Henry about the proper way
of understanding what a mode is.


The question boils down to whether relations exist in some manner in
extra-mental reality or solely through the operation of the intellect,
like second intentions (species and genera). Many arguments can be
adduced in support of each position, as Simplicius had already shown in
his commentary on Aristotle's Categories—a work
that would have a decisive influence on James' thought. For
instance, in support of the view that relations are not real, one may
point out that the intellect is able to apprehend relations between
existents and non-existents, e.g., the relation between a father and
his deceased son; yet, there cannot be anything real in the relation
given that one of the two relata is a non-existent. But if so, then the
same must be true of all relations, as the intellectual operation
involved is the same in all cases. Another argument concerns the way in
which relations come to be and cease to be. This appears to happen
without any change taking place in the subject which the relation is
said to affect. For instance, a child who has lost his mother is said
to be an orphan until the age of eighteen, at which point it ceases to
be one, although no change has occurred: “the relation recedes or
ceases by reason of the mere passage of time.”


But good reasons can also be found in support of the opposing view.
For one, Aristotle clearly considers relations to be real, as they
constitute one of the ten categories that apply to things outside the
soul. Furthermore, according to a view commonly held by the
scholastics, the perfection of the universe cannot consist solely of
the perfection of the individual things of which it is made; it is also
determined by the relations those things have to each other; hence,
those relations must be real.


The correct solution to the question of whether relations are real
or not, James contends, depends on assigning to a given relation no
more but no less reality than is fitting to it. Those who rely on
arguments such as the first two above to infer that relations are
entirely devoid of reality are guilty of assigning relations too little
reality; those who appeal to arguments such as the last two, showing
that relations are distinct from their subjects in the way in which
things are distinct from each other, assign too great a degree of
reality to relations. The correct view must lie somewhere in between:
relations are real, but are not distinct from their subjects in the way
one thing is distinct from another.


That they must be real is sufficiently shown by the first Simplician
arguments mentioned above, to which James adds some others of his own.
However, showing that they are not things is slightly more complicated.
James' position, in fact, is that relations are not things
“properly and absolutely speaking,” but only “in a
certain way according to a less proper way of speaking.” A
relation is not a thing in an absolute sense because of the
“meekness” of its being, for which reason “it is like
a middle point between being and non-being” (Quaestiones de
divinis praedicamentis, q. 11, p. 30, 668–9). The reasoning behind
this last statement is as follows: the more intrinsic some principle is
to a thing, the more that thing is said to be through it; what is
maximally intrinsic to a thing is its substance; a thing is therefore
maximally said to be on account of its substance. Now a thing's
being related to another is, in the constellation of accidents that
qualify that thing, what is minimally intrinsic to it and thus farthest
from its being, and so closest to non-being. But if relations are not
things, at least in the absolute sense, what are they? James answers
that they are modes of being of their foundations. “The
mode of being of a thing does not differ from the thing in such a way
as to constitute another essence or thing. The relation, therefore, is
not different from its foundation” (Quaestiones de divinis
praedicamentis, q. 11, p. 33, 745–7). Speaking of relations
as modes allows us to acknowledge their reality, as attested by
experience, without hypostasizing them. A certain number's being
equal to another is clearly something distinct from the number itself.
The number and its being equal are two “somethings”
(aliqua), says James; they are not, however, two
things; they are two in the sense that one is a thing (the
number) and the other is a mode of being of the number.


In making relations modes of being of the foundation, James
was clearly taking his cue from Henry of Ghent, who has been called
“the chief representative of the modalist theory of
relation” (Henninger 1989). For Henry and James, relations are
real in the sense that they are distinct from their foundations and
belong to extra mental reality. However, James' understanding of
the way in which a relation is a mode differs from Henry's. For
Henry, a thing's mode is the same thing as its ratio or
nature; it is the particular type of being that thing has, what
“specifies” it. But according to James' understanding
of the term, a mode lies beyond the ratio of a thing,
like an accident of that thing (Quaestiones de divinis
praedicamentis, p. 34, 767–8). In conclusion, one could say
that in his discussion of relations, James was guided by the same
motivation as many of his contemporaries, namely securing the
objectivity of relations without conferring full-blooded existence upon
them. Relations do exhibit some form of being, James believed,
but it is a most faint one (debilissimum), the existence of a
mode qua accident.
3.4 Individuation


James discusses individuation in two places: Quodl. I, q.
21 and Quodl. II, q. 1. I will focus on the first treatment,
because it is the lengthier of the two and because the tenor of
James' brief remarks on individuation in Quodl. II, q.
1, despite certain similarities with his earlier discussion (Wippel
1994), make it hard to see how they fit into an overall theory of
individuation.


The question James faces in Quodl. I, q. 21 is a markedly
theological one, namely whether, if the soul were to take on other
ashes at resurrection, a man would be numerically the same as he was
before. In order to answer that question, James tells us, it is first
necessary to determine what the cause of numerical unity is in the case
of composite beings. There have been numerous answers to that question
and James provides a short account of each. Some philosophers have
appealed to quantity as the principle of numerical unity; others to
matter; others yet to matter as subtending indeterminate dimensions;
finally, others have turned to form as the cause of
individuation. According to James, each of these answers is part
of the correct explanation though it is insufficient if taken on its
own. The correct view, according to him, is that form and matter taken
together are the principal causes of numerical identity in the
composite, with quantity contributing something “in a certain
manner.” Form and matter, however, are principal causes in
different ways; more precisely, each accounts for a different kind of
numerical unity. For by ‘singularity’ we can really mean
two distinct things: we can mean the mere fact of something's
being singular, or we can point to a thing qua “something
complete and perfect within a certain species” (Quodl.
I, 21, 227, 134–35). It is matter that accounts for the first kind of
singularity, and form for the second. Put otherwise, the kind of unity
that accrues to a thing on account of its being a mere singular,
results from the concurrence of the “substantial” unity
provided by matter and the “accidental” unity provided by
quantity. By contrast, the unity that characterizes a thing by virtue
of the perfection or completeness it displays is conferred to it by the
form, which is the principle of perfection and actuality in
composites.


Although James thinks he can quite legitimately enlist the support
of such prestigious authorities as Aristotle and Averroes in favor of
the view that matter and form together are constitutive of a
thing's numerical unity, his solution has struck commentators as
a somewhat contrived and ad hoc attempt to reach a compromise solution
at all costs (Pickavé 2007; Wippel 1994). James, it has been
suggested, “seems to be driven by the desire to offer a
compromise position with which everyone can to some extent agree”
(Pickavé 2007: 55). Such a suggestion does accord with what we
know about James' temperament, namely, his dislike of controversy
and his tendency, on the whole, to prefer solutions that present a
“middle way” (Quaestiones de divinis
praedicamentis, q. 11, p. 23, 513; Quodl. II, q. 7, p.
108, 118; De regimine christiano, 210; see also
Quodl. II, q. 5, p. 65, 208–209). However, James'
professions of moderation must sometimes be taken with a grain of
salt, as there are some positions he wants to pass off as moderate
that are quite far from being so, as we will see in
Section 7 below.
4. Natural Philosophy (The Doctrine of Seminal Reasons)


The belief that matter contains the ‘seeds’ of all the
forms that can possibly accrue to it is one of the hallmarks of James
of Viterbo's thought, as is the belief that the soul pre-contains, in
the shape of “propensities” (idoneitates), all
the sensitive, intellective, and volitional forms it is able to take
on. We will look at James' doctrine of propensities in the intellect
in Section 5, and his doctrine of propensities in
the will in Section 6. In this section, we present
James' arguments in favor of seminal reasons.


One important reason for subscribing to the existence of seminal
reasons is that the doctrine enjoys the support of Augustine. 
Although James is sometimes quite critical of his Augustinian
contemporaries, including his predecessor Giles of Rome, he is an
unreserved follower of Augustine, especially when it comes to the
greater philosophical issues, such as knowledge and natural causation.
However, what is particularly interesting about James is the way in
which he enlists such decidedly un-Augustinian sources as Aristotle,
Averroes, and especially Simplicius in the service of his Augustinian
convictions (Côté 2009).


James offers a thorough discussion of seminal reasons in
Quodl. II, q. 5.   The question he raises there is
not so much whether there are seminal reasons, for this is
“admitted by all Catholic doctors” (Quodl. II, q.
5, p. 59, 16), but rather, how one is to properly conceive of them. A
seminal reason, according to James, has two characteristics: it is (1)
an inchoate state of the form to be, and (2) an active principle. Most
of the discussion in Quodl. II, q. 5 is devoted to
establishing the first point. James thinks that the thesis that forms
are present in potency in matter is consonant with the teaching of
Aristotle, who, he claims, follows a “middle way” on the
issue of generation, eschewing both the position that forms are
created, and also Anaxagoras' “hidden-forms
hypothesis,” according to which all forms are contained in act in
everything. Now to say that forms are present in matter
inchoately or in potency, according to James, entails that the potency
of matter is something distinct from matter itself. One
argument in favor of this thesis is that matter is not corrupted by the
taking on of a form: it remains in potency towards other forms. Also,
potency is relational, whereas matter is absolute. When James states
that matter is distinct from potency he does not mean to say that they
are entirely distinct or unconnected, quite the contrary: potency is
the potency of matter. However, potency adds three
characteristics to the concept of matter. First, it adds the idea of a
relation to a form (matter is in potency towards a form); second, it
adds the idea that the form to which it is related is a form it lacks;
finally, it implies that the form which matter lacks is a form it has
the capacity to acquire, for as James explains, one does not say that a
stone is in potency toward the power of sight merely because it lacks
sight. In order for something to be in potency toward a particular form
it must both lack that form and also possess an aptitude to take it on.
James neatly summarizes his views in the following passage: “[the
potency of matter] denotes a respect of the matter toward the form,
attendant upon its lacking that form and having the aptitude to take it
on, so that four properties are included in the concept of potency,
namely matter, lack of form, aptitude toward the form and a respect
toward the form insofar as it is educible by an agent and motor
cause” (Quodl. II, q. 5, p. 69, 359 – p. 70,
363).


The originality of James' position lies in the way in which he
conceives matter's aptitudes. The term “aptitude” has
a precise technical meaning, which he fleshes out with the help of
Simplicius' commentary on the Categories. It denotes a
certain incipient or inchoative state of the form in matter. Potency
and act, James tells us, are two states or modes of the same thing, not
two distinct things. What exists in the mode of actuality must
preexist in the mode of potency, but in an inchoate way. James is aware
of the several objections that may be leveled against his conception of
aptitudes or propensities. The most serious of these is perhaps the
charge that their existence makes generation, i.e., the production of
new beings, impossible or useless. James replies by suggesting that
those who argue in this fashion misconstrue Aristotle's doctrine
of change. For change, according to Averroes' understanding of
Aristotle (see Quodl. III, q. 14), does not result from an
agent's implanting a form in a receiving subject, for this would
imply that forms “migrate” from subject to subject; it
results rather from an agent's making that which is in potency to
be in act. For this to occur, however, more is required than the mere
passive potency of matter: the seminal reason must also be viewed as an
active principle. The activity of potency manifests itself in the shape
of a natural inclination or tendency to attain its completion. 
Generation thus requires two things (besides God's general
operative causality): the “transmutative” agency of an
extrinsic cause and the intrinsic agency of the formae
inchoativum which inclines the potency to attain its
completion.


James' doctrine of seminal reasons would elicit considerable
criticism in the early fourteenth century and beyond (Phelps 1980). The
initial reaction came from Dominicans, e.g., Bernard of Auvergne, the
author of a series of Impugnationes (i.e., attacks) contra
Jacobum de Viterbio, and John of Naples who argued against
James' distinction between the potency of matter and potency. But
James' theory would also encounter resistance from within the
Augustinian Order, e.g., from Alphonsus Vargas of Toledo.
5. Cognition


James' doctrine of cognition must also be understood in the
context of his thoroughgoing Augustinianism and against the backdrop of
the late thirteenth-century arguments against Thomistic abstraction
theories. According to Thomas Aquinas' theory of knowledge, the
agent intellect abstracts a thing's form or essential information
from the image or representation of that thing. The outcome of this
process was what Aquinas called the intelligible species, which was
then taken to “move” the possible intellect to conceptual
understanding. However, as thinkers such as Vital du Four and Richard
of Middleton were to point out (see the articles by Robert and Noone),
the information coming in through the senses is related to a
thing's accidental properties, not to its substance. How, then,
could abstraction from the senses produce an intelligible species
relating to the thing's essence?


Although James of Viterbo agreed by and large with the spirit of
this objection and believed that the replies by proponents of
abstractionism were unsuccessful, he had another reason for rejecting
the theory. This was because it implied a view of the intellect
which he thought to be profoundly mistaken, namely, the view that there
is a real distinction between the agent intellect (which abstracts the
species) and the possible intellect (which receives it). If it
were truly the case, he reasoned, that one needed to posit a distinct
agent intellect because phantasms are only potentially intelligible,
then, by the same token, one would have to posit an “agent
sense”, because sensibles “are only sensed in
potency” (Quodl. I, q. 12, p. 164, 234). But given that
no proponent of abstraction admits an agent sense, one should not allow
them an agent intellect. Furthermore, if there were an agent intellect
distinct from the possible intellect, it would be a natural power of
the soul and so would be required for the cognition of all
intelligibles, not just a certain class of them. Similarly, qua natural
power, its use would be required not only in the present life but also
in the afterlife. But of course that would be absurd, as the agent
intellect, ex hypothesi, is only necessary to abstract form
from matter, something the mind does only when it is
joined to a corruptible body. 


James was well aware that by denying the distinction between the two
intellects, he was opposing the consensus view of Aristotle
commentators. Indeed, his views seem to run counter to the De
anima itself, though, as he would mischievously point out, it was
difficult to determine just what Aristotle's doctrine was, so obscure
was its formulation (Quodl. I, q. 12, p. 169, 426—170,
439). He replied that what he was denying was not the existence of a
“difference” in the soul, but merely that the existence of
a difference implied a distinction of powers (Quodl. I,
q. 12, p. 170, 440–45). The intellect, he held, was both in act
and in potency, active and passive, but one could account for its
having these contrary properties without resorting to the two
intellect model. This is because intellection is not a transient
action (like hitting a ball), requiring an active subject distinct
from a passive recipient; rather, it is an immanent action (like
shining).  James' solution, in other words, was to conceive of the
intellect (as indeed the will) as essentially dynamic, as an
“incomplete actuality”, its own formal cause,
spontaneously tending toward its completion, much in the way seminal
reasons tend toward their completing forms—indeed both
discussions drew their inspiration from the same source: Simplicius'
commentary on Aristotle's analysis of the second species of
quality. The intellect was described as a general (innate) propensity
made up of a series of more specific (equally innate) propensities,
the number of which was a function of the number of different things
the intellect is able to know: “The intellective power is a
general propensity with respect to all intelligibles, that is, with
respect to the actual conforming to all intelligibles. On this general
propensity are founded other specific ones, which follow the diversity
of intelligibles” (Quodl. VII, q. 7, p. 93,
453–55). Of course, as James readily acknowledged, although the
intellect is its own formal cause, it cannot issue forth an act of
intellection without some input from the senses. However, the type of
causality the senses were viewed as exercising was deemed to be purely
“excitatory” or “inclinatory” (Quodl.
I, q. 12, p. 175, 613–16), making the senses not the principal
but rather an instrumental cause of intellection. In all, three causes
account for the operation of the intellect, according to James: 1) God
as efficient cause; 2) the soul and its propensities as formal cause,
and 3) the object presented by the senses as “excitatory”
cause.
Although, as we have just seen, James rejected the distinction
between the agent and possible intellects, there was another, equally
widely-held distinction in the area of psychology that he did
maintain, namely the distinction between the soul and its
powers.  

For the purposes of this article, it will suffice to think of the
debate regarding the relation of the soul to its powers as being
motivated at least in part by the need to provide a coherent
understanding of the soul's structure and operations in view of two
inconsistent but equally authoritative accounts of the soul's relation
to its powers. One was that of Augustine, who had asserted that
memory, intelligence, and will (i.e., three powers) were one in
substance (De trinitate X, 11), and so believed that the soul
was identical with its powers; the other was Aristotle's, who clearly
believed in a certain distinction, and whose remarks about natural
capacities (dunameis) as belonging to the second species of
quality, in Categories c. 8,14–27, and hence to the
category of accident, making them distinct from the soul's essence,
were commonly applied by the scholastics to the soul's powers. Each
view, of course, had its supporters; and, naturally, as was so often
the case, attempts were made to find a middle way that would
accommodate both positions. During James' tenure as Master at the
University of Paris, the majority view was very much that there was a
real distinction. It was the view held by many of the scholastics
whose teachings he studied most carefully, namely Aquinas, Giles of
Rome, and Godfrey of Fontaines. There was, however, a commonly
discussed minority position, one that eschewed both real distinction
and identity: that of Henry of Ghent. Henry believed that the powers
of the soul were “intentionally”, not really, distinct
from its essence. James, however, sided with Thomas, Giles, and
Godfrey, against Henry (Quodl. II, q. 14, p. 160,
70–71;  Quodl. III, q. 5, p. 83, 56—84, 63). His
reasoning was as follows. Given that everyone agreed that there was a
real distinction between the soul and one of its powers in act
(between the soul and, e.g., an occurrent act of willing), then if one
denied that there was a real distinction between the soul and its
powers, as Henry had, one would be committed to the existence of a
real distinction between the power in act (e.g., an occurrent act of
willing) and that same power in potency (that is, the will, qua power,
as able to produce that act), since the power in act is really the
same as the soul. But as we saw in the preceding section, something in
potency is not really distinct from that same thing in act. This
followed from James' reading of Simplicius' account of qualities in
the latter's commentary on Aristotle's Categories. For
instance, seminal reasons are not really distinct from the
fully-fledged forms that proceed from them, nor are intellective
“propensities” really distinct from the fully actualized
cognized forms. Hence, James concluded, the powers must be really
distinct from the soul's essence. 
6. Ethics
6.1 Freedom of the Will


The question of the will's freedom was of paramount importance
to the scholastics. Unlike modern thinkers, for whom establishing that
the will is free is tantamount to showing that its act falls outside
the natural nexus of cause and effect, showing that the will is free,
for medieval thinkers, usually involved showing that its act is
independent of the apprehension and judgment of the intellect.
Although the scholastics generally granted that a voluntary act results
from the interplay between will and intellect, most of them preferred
to single out one of the two faculties as the principal determinant of
free choice. Thus, for Henry of Ghent, the will is the sole cause of
its free act (Quodl. I, q. 17), so much so that he tends to
relegate the intellect's role to that of a sine qua non
cause. For Godfrey of Fontaines, by contrast, it is the intellect
that exercises the decisive motion (Quodl. III, q. 16).
Although James of Viterbo sometimes claims to want to steer a middle
course between Henry and Godfrey (Quodl. II, q. 7), his
preferences clearly lie with a position like that of Henry's, as
can be gathered from his most detailed treatment of the question in
Quodl. I, q. 7.


James' thesis in Quodl. I, q. 7 is that the will is a
self-mover and that the object grasped by the intellect moves the will
only metaphorically. His main challenge is to show is that this
position is compatible with the Aristotelian principle that whatever is
moved is moved by another.


As we saw in the previous section, James believes that the soul is
made up of what he calls “aptitudes” or
“propensities” (idoneitates), which are the
similitudes of all things knowable and desirable, “before [the
soul] actually knows or desires them” (Quodl. I, q. 7,
p. 91, 407 – p. 92, 408). The pre-existence of such aptitudes
implies that the soul is neither a purely passive potency nor made up
of fully actualized forms, but rather an “incomplete
actuality” or, perhaps more correctly, a set of “incomplete
actualities,” which James describes as being “naturally
inserted in [the soul], and thus, remaining in it permanently, though
sometimes in an imperfect state, sometimes in a state perfected by the
act” (Quodl. I, q. 7, p. 92, 419–24).


In order to show how this view of the soul is compatible with
Aristotle's postulate that every motion requires a mover distinct
from the thing moved, James introduces a distinction between two sorts
of motion: efficient and formal. Efficient motion occurs when motion is
caused by a thing that possesses the complete form of the particular
motion caused; formal motion occurs when the moving thing has the
incomplete form of the thing moved. Heating is given as an example of
the first kind of motion; “gravity” or rather heaviness,
i.e., the tendency of heavy bodies to fall, is cited as an example of
the second kind of motion. Aristotle's principle applies only to
the first kind of motion, James asserts, not the second. Things which
possess an incomplete form naturally—i.e., in and of themselves
without an external mover—tend to their completion and are
prevented from reaching it only by the presence of an external
obstacle. For instance, a heavy object naturally tends to move downward
and will do so unless it is hindered. Such, mutatis mutandis,
is the case of the soul and especially of the will: the will as an
incomplete actuality naturally tends to its completion; in that sense,
that is, formally but not efficiently, it is self-moved. The difference
between it and the heavy object is that whereas the object moves upon
the removal of an obstacle, the will requires the
presence of an object; it requires, in other words, the
intervention of the intellect in order to direct it to a particular
object. However, once again, the intellect's action is viewed by James as
being merely metaphorical, that is, extrinsic to the will's
proper operation.
6.2 Connection of the Virtues

Like Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas, James of Viterbo holds
that the moral virtues, considered as habits, i.e., virtuous
dispositions or acts, are connected. In other words, he believes that
one cannot have one of the virtues without having the others as well.
The virtues he has in mind are what he calls the “purely”
moral virtues, that is, courage, justice, and temperance, which he
distinguishes from prudence, which is a partly moral, partly
intellectual virtue. In his discussion in Quodl. II, q. 17
James begins by granting that the question is difficult and proceeds to
expound Aristotle's solution, which he will ultimately adopt. As
James sees it, Aristotle proves in Nicomachean Ethics VI the
connection of the purely moral virtues by showing their necessary
relation to prudence, and this is to show that just as moral virtue
cannot be had without prudence, prudence cannot be had without moral
virtue. The connection of the purely moral virtues follows from this:
they are necessarily connected because (1) each is connected to
prudence and (2) prudence is connected to the virtues (Quodl.
II, q. 17, p. 187, 436 – p. 188, 441).
6.3 Love of Self vs. Love of God


Since the time of Augustine, theologians had agreed that man needs the
gift of grace in order to love God more than himself, and that he
cannot do so by natural means. However, in the early thirteenth
century, theologians raised the question of whether, at least in his
pre-lapsarian state, man did not love God more than himself. That this
was in fact the case was the belief of Philip the Chancellor as well
as Thomas Aquinas. Other authors, such as Godfrey of Fontaines and
Giles of Rome, argued further that to deny man the natural capacity to
love God more than himself, while allowing this to happen as a result
of grace, was to imply that the operations of grace went counter to
the those of nature, which was contrary to the universally accepted
axiom that grace perfects nature and does not destroy it. By contrast,
James of Viterbo famously argues in Quodl. II, q. 2, against
the overwhelming consensus of theologians, that man naturally loves
himself more than God. He has two arguments to show this (see Osborne
1999 and 2005 for a detailed commentary). The first is based on the
principle that the mode of natural love is commensurate with the mode
of being and, hence, of the mode of being one. Now a thing is one with
itself by virtue of numerical identity, but it is one with something
else by virtue of a certain conformity. For instance Socrates is one
with himself by virtue of his being Socrates, but he is one with Plato
by virtue of the fact that both share the same form. But the being
something has by virtue of numerical identity is “greater”
than the being it has by reason of something it shares with
another. And given that the species of natural love follows the mode
of being, it follows that it is more perfect to love oneself than to
love another (Quodl. II, q. 20, p.  206, 148 – p. 149,
165). The second argument attempts to infer the desired thesis from
the universally accepted premise that “the love of charity
elevates nature” (Quodl. II, q. 20, p. 207,
166–67). This is true both of the love of desire and the love of
friendship. In the case of love of desire, grace elevates by acting on
the character of love: by natural love of desire we love God as the
universal good. Through grace God is loved as the beatifying
good. Regarding love of friendship, James explains that God's charity
can only elevate nature with respect to its “mode,” that
is, with respect to the object loved, by making God, not the self, the
object of love. In other words, James is telling us that if we are to
take seriously the claim that grace elevates nature, there is only one
way in which this can occur, namely by making God, not the self, the
object of greatest love, which implies that in his natural state man
loves himself more than God.


James' opposition to the consensus position on the issue of
the love of self vs. the love of God would not go unnoticed. In the
years following his death, such authors as Durand of
Saint-Pourçain and John of Naples criticized him vigorously and
attempted to refute his position (Jeschke 2009).
7. Political Thought


Although James touches briefly on political issues in
Quodl. I, q. 17 (see Côté, 2012), his most
extensive discussions occur in his celebrated De regimine
christiano (On Christian Government), written in 1302
during the bitter conflict pitting Boniface VIII against the king of
France Philip IV (the Fair). De regimine christiano is often
compared in aim and content with Giles of Rome's De ecclesiastica
potestate (On Ecclesiastical Power), which offers one of
the most extreme statements of pontifical supremacy in the thirteenth
century; indeed, in the words of
De regimine's editor, James' goal is “to
formulate a theory of papal monarchy that is every bit as imposing and
ambitious as that of [Giles]” (De regimine christiano:
xxxiv). However, as scholars have also recognized, James shows a
greater sensitivity to the distinction between nature and grace than
Giles (Arquillière 1926). 

De regimine christiano is divided into two parts. The
first, dealing with the theory of the Church, is of little
philosophical interest, save for James' enlisting of Aristotle to
show that all human communities, including the Church, are rooted in
the “natural inclination of mankind.” The second and
longest part is devoted to defining the nature and extent of
Christ's and the pope's power. One of James' most
characteristic doctrines is found in Book II, chapter 7, where he turns
to the question of whether temporal power must be
“instituted” by spiritual power, in other words, whether it
derives its legitimacy from the spiritual, or possesses a legitimacy of
its own. James states outright that spiritual power does institute
temporal power, but notes that there have been two views in this
regard. Some, e. g., the proponents of the so-called
“dualist” position such as John Quidort of Paris, hold that
the temporal power derives directly from God and thus in no way needs
to be instituted by the spiritual, while others, such as Giles of Rome
in De ecclesiastica potestate, contend that the temporal
derives wholly from the spiritual and is devoid of any legitimacy
whatsoever “unless it is united with spiritual power in the same
person or instituted by the spiritual power” (De regimine
christiano: 211).


James is dissatisfied with both positions and, as he so often does,
endeavors to find a “middle way” between them. His
solution is to say that the “being” of the temporal
power's institution comes both from God—by way of
man's natural inclination—in “a material and
incomplete sense,” and from the spiritual power by which it is
“perfected and formed.” This is a very clever solution. On
the one hand, by rooting the temporal power in man's natural
inclination, albeit in the imperfect sense just mentioned, James was
acknowledging the legitimacy of temporal rule independently of its
connection to the spiritual, thus “avoid[ing] the extreme and
implausible view of [Giles of Rome]” (Dyson 2009: xxix). On the
other hand, making the natural origins of temporal power merely the
incomplete matter of its being was a way of stressing its subordination
and inferiority to the spiritual order, in keeping with his papalist
convictions. Still, James' very choice of analogies to illustrate
the relationship between the spiritual and temporal realms showed that
his solution lay much closer to the theocratic position espoused by
Giles of Rome than his efforts to find a “middle way” would
have us believe. Thus, comparing the spiritual power's relation
to the temporal in terms of the relation of light to color, he explains
that although “color has something of the nature of light,
(…) it has such a feeble light that, unless there is present a
more excellent light by which it may be formed, not in its own nature
but in its power, it cannot move the vision” (De regimine
christiano: 211). In other words, James is telling us that
although temporal power does originate in man's natural
inclinations, it is ineffectual qua power unless it is
informed by the spiritual.