Josiah Royce (1855–1916) was the leading American proponent of absolute
idealism, the metaphysical view (also maintained by G. W. F. Hegel and
F. H. Bradley) that all aspects of reality, including those we
experience as disconnected or contradictory, are ultimately unified in
the thought of a single all-encompassing consciousness. Royce also made
original contributions in ethics, philosophy of community, philosophy
of religion and logic. His major works include The Religious Aspect
of Philosophy (1885), The World and the Individual
(1899–1901), The Philosophy of Loyalty (1908), and The
Problem of Christianity (1913). Royce's friendly but longstanding
dispute with William James, known as “The Battle of the Absolute,”
deeply influenced both philosophers' thought. In his later works, Royce
reconceived his metaphysics as an “absolute pragmatism” grounded in
semiotics. This view dispenses with the Absolute Mind of previous
idealism and instead characterizes reality as a universe of ideas or
signs which occur in a process of being interpreted by an infinite
community of minds. These minds, and the community they constitute, may
themselves be understood as signs. Royce's ethics, philosophy of
community, philosophy of religion, and logic reflect this metaphysical
position. 

 
1. Life


Royce was born November 20, 1855, in the remote mining town of Grass
Valley, California, to Josiah and Sarah Eleanor Bayliss Royce. Sarah
Royce was a devout Christian who headed a primary school in Grass
Valley. Royce's mother and older sisters directed his early education.
At age 11 he entered school in San Francisco. He graduated from the
newly established University of California in Oakland with a B. A.
degree in Classics in 1875. Royce then traveled to Germany to study
philosophy for one year, mastering the language and attending lectures
in Heidelberg, Leipzig, and Göttingen. On his return, he entered
the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, where he earned a
Ph. D. in 1878.


He taught composition and literature at the University of
California, Berkeley from 1878–1882. During this time he published
numerous philosophical articles, as well as his Primer of Logical
Analysis. He married Katherine Head in 1880. The couple had three
children (Christopher 1882; Edward 1886; Stephen 1889) and remained
married until Josiah's death. Not content in California, so far from
the intellectual life of the East Coast, Royce sought help in attaining
a new post from his acquaintances there. In his later ethical writings
Royce would stress the centrality of action intended to realize a sound
ideal that one has freely embraced. When offered the opportunity to
replace William James during a one year sabbatical at Harvard
University, Royce acted: he accepted the offer of half of James's
salary, resigned his California appointment altogether, and moved his
wife and newborn son across the continent in the summer of 1882.


In Cambridge, Royce commenced to work doggedly and in diverse areas.
In January 1883 he arrived at an insight that proved fundamental to his
philosophy: in order for our ordinary concepts of truth and error to be
meaningful, there must be an Absolute Knower, an actual infinite mind
that encompasses the totality of all actual truths and possible errors.
This insight formed the core of his first major philosophical
publication, The Religious Aspect of Philosophy, which
appeared in 1885. Royce received a permanent appointment as assistant
professor at Harvard in that same year. (During his three decades at
Harvard Royce would teach such notable students as T. S. Eliot, George
Santayana, and W. E. B. Du Bois.) He taught full time, gave many public
lectures, published his History of California in 1886, and a
novel in 1887. In 1888 he experienced a nervous breakdown, from which
he recovered after a sea voyage of some months' duration.


Royce was appointed Professor of the History of Philosophy at
Harvard in 1892 and served as Chair of the Department of Philosophy
from 1894–98. During these years Royce established himself as a leading
figure in American academic philosophy with his many reviews, lectures
and books, including The Spirit of Modern Philosophy (1892)
and The Conception of God (1895). In 1898 Royce attended a
series of lectures by Charles S. Peirce, “Reasoning and the Logic of
Things,” which significantly influenced his understanding of the
relation between logic and metaphysics.


Royce delivered the prestigious Gifford Lectures at the University
of Aberdeen in two series, the first in 1899 and the second the
following year. He regarded this as the opportunity to consolidate his
years of hard thought and study, so as to produce a definitive and
original statement of his metaphysics. The result was his two volume
opus The World and the Individual (1899–1901).


The Gifford Lectures marked a turning point in Royce's life and
thought. He had worked out his philosophical theories in minute detail.
His public reputation as a philosopher was sealed (Royce was elected
president of the American Psychological Association in 1902 and of the
American Philosophical Association in 1903). The year 1900 apparently
represented the culmination of his life's work. Royce was only 45 years
old, though, and this culmination proved also to be a starting point
for significant growth.


Reviews of The World and the Individual praised Royce's
philosophical acumen but raised significant objections to his
conclusions. Peirce, in particular, pointedly criticized Royce's use of
logic. Royce set out to reconsider his central arguments and, at the
same time, undertook an ambitious program of study in mathematical
logic. In his teaching and publications after 1900, two philosophical
strains came to the forefront. One was a growing reliance on formal
logical and mathematical concepts as the basis for his metaphysical
speculation (the first hint of this appears in the “Supplementary
Essay” to the first volume of The World and the Individual).
The second was an emphasis on philosophy as a means to understand the
concrete phenomena of life: the nature of human society, of religious
experience, of ethical action, of suffering and the problem of
evil.


After 1907 Royce's emphasis on the relevance of philosophy for
living took on a clear personal dimension. In that year Christopher,
who had come with Josiah and Katherine across the continent as a
newborn 25 years earlier, and who had graduated from Harvard at age 18,
showed symptoms of severe depression and psychotic delusions. In 1908
his parents committed him to a state mental hospital with little hope
that he would recover. In August of 1910 William James died, leaving
Royce without his closest friend, neighbor and colleague. In September
of the same year Christopher Royce died of typhoid fever, leaving
Josiah and Katherine without their firstborn child. Royce had earlier
stated his philosophy in a somewhat abstract and formal way, so that it
might help him discover metaphysical truth. Perhaps under the weight of
these later sorrows, Royce returned to his system seeking wisdom and
understanding in addition to truth.


However that may be, and though he by no means abandoned systematic
and theoretical philosophy, Royce began to write more about what today
would be called “practical” or “applied” philosophy. His major work on
ethics, The Philosophy of Loyalty, appeared in 1908. Later he
would address ethics in even more practical terms, not as a philosophy
but as an “art” of loyalty. He published a collection of essays under
the title Race Questions, Provincialism, and Other American
Problems in 1908; another collection, entitled William James
and Other Essays on the Philosophy of Life, appeared in 1911. Four
of the six essays in The Hope of the Great Community, written
in the last year of his life and published posthumously in 1916,
directly concerned global politics and the Great War.


Royce and James had always disagreed deeply concerning the proper
understanding of religious phenomena in human life. When James
delivered the Gifford Lectures in 1901 and 1902, he directed many
arguments against Royce's idealism, though he did not there target his
friend by name. James's lectures, published as The Varieties of
Religious Experience, were a popular and academic success . Royce
believed that James, who had never been regularly affiliated with an
established church or religious community, had in that work placed too
much emphasis on the extraordinary religious experiences of
extraordinary individuals. Royce's first education was into a strongly
Protestant world view, he always retained a respect for the conventions
of organized Christianity, and his writings exhibit a consistent and
deep familiarity with Scripture. He sought a philosophy of religion
that could help one understand and explain the phenomena of ordinary
religious faith as experienced by communities of ordinary people. There
was a deeper difference between them, as well, and it centered on a
metaphysical point. Royce's 1883 insight concerning the Absolute was at
bottom a religious insight. Contrary to the open-ended pluralism and
pragmatism of James, Royce was convinced that the object and source of
religious experience was an actual, infinite, and superhuman being.
Royce did not attempt to work out his religious philosophy until after
James's death, however. In 1911 Royce finally composed the lectures
that responded to James. These were published in 1912 as The
Sources of Religious Insight. It is here that the theoretical and
practical threads of his late thought began to come together. Royce
himself said of the Sources: “It contains the whole of me in a
brief compass” (Clendenning 1970, 570).


In early 1912, Royce suffered a stroke. During his recovery, he
continued to explore the philosophy of religion outlined in the
Sources, with an eye toward adapting these ideas specifically
to Christianity. He also returned to Peirce's writings, seeking the
solution to certain nagging problems in his own metaphysics. He found
in Peirce's semeiotic, or theory of signs, the technical tools he
needed to address both issues at once. The Problem of
Christianity presents, in place of the earlier Absolute Knower,
the concept of an infinite community of interpretation guided by a
shared spirit of truth-seeking. This Universal Community, which
constitutes reality, develops greater understanding over time through
its members' continual development of the meaning of signs. Within this
framework Royce endeavored to reconcile and explain many key Christian
doctrines and experiences.


Though Royce lived only a few years beyond this late philosophical
breakthrough, his last period brought the true culmination and
flowering of his life's work. Besides The Sources of Religious
Insight and The Problem of Christianity, notable
available works include The Hope of the Great Community, his
last Harvard seminar on Metaphysics (1915–16) and a series of lectures
given at the University of California at Berkeley. These lectures at
his alma mater were to have ended with a talk entitled “The Spirit of
the Community.” When the Great War broke out, Royce set this manuscript
aside and sketched a practical proposal to use the economic power of
insurance to mediate hostilities among nations and hence reduce the
attraction of war in the future. War and Insurance (1914) was
a daring political and economic proposal on behalf of the Universal
Community.


Royce died on September 14, 1916. Though scholars now recognize the
originality and strength of his last works, he was unable to respond to
critics or to press his case for the last crucial innovations to his
philosophy. His reputation was eclipsed as other philosophers used
Royce's earlier writings as a foil in developing their own doctrines of
pragmatism, realism, empiricism, and logical analysis. While scholars
of American intellectual life have always acknowledged the historical
importance of Royce's influence, recent years have brought a revival of
interest in Royce's thought on its own terms. Royce's work is proving
especially fruitful for theologians and philosophers interested in
speculative philosophy and metaphysics, practical and theoretical
ethics, philosophy of religion, and the philosophy of community.
2. Philosophy


Royce's early studies in Germany and at the Johns Hopkins University
concentrated on the development of post-Kantian idealism. His
philosophical work as a whole may be regarded as a committed idealist's
effort to understand the place of finite individuals in an infinite
universe, a theme that Royce captured most succinctly in his Gifford
Lectures title, “The World and the Individual.” This theme will serve
as a touchstone in the following survey of Royce's work in metaphysics
and epistemology, ethics and practical philosophy, religious
philosophy, and logic.
2.1 Metaphysics and Epistemology: Idealism and Interpretation


Royce announced the beginning of his professional career with a
novel defense of absolute idealism, “the argument from error.” Kant had
introduced the notion of a “transcendental argument” by asking what the
world must be like in order for knowledge of the world to be possible.
In The Religious Aspect of Philosophy Royce took the
experience of error — a particularly compelling aspect of the
phenomenon of knowing — as the starting point for his own
transcendental argument. According to the correspondence theory of
knowledge an idea (or judgment) is true if it correctly represents its
object; error obtains when an idea does not correctly represent its
object. It is indisputable that finite minds do sometimes entertain
erroneous ideas. Royce pointed out that in such a case the mind must
contain an (erroneous) idea and its (false) object, while
simultaneously intending, or “pointing toward,” the idea's true object.
If the mind is able to intend the true object then that object is
somehow available to the mind. How can it be that the true object is in
this way available to the mind, but not known? Consider what happens in
an ordinary example of error: if I think that my keys are on the table,
but later discover that they are in my pocket, I do not conclude that
my keys never existed as the object of my thought. Rather, I focus on
an idea that I had all along — that my keys do definitely exist
somewhere. The keys, their location, and all other facts about them are
the true object of an idea. At the moment when I discover that my keys
are not on the table, it becomes apparent that this true object was
only imperfectly available to me. The fact that such error does occur
indicated to Royce that the true object of any idea must exist, in a
fully determinate or absolute state, in some actual mind with which my
own mind is or may be connected. From the possibility of error, Royce
concluded that there is an Absolute Knower, a mind for which all
thoughts do correspond correctly and adequately to their true
objects.


One objection to the argument from error is that another type of
objective reality, some other sort of being external to one's finite
mind, might explain the possibility of error just as well. Royce took
up this objection in the first volume of The World and the
Individual, which was subtitled “The Four Historical Conceptions
of Being.” In this extended argument Royce critiqued what he regarded
as the main competing conceptions of objective reality so as to
strengthen his case for idealism. The first conception of being Royce
considered was realism, the view that the world exists
entirely independently of our thoughts or ideas about it. The world is
what it is, in short, without any reference to our thoughts. While this
view has great common-sense appeal and does provide for an objectively
existing sphere of being against which our ideas can apparently be
measured, Royce pointed out a fundamental problem. Realism, so defined,
introduces a radical metaphysical dualism. Between my ideas, and a
sphere of being that by definition exists completely independent of
those ideas, there is a gap that cannot be bridged. Realism posits an
objective realm that is utterly independent and hence, strictly
speaking, is utterly meaningless to thought. The theory of
mysticism, the second conception of being Royce considers,
likewise meets with problems. This view maintains that the real is the
ineffable immediate fact that is present to the mind. Mysticism avoids
the problem of an unbridgeable gap between idea and reality by
completely denying any such gap. The difficulty here is that one cannot
then distinguish between idea and reality. If reality is in the end the
immediate content of my idea, then error in my idea of reality would
simply appear to be impossible. The third conception of being, which
Royce identifies with Kantian critical rationalism, is
presented as a correct but incomplete view. Royce characterizes
critical rationalism as the view that “What is, gives warrant to ideas,
makes them true, and enables us to define determinate, or valid,
possible experiences” (Royce 1976 [1899–1901], 266). The real is that
which, in conforming to given universal structures or categories of
experience, is capable of validating certain ideas. The connection
between my ideas and an objectively existing sphere of being is clearly
established: my ideas and that sphere both conform to the same
categories of experience. The independence of objective reality, and
hence the possibility of error, is likewise preserved: I may form an
idea of a definite possible experience (e.g., that my keys are on the
table) but then discover that reality does not validate my idea (I can
in fact check the table surface and discover that my keys are not
there). The critical rationalist conception is inadequate, in Royce's
view, because it is restricted to describing the universal forms and
possibilities of experienced reality. It cannot in Royce's view account
for the concrete, actual individual facts that impose themselves in
experience. These are simply and mysteriously “given” in the critical
rationalist theory.


Royce endeavored to extend and complete critical rationalism in his
explanation of the “fourth conception of being.” To say that
an idea intends its object means more than that the idea may be
validated by a “possible experience.” An idea in this respect embodies
a purpose: that its meaning shall be fulfilled in experience. In
Royce's view this requires a world that is more than the abstract or
merely hypothetical content posited by the description of a possible
experience. What is needed is a definite, actual individual being that
exists “in an absolutely final form.” Royce thus agrees with critical
rationalism in saying that a true idea is one that may be fulfilled or
validated by a possible experience. He argues further, though, that
such a possible experience requires the existence of an actual being
(e.g., the particular set of keys in my pocket) that is in principle
capable of being experienced. It is this being, the actual individual,
and not the mere possible experience of it, that is the object of
knowledge and “the essential nature of Being” (Royce 1976 [1899–1901],
348). The “fourth conception of being” detailed in The World and
the Individual provides the metaphysical background for the
remainder of Royce's thought. It presents a view of the totality of
Being as an actual Infinite Individual that is itself timeless,
encompassing as it does all valid past, present, and future possible
experience of fact. All finite beings, such as ourselves, are but
fragments of this Absolute Mind or eternal truth.


In his last period Royce embraced what may be called a hermeneutic
epistemology. While he still maintained the central notion that a true
idea correctly represents its object, he arrived at a new understanding
of the nature of representation. Earlier, he had rather uncritically
taken “representation” to be a straightforward correspondence relation
in which the idea merely copied its object. Under the influence of
Peirce's theory of signs, however, Royce came to appreciate the
creative, synthetic, and selective aspects of representation. The new
semiotic conception is detailed in the chapter of The Problem of
Christianity entitled “Perception, Conception and Interpretation.”
Knowledge is not at bottom merely the accurate and complete perception
of an object, as empiricism would have it. Nor is it the accurate and
complete conception of an idea, as rationalism maintains. Knowledge is
instead a process of interpretation: the true idea selects, emphasizes,
and re-presents those aspects of the object that will be meaningfully
fulfilled in subsequent experience. Royce's “absolute pragmatism,” like
other versions of pragmatism, thus offers an alternative to rationalism
and empiricism.


This revised understanding of knowledge as interpretation prompted,
if it did not exactly require, a corresponding change in Royce's notion
of the Infinite Mind whose reality was established in the argument from
error. As long as knowledge is regarded as possessing perceptions or
conceptions that correspond to objects, the Infinite Mind is naturally
envisioned as something that “contains” the totality of all perceptions
or conceptions. If knowledge is instead regarded as a process of
interpretation, though, the Infinite Mind may be regarded as the mind
that carries this process forward. Royce had long sought an explicitly
non-Hegelian account of Absolute Mind. In The Problem of
Christianity he was finally able to replace the old terminology of
the Absolute with a description of an infinite Community of
Interpretation. This community is the totality of all those minds
capable of representing aspects of Being to one another or to their
future selves. Royce summarized the metaphysical implications of this
new view by saying “the real world is the Community of
Interpretation… If the interpretation is a reality, and if it
truly interprets the whole of reality, then the community reaches its
goal [i.e., a complete representation of Being], and the real world
includes its own interpreter” (Royce 2001 [1913], 339). In this late
period Royce remained firmly committed to idealism. He renounced the
notion that the Absolute is complete at any actual time, though, and
instead preferred to think of the possible totality of all truth simply
as the eternal.
2.2 Logic


Royce maintained an interest in logic throughout his career. His
first published book was a Primer of Logical Analysis for the Use
of Composition Students, written for his students in California in
1881. A long piece from 1899, entitled “Supplementary Essay: The One,
the Many, and the Infinite” and appended to the first volume of The
World and the Individual, marks his first effort to support his
philosophical theses using ideas explicitly drawn from modern logic and
mathematics. His own proposal for a system of formal logic was
published as “The Relation of the Principles of Logic to the
Foundations of Geometry” in 1905; this work was extended in “The
Principles of Logic” in 1914 (reprinted in Robinson 1951, 379–441 and
310–378, respectively). Among his last writings were a series of
encyclopedia articles on logical topics: “Axiom,” “Error and Truth,”
“Mind,” “Negation” and “Order” (reprinted in Robinson 1951). Besides
these and other published works on logic, thousands of pages of his
unpublished and largely unexplored logical writings are among the Royce
Papers at the Harvard University Archives.


It is clear that after The World and the Individual Royce
was ever more deeply interested in logic and mathematics. Precisely how
and to what extent his philosophical work was based upon logical and
mathematical concepts, or how his logical writings might clarify and
extend ideas developed in his other works, will require a much more
comprehensive examination and analysis of the logical writings than has
yet been undertaken. At this point, scholars interested in Royce's
logic may refer to the selection of original works published in
Robinson (1951) and to chapters 9 through 11 of Kucklick (1985). Such a
line of research appears promising, if only because of the assessment
by C. I. Lewis that Royce's system of formal logic, conceived as a
“general science of order,” may be preferable, for some uses, to that
developed by Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead in
Principia Mathematica. (Lewis 1916, 419).
2.3 Ethics and Practical Philosophy


That Royce's metaphysical solution to the problem of error was of
broad relevance for the rest of his philosophy is clear: “The existence
of error…must be explained as due to the same conditions as
those which make possible finite life, evil, individuality, and
conflict in general” (Robinson 123). Error is possible, according to
Royce, only if there is an infinite being for which all intended
objects could be realized. This Being (whether conceived as Absolute
Mind or the infinite Community of Interpretation) also makes individual
human life comprehensible. Royce's considerable attention to
speculative metaphysics is complemented by his concern for the
practical implications of that metaphysics. The infinite manifests
itself in the realm of individual beings bound within the constraints
of time, space, and finitude. Ethics and religion have their basis in
this relation of the individual to the infinite real world, a relation
Royce characterized in terms of loyalty.
2.3.1 The Philosophy of Loyalty


Near the end of The Philosophy of Loyalty Royce wrote:
Human life taken merely as it flows, viewed merely as it
passes by in time and is gone, is indeed a lost river of experience
that plunges down the mountains of youth and sinks in the deserts of
age. Its significance comes solely through its relations to the air and
the ocean and the great deeps of universal experience. For by such poor
figures I may, in passing, symbolize that really rational relation of
our personal experience to universal conscious
experience….(Royce 1995 [1908], 179–80)


Royce's ethics is rooted in his analysis of the conditions necessary
for an individual life to be meaningful. It is not enough that one's
actions merely conform to the strictures of conventional morality
— a trained animal might well fulfill such minimal conditions of
morality. To lead a morally significant life, one's actions must
express a self-consciously asserted will. They must contribute toward
realizing a plan of life, a plan that is itself unified by some freely
chosen aim. Such an aim and its corresponding plan of life could not
easily be created by an individual out of the chaos of conflicting
personal desires and impulses that we all encounter. Rather, such aims
and plans are found already largely formed in social experience: we
come to consciousness in a world that proffers countless well-defined
causes and programs for their accomplishment. These programs extend
through time and require the contributions of many individuals for
their advancement. When one judges a cause to be worthwhile and freely
embraces such a program, several momentous things happen. The
individual's will is focused and defined in terms of the shared cause.
The individual becomes allied with a community of others who are also
committed to the same cause. Finally, a morally significant commitment
to the cause and to the community develops. This commitment is what
Royce calls “loyalty.” The moral life may be understood in terms of the
multiple loyalties that a person exhibits.


Just as the truth value of an idea is a matter of whether its
intended object is fulfilled in reality, the moral value of actions is
a matter of whether they are loyal, whether they tend to fulfill the
community's intended aim. Loyalty is a necessary condition for moral
validity; defined narrowly, as Royce prefers, loyalty may even be a
sufficient condition for moral validity. Royce's narrow definition of
loyalty, of “true loyalty,” is intended to rule out loyalty to morally
evil causes and the communities that serve them. Royce observes that
the highest moral achievements throughout history have involved
individuals' loyalty to ideals that promote the formation and expansion
of communities of loyalty. Many of the worst deeds have also involved a
high degree of loyalty, but this loyalty is directed exclusively to a
particular group and is expressed in the destruction of the conditions
for others' loyal actions, of those other persons, and even of one's
own community and cause. Royce generalized the difference between true
loyalty and vicious or “predatory” loyalty as follows:
a cause is good, not only for me, but for mankind, in so
far as it is essentially a loyalty to loyalty, that is, an aid
and a furtherance of loyalty in my fellows. It is an evil cause in so
far as, despite the loyalty that it arouses in me, it is destructive of
loyalty in the world of my fellows. (Royce 1995 [1908],
56)


While every community hopes for the accomplishment of its central
cause, and sees that cause's fulfillment as its highest achievement,
Royce places particularly high emphasis on the phenomenon of loyalty to
a lost cause. A lost cause is not in Royce's view a hopeless cause, but
rather one that cannot be fulfilled within the actual lifetime of the
community or any of its members. Many lost causes are rightly lost, of
course: Royce would have recognized the Confederate States' defense of
slavery during the U.S. Civil War as such a case. Besides such
misguided causes, though, there are a number of legitimate causes that
are, by this definition, “lost” simply in virtue of their scope and
magnitude. Such causes are not hopeless, however. It is precisely these
causes that establish ideals capable of evoking our highest hope and
moral commitment.


Chief among these are the universal causes of the full attainment of
truth, the complete determination of the nature of reality through
inquiry and interpretation, and of the establishment of universal
loyalty to loyalty itself. In practice, the formula of “loyalty to
loyalty” demands that one's moral and intellectual sphere become ever
broader and remain critical at all levels. All the communities we
actually know, those we inhabit and identify with, are finite and to
some degree “predatory” in Royce's sense. This is clearly true of small
social cliques, isolated intellectual communities, parochial religious
groups, self-interested unions and corporations, local political
movements, and other such groups. Roycean loyalty requires one to
scrutinze the aims and actions of such communities and to work to
reform their disloyal aspects. The philosophy of loyalty calls us first
of all, then, to create and embrace more cosmopolitan and inclusionary
communities. It should be clear that this is only the first important
step of an infinite process aimed at realizing the ideal of universal
loyalty. Any actual community, whether it be the United Nations or a
bickering family, will in fact fall short of perfect loyalty. When it
does so, each must answer to the same critical scrutiny and calls for
reform. There is no expectation that these high ideals of perfect
loyalty, truth and reality will ever be fully realized. These “lost
causes” are indispensible, in Royce's view, as the source of absolute
norms for any community and its members.


Royce maintained that the logic of volition, pursued far enough,
compels us to embrace precisely these lost causes as our own. In the
course of his extended debate with James over the adequacy of
pragmatism as a doctrine, Royce came to accept many of James's
principles. One, inspired by James's well-known essay “The Will to
Believe,” is that any philosophical view is at bottom an expression of
individual volition. Given the fact of our existence in the world, we
must first decide how we are to approach that world, and then develop
our philosophical theories accordingly. A second principle that Royce
adopted is the pragmatist view of truth: truth is the property
possessed by those ideas that succeed in the long run. Royce's main
disagreements with pragmatism concern the way these two principles are
typically understood. Royce maintains that although there are several
possible attitudes of the will that one might adopt toward the world
(including Schopenhauer's “will to live” and its opposite, resignation)
only one — loyalty to the ideal of an ultimate truth — is
correct. The other possible attitudes of the will are self-refuting. He
accordingly refers to his own position as “Absolute Voluntarism” (Royce
2001 [1913], 349). Royce offers a similar argument concerning the
pragmatist notion of truth (Royce 2001 [1913], 279). Explicitly
adopting one of Peirce's concepts, Royce argues that to define truth
using any conception of “the long run” — short of the ideal end
of inquiry — is self-refuting. Given the apparent finality of
this argument (which is, again, a variation of the Argument from Error)
Royce calls his position “Absolute Pragmatism.”


Royce's philosophy of loyalty resembles existentialism in certain
respects. Notable among these are the notions that we come to moral
awareness in a world of already established aims and social projects,
that moral responsibility requires a self-conscious and deliberate
individual choice to embrace particular causes, and that the highest
forms of ethical conduct involve dedication and effort in service of a
cause that offers no promise of final success. Royce differs from later
existentialists such as Camus and Sartre, however, in several important
respects. Royce would not accept their notion that human efforts are
finally absurd, unfolding against a backdrop of a meaningless and
indifferent universe. On the contrary, Royce maintains that the
concepts of ultimate meaning and reality are powerful and legitimate
forces in our lives. With existentialism, Royce recognizes the very
real chasms that separate one person's feelings, thoughts, and will
from another: the experience of another may be inscrutable. At the same
time, though, he insists that we acknowledge the equally important fact
that in ordinary social life minds frequently do work in concert.
Groups of people often are unified in feeling, thought, and will by
something that transcends any of the individuals present (Royce 2001
[1913], 239).
2.3.2 Theory of Community


Royce was one of the first American philosophers to recognize the
important challenge of Nietzsche's moral vision, which celebrates those
individuals who seek to exercise their autonomous will to a “socially
idealized” power. Such heroic individualism, also associated with Walt
Whitman, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and William James, proves unsatisfactory
in Royce's view (Royce 1995 [1908], 41). Their inspiring ethical
visions are doomed to ineffectiveness precisely because of their
extreme individualism. “There is only one way to be an ethical
individual. That is to choose your cause, and then to serve it, as the
Samurai his feudal chief, as the ideal knight of romantic story his
lady, — in the spirit of all the loyal” (Royce 1995 [1908], 47).
These particular examples are meant to illustrate the essentially
social character of loyalty in general: “My life means nothing, either
theoretically or practically, unless I am a member of a community”
(Royce 2001 [1913], 357).


One of the more striking features of Royce's philosophy is its
emphasis on communities as being logically prior to individuals. As we
have seen, Royce considers the notions of truth and knowledge
unintelligible for the individual unless we posit an ultimate knower of
objective truth, the infinite community of minds. The notions of
personal identity and purpose are likewise unintelligible unless we
posit a community of persons that defines causes and establishes social
roles for those individuals to embrace. The concept of community is
thus central both to Royce's ethics and his metaphysics. Not just any
association or collection of individuals is a community. Community can
only exist where individual members are in communication with one
another so that there is, to some extent and in some relevant respect,
a congruence of feeling, thought, and will among them. It is also
necessary to consider the temporal dimensions of community. “A
community constituted by the fact that each of its members accepts as a
part of his own individual life and self the same past events
that each of his fellow-members accepts, may be called a community
of memory.” Similarly, “A community constituted by the fact that
each of its members accepts, as part of his own individual life and
self, the same expected future events that each of his fellows
accepts, may be called a community of expectation
or…a community of hope” (PC 248). These common past and
future events, which all members hold as identical parts of their own
lives, are the basis of their loyalty to the community.


As discussed in connection with Royce's ethical theory, some
communities are defined by true loyalty, or adherence to a cause that
harmonizes with the universal ideal of “loyalty to loyalty.” He refers
to such communities as “genuine communities” or “communities of grace.”
Other communities are defined by a vicious or predatory loyalty. These
degenerate “natural communities” tend toward the destruction of others'
causes and possibilities of loyalty. Finally, beyond the actual
communities that we directly encounter in life there is the ideal
“Beloved Community” of all those who would be fully dedicated to the
cause of loyalty, truth and reality itself.


Royce stresses that the sharing of individuals' feelings, thoughts,
and wills that occurs in any community (including the Beloved
Community) should not be taken to imply a mystical blurring or
annihilation of personal identities. Individuals remain individuals,
but in forming a community they attain to a kind of second-order life
that extends beyond any of their individual lives. Where a number of
individuals' loyalty to a cause is coordinated in community over time,
Royce speaks non-figuratively of a super-human personality at work: a
genuine community is united by a guiding or “interpreting spirit.” The
interpreting spirit may on occasion be embodied by a single person such
as a leader or other exemplar, but this is not always the case.
2.4 Philosophy of Religion


Though his writings contain a great deal of insight that is relevant
for a strictly naturalistic philosophy, religious concerns figure
prominently from Royce's first major publication, The Religious
Aspect of Philosophy, to his last two, The Sources of
Religious Insight and The Problem of Christianity. As has
been indicated, the main focus of Royce's early work was metaphysical.
In The World and the Individual he plainly identified the
object of his inquiry as “the Individual of Individuals, namely the
Absolute, or God himself” (Royce 1899–1901, 1:40). Critics of Royce's
early works admired his metaphysical argumentation but found his
conception of God wanting. Peirce observed that the Absolute Mind bore
little resemblance to the God that people seek in churches — it
is not the kind of being anyone would worship. James objected that if
all our errors and sorrows are in fact reconciled in the Absolute, then
finite persons would seem to be exonerated from ultimate responsibility
for their actions: they might as well enjoy a lifelong “moral holiday.”
With The Philosophy of Loyalty Royce began to devote more
attention to the practical questions of ethics and the philosophy of
community. In his last works he drew upon the notion of loyalty to
explain the nature of religious experience in human communities.


Royce states that “the central and essential postulate” of every
religion is that “man needs to be saved” (Royce 2001 [1912], 8–9).
Salvation is necessary because of a combination of two factors. The
first is “the idea that there is some aim or end of human life which is
more important than all other aims.” The second is that “man as he now
is, or as he naturally is, is in great danger of so missing this
highest aim as to render his whole life a senseless failure” (Royce
2001 [1912], 12). Salvation comes in the form of guidance toward
understanding and accomplishing the highest aim of life, so far as we
are able. Given the limitations and fallibility of the human
perspective, Royce maintains that this guidance must come from some
super-human or divine source. Religion is the sphere of life in which
finite human beings are able to get into touch with this divine source
of wisdom and guidance.


In The Sources of Religious Insight Royce considers and
rejects several common conceptions of religion before making his case
for a religion of loyalty. His discussion of natural social
life as a source of religious insight may be read as a critique of
the “Social Gospel” movement. His consideration of reason is
notable not for its familiar observation that reason is inadequate to
religious knowledge, but for his pragmatist critique of the adequacy of
mere reason even for scientific knowledge. Finally, his careful
consideration and rejection of individualism in religion is a
direct critique of the Jamesean view of religious experience. Royce
employs his familiar dialectical method to make his case for religious
insight through participation in the loyal community, the “invisible
church” guided by a divine spirit and devoted to the highest ideals of
goodness. In the Sources Royce offers a view of religion as
common experience. It is “common” both in the sense that it does not
primarily consist of the kind of extraordinary experiences that James
emphasized, and in the sense that it is a fundamentally social rather
than individual experience of reality.
2.4.1 Christianity


While the Sources concerns the nature of religious
experience in general, The Problem of Christianity focuses on
the question “In what sense, if any, can the modern man consistently
be, in creed, a Christian?” (Royce 2001 [1913], 62). Royce's answer
actually rejects the sort of static concepts and beliefs usually
implied by devotion to specific creeds, including those identified with
Christianity. While his view pivots on the Christian notion of divine
incarnation, it is not the incarnation of God in Jesus but rather the
incarnation of the Spirit in the living church that Royce emphasizes:
“the Church, rather than the person of the founder, ought to be viewed
as the central idea of Christianity” (Royce 2001 [1913], 43). The
Christian church's primary importance, for Royce, is as a paradigm of
community. He regards the Pauline church as the best exemplar of a
graced community: at its best, the church strives to embody the guiding
Interpreter Spirit, so as to become a Universal Community of
Interpretation “whose life comprises and unifies all the social
varieties and all the social communities which…we know to be
real” (Royce 2001 [1913], 340). Doctrines and creeds may change; the
particular institutions that identify themselves as churches may or may
not actually be communities of grace. What matters in the end is the
process of interpretation — the process of communicating and
understanding one another in actual, imperfect, finite communities of
grace bound together by loyalty and striving toward the ultimate and
ideal Beloved Community.


Royce is critical of many historical churches because they have in
his view lost sight of the spirit that ought to guide them. At the same
time he would identify grace at work in many communities that are not
self-consciously religious. He had great respect for non-Christian
religions, paying especially careful attention to Buddhism (Royce took
the trouble to learn Sanskrit, and The Problem of Christianity
includes a very sympathetic presentation of Buddhism). In the end,
however, Royce was a philosopher who worked within the intellectual
context of Western Christianity. He maintains that only the Christian
model of the loyal community successfully combines the true spirit of
universal interpretation with an appreciation of the “infinite worth”
of the individual as a unique member of the ideal Beloved Community,
the Kingdom of Heaven (Royce 2001 [1913], 193).
2.4.2 The Problem of Evil


The problem of evil is a persistent theme throughout Royce's
writings. He struggled with tragedy in his personal life and sought to
understand it better through philosophy. As an idealist he also had to
struggle with evil as a problem of metaphysics. Idealism maintains that
all deeds and events are ultimately taken up and reconciled in a final
perspective. This seems to suggest that the evil, sorrow, and pain that
run through human life are illusory — or what seems even less
comprehensible, that our experience of suffering is somehow good, that
it is “all for the best.” While some idealists have accepted these
apparent implications of their metaphysics, Royce maintained that evil
is a real fact of the world. He insisted that we confront evil
as evil and not regard it as a means to attain a preordained
but inscrutable Divine purpose. He sought to understand evil
philosophically. In seeking that understanding he was not content to
explain it away or to salve its effects by appealing to a clever
theodicy.


Royce embraced a theistic process metaphysics that recognizes evil
as a real force and suffering as an irreducible fact of experience. In
“The Problem of Job” Royce addressed the traditional problem of evil:
“Grant Job's own presupposition that God is a being other than this
world, that he is its external creator and ruler, and then all
solutions fail. God is either then cruel or helpless, as regards all
finite ill of the sort that Job endures.” If we consider that God is
not a separate being, then “When you suffer, your sufferings are
God's sufferings, not his external work, not his external penalty,
not the fruit of his neglect, but identically his own personal woe. In
you God himself suffers, precisely as you do, and has all your concern
in overcoming this grief.” Grief is not “a physical means to an
external end,” but rather “a logically necessary and eternal
constituent of the divine life” (McDermott 1969, 843). Though Royce
believed that events are collectively tending toward an ultimate
reconciliation in the eternal perspective of the Beloved Community,
they are not erased even in that ideal perspective. The events of life
(joyful and sorrowful alike) persist, both as experiences of the
individuals who undergo them and also as God's own experiences.


Royce does not seek to explain away or lessen the reality of evil:
it is in his view a brute fact of being, an inevitable result of the
world's existence in time. Given the fact of evil, the most important
question concerns how we finite beings ought to respond to it. His
answer is that we should adopt the attitude of loyalty to goodness and
truth, which as real forces in the world are the metaphysical opposite
of evil. The loyal member of a genuine community confronts evil and
wills to overcome it through the very fact of loyalty to its opposite.
Evil can never be eradicated — this is another way of saying that
loyalty to loyalty is a lost cause. Though the success of this
high cause lies in the unreachable future, the meaning of our
response is manifest in our present lives.


Royce's powerful and original explanation of the doctrine of
atonement in The Problem of Christianity details how the loyal
community can best respond to human evil. The highest kind of
transgression in an ethics of loyalty is treason, or the willful
betrayal of one's own cause and the community of people who serve it.
The traitor is one who has freely embraced a cause and joined with a
community of grace in service of that cause, but who then culpably
commits some act that undermines the cause and the community. Such a
betrayal is but one step away from moral suicide: it threatens to
destroy the network of purposes and concrete social relationships that
define the traitor's self (Royce 2001 [1913], 162). Atonement occurs
when the traitor and the community are reconciled, when they are both
saved from the evil deed through some act of the will.


Royce finds traditional Christian accounts of atonement
unsatisfactory. They do not adequately explain how both the traitor and
the community are reconciled and saved in the human sphere. Much less
do they explain the mysterious details of how atonement reconciles the
sinner with God. The traitor who recognizes the magnitude of what has
been lost through the act of betrayal lives in a state that Royce calls
“the hell of the irrevocable” (Royce 2001 [1913], 162). Royce seeks an
explanation of atonement that acknowledges the irrevocable nature of a
deed that has been done, and which changes everything for the sinner
and the community that has been harmed. “Penal satisfaction” theories
of atonement simply do not speak to the sinner's situation: to be told
that an angry God demands repayment or retribution for the betrayal,
and that this price has been paid (by the violent death of Jesus
Christ, or by any other sacrifice) does not repair the sinner's own
devastated moral universe. The sinner “is dealing, not with the
‘angry God’ of a well-known theological tradition, but with
himself” (Royce 2001 [1913], 170–71). Royce seeks a theory that first
makes sense of the immediate human aspect of atonement. If one can be
found, it may then be considered theologically. A theory of “penal
satisfaction,” which claims to answer theological questions but remains
meaningless or mysterious in human terms, is simply unsatisfactory.


The concrete human evil of treason is that the traitor's loyalty to
the cause, and with it the moral relations that bound the community
together, have been broken and cannot be restored to their previous
state. “Moral theories” of atonement account for change in the
traitor's person but fail to explain how the “wounded or shattered
community” can be repaired (Royce 2001 [1913], 175). Such theories, in
Royce's account, explain that in contemplating Christ's willing
sacrifice of his own life for the sake of the human community, the
sinner experiences deep repentance and develops a new capacity for love
of the betrayed community. The sinner's soul is purified and made
better (Royce 2001 [1913], 172). Such a process may bring the sinner to
realize the hellish magnitude of irrevocable treason. Royce points out,
though, that such a process by itself does nothing to reconcile the
sinner to the community or to repair that community. Such
reconciliation and healing requires something more than a change in the
individual's heart.


This brings Royce to consider theories of atonement that center upon
the community's act of forgiveness. Forgiveness, as an act of the
community and not the sinner, is clearly essential to atonement.
Moreover, it involves a recognition of human frailty — not just
the moral frailty of the sinner in question, but that of all humans.
Forgiveness involves a recognition that anyone might commit such an
act, that the cause of perfect loyalty is a lost cause. Even when it
can occur, though, forgiveness does not restore the community to the
innocent state of harmony and “unscarred love” that existed before the
betrayal (Royce 2001 [1913], 177–78). Atonement moves the community and
the traitor beyond the irrevocable deed of betrayal. This cannot be
done by an act of forgiveness that returns the community and its
relations to the way things were before. “The way things were” is
irrevocably gone.


In its human aspect atonement occurs through an interpretive act
that creates new relationships among the members, including the
traitor, together with a new understanding and fresh embracing of their
unifying cause. The act of atonement “can only be accomplished by the
community, or on behalf of the community, through some steadfastly
loyal servant who acts, so to speak, as the incarnation of the spirit
of the community itself” (Royce 2001 [1913], 180). This person acts as
a mediating third party between the traitor and the betrayed community.
Things are not made the same as they were before through atonement, but
are in an important respect made better — precisely because of
the unique circumstances created by the original act of treason.
Through the atoning act genuine community is restored and all the
individuals involved may emerge as wiser, more resolved servants of
their common cause. In this sense, Royce writes, “The world, as
transformed by this creative deed, is better than it would have been
had all else remained the same, but had that deed of treason not been
done at all” (Royce 2001 [1913], 180).


Royce indicates that this insight about the human aspect of
atonement provides the basis for a theological understanding of the
atonement involved in Christ's teachings and death. He does not himself
articulate the details of a theological doctrine of atonement, however.
He states “the central postulate” of “the highest form of human
spirituality” as follows: “No baseness or cruelty of treason so
deep or so tragic shall enter our human world, but that loyal love
shall be able in due time to oppose to just that deed of treason its
fitting deed of atonement” (Royce 2001 [1913], 186). This
postulate cannot be proved true, of course, but human communities can
assert it and act upon it as if it were true. Christian doctrine, as
Royce presents it, takes this same postulate as “a report concerning
the supernatural works of Christ” (Royce 2001 [1913], 186). In The
Problem of Christianity Royce had set out to answer the question
“In what sense, if any, can the modern man consistently be, in creed, a
Christian?” One form of his answer, based on this theory of atonement,
is that communities can and should act upon the faith that, through the
spirit of genuine community, atonement is always possible as a response
to human sin and evil.