It is common in epistemology to distinguish among three kinds of
knowledge. There's the kind of knowledge you have when it
is truly said of you that you know how to do something—say,
ride a bicycle. There's the kind of knowledge you have when
it is truly said of you that you know a person—say, your best
friend. And there's the kind of knowledge you have when it
is truly said of you that you know that some fact is true—say,
that the Red Sox won the 2004 World Series. Here we will be
concerned with the first and last of these kinds. The first is
usually called “knowledge-how” and the last is usually
called “knowledge-that” or “propositional
knowledge.”


Debates about knowledge-how revolve around two main issues.  First,
there are debates about the degree to which knowledge-how is
independent of knowledge-that. Is to know how to do something just to
know lots of facts (of the right sort)? To exercise knowledge-how,
must an act be preceded by some implicit or explicit consideration of
a fact about how to do it? Since Gilbert Ryle's seminal (1949)
presentation of the issue, the majority opinion in academic philosophy
is that there is a considerable degree of independence. Knowledge-how
and knowledge-that are distinct kinds; to know how to do something is
not just to know the right facts about how to do it, and to exercise
knowledge-how you need not first implicitly or explicitly consider a
fact about how to do it. The view that knowledge-how and
knowledge-that are independent in this way is usually, following Ryle,
called anti-intellectualism. The view that they are
dependent—that to know how to do something is just to know the
right sort of fact or that to exercise know-how requires a prior
implicit or explicit consideration of a proposition—is called
intellectualism. There is also a more radical form of
anti-intellectualism according to which to know that something is the
case is to have a certain kind of knowledge-how.  I'll use the label
“moderate anti-intellectualism” for the less radical
version.


Second, there are debates about exactly what knowledge-how consists
in. The intellectualist can provide one answer—knowledge-how
consists in the knowledge that certain propositions are true. If not
that, what? The main anti-intellectualist answers—sometimes not
clearly enough distinguished—are that knowledge-how consists in
some sort of ability and that knowledge-how consists in some sort of
disposition. In this entry I will outline the main views about what
knowledge-how might consist in, discuss how these views point us
either toward intellectualism or anti-intellectualism, and present the
main difficulties that have been offered against each account.
 
1. Related Distinctions


The distinction between knowledge-how and knowledge-that overlaps
three other distinctions: the ancient distinction between
technê and episteme, the distinction between
practical and theoretical knowledge, and the distinction between
procedural and declarative knowledge.
1.1 Epistêmê and Technê


The ancient Greek philosophers had one
word, epistêmê, that is usually translated as
knowledge and another, technê, often translated as
craft or art. This distinction, it might be thought, maps roughly onto
the distinction between knowledge-that and knowledge-how,
respectively. The relationship between epistêmê
and technê is rather fraught, though, so whether to
classify, say, Plato and Aristotle as intellectualists or
anti-intellectualists is not
easy. Because epistêmê and technê
are discussed extensively elsewhere in this encyclopedia, the
discussion is kept brief.


According to Plato, to live a good life we ultimately need knowledge
of the forms of virtue. That
knowledge—epistêmê—seems to be
knowledge-that.  As A. E. Taylor puts the point, for Plato,

 virtue, moral
excellence, is identical with knowledge… vice, bad moral
conduct is therefore in all cases ignorance, intellectual error.
(1933, 141)


 So, it might be thought that, for Plato,
technê is ultimately a matter of
epistêmê. But John Gould (1955) argues, to
the contrary, that this natural interpretation of Plato is only
seductive because Plato was not as clear on the distinction as he
should have been. Ultimately, argues Gould, for Plato, knowledge
(epistêmê) is knowing how. To know the good
is to know how to be moral. This, thinks Gould, makes sense of
how Socrates can coherently say that virtue is knowledge. For
this would be odd if knowledge were factual insight into the nature of
right and wrong. It's much less odd if knowledge is an
ability to do certain sorts of things. Gregory Vlastos (1957),
however, argues that there is an unavoidable thread of irreducible
knowledge-that in Plato. For one thing, Socratic questioning aims
to make men better and by correcting false beliefs (or eliminating
them). According to Vlastos, Socrates came to believe a
paradoxical statement (virtue is knowledge), because he overlooked the
distinction between knowing-how and knowing-that, not because he
thought one was a kind of the other.


It is less tempting to deny that Aristotle had a sense of the
distinction. In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle defines
epistêmê as (as it is usually translated)
scientific knowledge, while technê is translated
occasionally as skill, art, or craft, or even “general know-how,
the possession of which enables a person to produce a certain
product” (see p. 315 of the Ostwald translation of
the Nicomachean Ethics cited in the Bibliography). The
distinction may not perfectly map onto the distinction between
knowledge-how and knowledge-that, especially if Aristotle is taken at
his word that what distinguishes epistêmê is what
it is knowledge
of: what “cannot be otherwise than it is”
(Nic. Eth. 1139b.20). However, the distinction seems good enough to
count as a precursor to the knowledge-that/knowledge-how distinction,
especially when we consider that Aristotle takes technê
to be “identical with the characteristic of producing under the
guidance of true reason” (Nic. Eth. 1140a.10). Such a conception of
technê as skill guided by norms or rules anticipates
Ryle's identity of know-how with a disposition whose
“exercises are observances of rules or canons or the application
of criteria” (Ryle 1949, 47). It also anticipates Katherine
Hawley's (2003) “direct” analysis of knowing-how
according to which know-how is a matter of successful action plus
warrant.


That Aristotle makes a distinction among kinds of knowledge that maps
onto the distinction between knowledge-how and knowledge-that is not
to say that Aristotle is an anti-intellectualist. Hawley, for example,
draws a related distinction to Aristotle's but does not
“prejudge whether one form of knowledge is a sub-type of the
other” (Hawley 2003, 20). It's the fact that Aristotle seems to
regard technê and epistêmê as
distinct fundamental categories that seems to be prima
facie evidence that Aristotle is an early anti-intellectualist.
However, that conclusion is complicated by the fact that there are
things we would normally call objects of scientific knowledge that are
hard to classify in Aristotle's scheme. How, for example, should we
categorize our knowledge that penicillin cures bacterial infection?
It's not obviously a skill, though clearly the knowledge is going to
be relevant to a doctor's skill in healing the sick. But it's also not
obviously
epistêmê in Aristotle's strict sense: scientific
knowledge of what cannot be otherwise than it is—what is
necessarily so.
1.2 Practical and Theoretical Knowledge


One intuitive way to distinguish between practical and theoretical
knowledge is to distinguish between the objects of what's known. Some
propositions, for example, concern practical matters—what road
to take to Tulsa, for example, or the correct way to ride a
bicycle. Other propositions concern purely theoretical matters: what
the square root of 16 is, or what will happen if the minimum wage is
lowered. Obviously, many theoretical propositions have bearing on
practical propositions: what will happen if the minimum wage is
lowered has consequences for the best way to decrease
unemployment. But there's still a distinction between propositions
that are about what to do or how to do something and propositions that
are not about these things. Knowledge of the first is practical
knowledge and knowledge of the second is theoretical. Even practical
knowledge in this sense can be knowledge-that and can fail to be
knowledge-how.


The same goes with a second intuitive way we might distinguish
theoretical from practical knowledge—not in terms of what the
knowledge is about, but in terms of how the knowledge was
learned. We might think that someone who reads a book about how
to run a restaurant and someone who learns how to run a restaurant by
working in a restaurant have very different kinds of knowledge about
how to run a restaurant. One learned by doing, and one learned by
being told, and perhaps this difference is reflected in the kind of
knowledge each has. The first has merely theoretical knowledge of
how to run a restaurant, while the second has practical knowledge of
how to run a restaurant. (The distinction between ways of
learning might map roughly onto the distinction in psychology between
“top-down” and “bottom up”, or implicit,
learning. See, e.g., Sun and Zhang 2004.)


Learning in these two very different ways is bound to result in
different things known. Those who champion learning by experience
will likely point to all the little bits of knowledge that get left out
by mere book-learning, and perhaps all the falsehoods that come to be
believed when one limits one's learning to what one picks up in
books. It's unlikely that a champion of learning through
experience would claim that both learners learn the same things, but
bear different epistemic relations to those things. So,
it's not clear how much these first two intuitive ways of
dividing practical from theoretical knowledge differ.


 A
third way to distinguish theoretical from practical knowledge is
provided by Ephraim Glick (2011). Glick suggests that his way of
distinguishing the two allows the distinction between practical and
theoretical knowledge to be philosophically more important than the
distinction between knowledge-how and knowledge-that, and perhaps to be
the distinction that debates about knowledge-how are focusing on in any
case. As he points out, we attribute lots of obviously
propositional knowledge by using expressions like, “S knows
how” and even “S knows how to”: 

someone who is
told that he should jog three times a week to get in shape may, in a
sense, know how to get in shape…, but prima facie it should be
an open question whether the sort of know-how here ought to be lumped
into the same category as the cases that have motivated
anti-Intellectualism, cases like the knowing-how-to possessed by the
typical swimmer or by the chess grandmaster. (Glick 2011, 427) 


What we
might do instead is just lump together all the seemingly unified cases
of interest to the anti-intellectualist—the “cases of a
self-taught skier who is unable to provide a word of helpful
instruction, a skillful bicyclist whose sincere claims about how to
balance and turn are all false,” etc. (Glick 2011, 427)—and
distinguish them from a set of seemingly unified distinct cases:
“the aspiring golfer who has absorbed instructional videos and
books about golfing but has never held a club”, etc. (Glick 2011, 428).
The latter kinds of cases, it seems, though we can plausibly speak of
their subjects as knowing “how to” do something, in at
least some sense, involve knowledge that is more of kind with
knowledge, say, “about the ways in which historical figures
died” (Glick 2011, 428) than the knowledge present in the first kind of
case.


If we call the knowledge present in the first kind of case
“practical” and the knowledge present in the second kind of
case “theoretical”, then we can see that the debate between
intellectualism and anti-intellectualism about knowledge-how is
ultimately a debate about practical and theoretical knowledge, rather
than a debate about when we should say that some subject “knows
how” to do something.
1.3 Procedural and Declarative Knowledge


The third distinction—between procedural and declarative
knowledge—has its origin in discussions of artificial
intelligence and is often invoked in cognitive psychology.
Roughly, procedural knowledge is knowledge that is manifested in the
use of a skill, whereas declarative knowledge is explicit knowledge of
a fact. But the literature is conflicted, even sometimes within
the same article. For example, Pawel Lewicki, et al. (1987, 523)
initially equate procedural knowledge with cognitive skills, but on the
same page equate procedural knowledge, not with the skills themselves,
but with “processing rules”. What is more, while
equating procedural knowledge with skills would seem to require that
procedural knowledge is non-propositional, some discussions of
procedural knowledge make it explicitly propositional. For
example, Bruce Kogut and Udo Zander say that

 Procedural
knowledge consists of statements that describe a process, such
as the method by which inventory is minimized. (1992, 387, emphasis
added)



It would be a mistake to simply define procedural knowledge either as
statements or as non-propositional knowledge or even as non-declarative
knowledge. That's because it's supposed to be a
matter of empirical discovery whether procedural knowledge is
propositional or not; more to the point, according to
anti-intellectualists, that procedural knowledge is not declarative
knowledge is something that has been empirically established (see, e.g.,
Devitt 2011 and Wallis 2008). Better, then, to define
procedural knowledge as the knowledge that is manifested in the
performance of a skill. Declarative knowledge, on the other hand,
is explicit—consciously representable. But this only maps
onto the knowledge-how/knowledge-that distinction if knowledge-that is
also always consciously representable. As we shall see, below,
this assumption has been questioned.

2. Moderate Anti-Intellectualism


Moderate anti-intellectualism is the view that knowledge-how and
knowledge-that are distinct kinds. Moderate anti-intellectualism
has been thought (by, e.g., David Lewis 1990 and Laurence Nemirow
1990) to undercut the so-called “knowledge-argument” in
the philosophy of mind (see Jackson 1986 for a classic formulation),
though Yuri Cath (2009) argues that similar worries about the argument
survive even on some prominent intellectualist views. For a nice
survey of other consequences thought to follow from the various
positions in the knowledge-how debate, see Bengson and Moffett (2012b,
44–54).
2.1 The Ability Account of Knowledge-How


What is it to know how to ride a bicycle? One natural answer
might be this: to know how to ride a bicycle is to have a certain
ability—the ability to ride a bicycle. Suppose I am
assigning tasks for our start-up pizza business. I ask you,
“do you know how to ride a bike?” and, suppose, you say
that you do. I might then assign you the task of biking the pizza
to the relevant address. If, after the pizza fails to be
delivered, you say, “I don't have the ability to ride a
bicycle” it seems I can rightly challenge you: “You said
you knew how to ride a bike!” This is evidence that knowing
how to do something entails the ability to do it. Likewise, it
seems that if you have the ability to do something, it follows that you
know how to do it. If, when I ask you if you know how to ride a
bike, you say, “I'm afraid not,” I can rightly be
annoyed if later that day I see you tooling around the streets on a
bicycle. I can rightly say, “I thought you said you
didn't know how to ride!” It would be an odd answer
indeed if you responded, “That's right, I don't know
how. I'm just able to do so.”


This “ability account” of know-how is often attributed to
Ryle (see, e.g., Stanley and Williamson 2001, 416), though see Hornsby
(2012, 82) for convincing dissent. Whether Ryle endorsed the
account, it has become influential and, thus, subject to
counterexamples. The first kind of counterexample is directed at
the claim that knowing how to do something entails having the ability
to do it. Imagine cases in which some expert in a given task
becomes physically incapacitated and so loses the ability to perform
that task—Stanley and Williamson's (2001, 416) pianist who
has lost her arms (a malady that also afflicts Paul Snowdon's
(2003, 8) expert omelette maker) or Carl Ginet's (1975, 8)
violinist with damaged fingers. Intuitively, these subjects can
retain knowledge how to perform their tasks—play the piano or
violin, or make an omelette. They just no longer have the ability
to exercise their knowledge. (One option, employed by Alva
Noë (2005), is to distinguish between having an ability to do
something, and being able to do something. According to Noë,
in the relevant examples, the subjects have the ability, but
aren't able to perform the relevant actions. See Bengson,
Moffett, and Wright (2009, 391–92) for a response to Noë.)


There are also counterexamples to the other
direction—counterexamples to the claim that if you have an
ability to do something, then you know how to do it. We can construct
cases in which subjects seem to have the ability to perform some act
even though they don't know how to do it. Some of these cases will
involve lucky performances that aren't easily repeated. For example,
David Carr points out that 

a novitiate
trampolinist, for example, might at his first attempt succeed in
performing a difficult somersault, which although for an expert would
be an exercise of knowing how, is in his case, merely the result of
luck or chance. Since the novice actually performed the feat one
can hardly deny that he was able to do it (in the sense of possessing
the physical power) but one should, I think, deny that he knew how to
perform it. (1981, 53)

 
  Torin Alter (2001) questions this latter
assumption, arguing that it is too quickly assumed in such cases that
the subjects don't know how to do the relevant activity, but there is
empirical data that the folk—and Ryle himself (1949,
40)—agree with Carr about cases like this: the relevant
subjects have the ability but lack the know-how (see, again, Bengson,
Moffett, and Wright (2009, 391–92)). 


At least one difference between knowing how to do something and being
able to do it has to do with the range of possible worlds in which one
succeeds in doing it if one tries. In normal circumstances knowing how
to do something requires that trying to do it will lead to success
across some specified range of possible worlds. As Katherine Hawley
points out, “To say that Sarah knows how to drive is to
attribute success to Sarah under some but not all counterfactual
circumstances” (Hawley 2003, 20). To say that Sarah is able to
drive is to say something different. The difference has to do with
which possible worlds you must succeed in driving in to count as able
to drive vs. knowing how to drive. As Stanley (2011, esp. 126) argues,
following Angelika Kratzer's (1977) discussion of modals, it's
typically the case that to be able to drive, you must succeed in
driving (when you try) in some possible worlds very close to the
actual world, whereas to know how to ride a bike, you need only
succeed in riding a bike in worlds close to worlds somewhat similar to
the actual world. For example, if you lack legs, you can know how to
ride a bike if you will succeed in riding a bike in worlds in which
you have legs. But you still won't be able to ride a bike, because in
worlds very much like the actual world—in worlds, that is, in
which you lack legs—you will fail to ride a bike.


Which features of the actual world are relevant, and so which and how
many worlds you must succeed in doing something in order to be able to
do that thing are highly contextual. This, perhaps, is how
Stanley might deal with examples like Carr's novitiate
trampolinist, were he sympathetic to Carr's conclusion about the
case. When we consider Carr's novitiate trampolinist in the
context of asking whether the trampolinist was able to perform the
difficult somersault, we are interested in whether the trampolinist
would succeed in some possible worlds much like the actual world.
In more restrictive contexts, we will be interested in whether the
trampolinist would succeed in all possible worlds much like the actual
world. Such a context is provided by Ephraim Glick  when he
considers a case in which

 the novice trampolinist's new
coach asks him which tricks he is already able to do. The correct
answer would not be a massive list including every trick he could pull
off given some incredible stroke of luck. (Glick 2012, 129)

2.2 The Dispositional Account of Knowledge-How


Ryle himself did not emphasize abilities but, rather, an array of
dispositions and capacities. Might we instead say that knowing
how to do something entails a disposition to do it? This simple
variant is obviously unsatisfactory, because there are many things we
might know how to do but have a disposition to avoid. Bengson and
Moffett  note that 

It is important that
anti-intellectualism requires the corresponding ability; one
need not be an anti-intellectualist to allow that some ability
(e.g., the ability to breathe or think or apply concepts) might be
required for know-how (2007, 33),


 but it seems that knowing how to do
something need not involve any simple entailment to a disposition or
ability to do that very thing. Such is suggested by Weatherson
(2006, Other Internet Resources), who cites Ryle's (1949) claim that



You exercise your knowledge of how to tie a clove-hitch not only in
acts of tying clove-hitches and in correcting your mistakes, but also
in imagining tying them correctly, in instructing pupils, in
criticizing the incorrect or clumsy movements and applauding the
correct movements that they make, in inferring from a faulty result to
the error which produced it, in predicting the outcomes of observed
lapses, and so on indefinitely. (Ryle 1949 55)



If exercises of knowledge how to tie a clove-hitch can involve these
disparate activities, then we can well construe knowledge how to tie a
clove-hitch as a disposition to engage in these activities in the
appropriate circumstances. And this fits well with Ryle's
further claim that



Knowing how, then, is a disposition, but not a single-track
disposition like a reflex or a habit. Its exercises are
observances of rules or canons or the applications of criteria…
Further, its exercises can be overt or covert, deeds performed or
deeds imagined, words spoken aloud or words heard in one's head,
pictures painted on canvas or pictures in the mind's eye.
Or they can be amalgamations of the two. (1949, 46 ff.)



For Ryle, then, to know how to do something is to be disposed to
behave in certain ways, and it's going to be very hard to specify
in advance what those ways are. It will depend on the situation
and on what the goals of the knower are. Still, we can say at
least this: to know how to do something is to be disposed to behave in
accord with various rules. For example, according to Ryle,

the ability to give by rote the correct solutions of
multiplication problems differs in certain important respects from the
ability to solve them by calculating. (1949, 42) 


Ryle is
inclined only to call the exercise of the latter ability an exercise of
knowledge-how.


Do dispositional analyses avoid the counterexamples to the ability
account? Does a case in which a master omelette chef has lost his
arms while retaining the knowledge how to make omelettes count as a
counterexample to the dispositional account? Not obviously.
For the master omelette chef lacks the ability to make omelettes, but
still has other dispositions appropriate to one who knows how to make
omelettes. Likewise, a novitiate trampolinist who doesn't
know how to execute an extremely difficult jump will—though
able in some minimal sense to execute it—lack the seemingly
crucial dispositions associated with one who knows how to execute such
a jump. Unless there are good arguments for other accounts of
knowledge-how, the dispositional account remains a contender.
3. Intellectualism


Are there, then, other accounts of knowledge-how that might replace
either the ability or dispositional accounts? The standard
alternative is what Ryle dubs “intellectualism”, because it
makes knowledge how to do something a matter of having knowledge of
some fact. In its most simple form, intellectualism says that to
know how to ride a bike or speak a language or play a game is just to
know a certain set of propositions (perhaps in a certain way).
For example, to know how to play chess is just to know the rules of
chess. And to exercise one's knowledge how to do any of
these things is just for these bits of propositional knowledge to
govern the actions one performs. (For a helpful discussion of the
distinction between what knowledge-how is and what it is to exercise
knowledge-how, and how the distinction manifests itself in both
intellectualist and anti-intellectualist views, see Bengson and
Moffett 2012b.)
3.1 Prima Facie-Evidence for and Against Intellectualism


With respect to some instances of knowledge-how, the suggestion that
to know how to do something is just to know that something is the case
might look absurd on its face. If to know how to do something is
just to know a certain set of propositions, it might seem appropriate
to require that the knower be able to say what those propositions
are. For example, if to know how to ride a bicycle is to know a
certain set of propositions about how to move, then one way to test the
truth of this account might be to see if people who know how to ride
bicycles know the relevant propositions. It does not, however,
seem that such a result is in the offing. I, though I know how to
ride a bike, can at most tell you things like, “I ride a bike by
pedaling, by keeping balanced on the seat, by steering left if I want
to turn left,” etc. But plenty of folks who don't
know how to ride a bike can say as much. What I can do, that
non-knowers can't, is do the things in that list. I can
balance, and it seems that this ability is what distinguishes the
knowers-how from the non-knowers-how. Of course, there might be
further propositions I know that the non-knowers don't.
Ultimately, though, it seems I will run out of answers when asked what
those propositions are. This point is pressed by Stephen Schiffer
(2002, 200 ff.). What is more, I (if I'm like most people)
will tend to give incorrect answers when asked to report how I go about
doing various tasks that I clearly know how to do. Summing up the
relevant results from cognitive psychology, Charles Wallis 
says



(1) Cognizers often perform tasks without any conscious experiences
of remembering that they know how to perform the task, perceiving that
they are performing the task, identifying the task they are performing,
or knowing that they can perform the task. (2) Cognizers often
cannot articulate the information or indicate the complexes of
dispositions which would constitute the content of their supposed
beliefs when explicitly questioned about such information and
dispositions. (3) Cognizers often exhibit no conscious awareness
of environmental factors or information shown by analysis to have
importantly influenced their responses, and hence exhibit no
basis for supposing that they believe that the information is relevant
to their performance. (4) Cognizers often offer demonstrably
false or highly implausible accounts of the reasoning underlying their
performance inconsistent with any beliefs regarding how they actually
perform the task, and hence cannot be supposed to have true beliefs
regarding how they, in fact, perform a task. (2008, 140)



A related charge is levelled by Michael Devitt (2011), Marcus Adams
(2009), and, again, Wallis (2008). Their worry is not so much
that the intellectualist requires subjects who know how to ride a bike
to be able to explain in detail how they do it, but rather that the
intellectualist requires knowledge how to ride a bike to be in
principle explicitly linguistically represented when, in fact, the bulk
of evidence from cognitive psychology has it that this is not the
case. Intellectualism requires knowledge-that to identified with
declarative knowledge, and knowledge-how with procedural
knowledge. Because cognitive psychologists have convincing
evidence that declarative and procedural knowledge are distinct,
knowledge-that and knowledge-how are distinct.


The natural way for the intellectualist to resist this argument is by
rejecting the claim that all knowledge-that is declarative—to
reject the claim that when one knows a proposition about how to, say,
ride a bike, then one is in a position to offer up that proposition
when one is asked how one rides a bike. As Jerry Fodor says, in
support of this move, “Certain of the anti-intellectualist
arguments fail to go through because they confuse knowing that with
being able to explain how” (1968, 634). Fodor, however, only
allows for inexpressible knowledge of this sort when that knowledge is
tacit. It is not clear whether tacit knowledge is itself a species of
the ordinary kind of propositional knowledge that intellectualists
think know-how is a species of. Still, the appeal to tacit knowledge
would allow knowledge how to ride a bike to be constituted by an
epistemic relation to a proposition, even if that epistemic relation
isn't the full-fledged knowledge-that relation that might be desired
by the most committed intellectualists.


Jason Stanley  points out that the anti-intellectualist demand
that propositional knowledge be verbalizable is not intuitively
motivated. On the contrary, intuitively, a “punch-drunk
boxer” who can at best demonstratively refer to his re-enactment
of the way of boxing against southpaws, and says, “This is the
way I fight against a southpaw” intuitively knows that this is
the way he fights against southpaws (Stanley 2011, 161). Of course, this
knowledge has an essential demonstrative or indexical component.
But the same goes for much other propositional knowledge, for example
the knowledge we express by saying, “This is to the left of
that,” “This is the tool for the job,” and
“That is going to be trouble.” Nor does epistemology
demand of us that knowledge-that be verbalizable (see Stanley 2011,
163).


Still, the argument from the cognitive psychology literature is not
simply that, when one knows how to ride a bike, one cannot verbalize
any attendant propositional knowledge. It's not like a situation in
which we feel like there's some knowledge there and are having
trouble—like the punch-drunk boxer—putting it into
words. As Wallis points out, we actively deny the facts about the ways
we do things. This seems like prima facie evidence against
intellectualism. On the other hand, there do seem to be cases in which
you come to know how to do something precisely by consulting a manual
and learning some propositions (see, e.g., Snowdon (2003, 12), Bengson
and Moffett (2012b, 8), and Katzoff (1984, 65ff)). Both Bengson &
Moffett and Katzoff go on to suggest (more or less explicitly), this
evidence is only prima facie.  Nonetheless, prima
facie evidence for intellectualism is still evidence for
intellectualism.


 A
different sort of argument against intellectualism is provided by David
Carr. Though Carr, as we saw earlier, is no friend of the ability
account of knowing how, he doesn't think that to know how to do
something is to know that some proposition is true. That's
because when you know how to do something, you have an attitude that
essentially takes as its object an act. But when you know that
something is the case, you have an attitude that essentially takes as
its object a proposition. An attitude that takes one kind of
thing essentially as its object cannot be the same kind of attitude as
one that takes another kind of things essentially as its object.
So, the attitudes of knowing-how and knowing-that cannot be the
same.


One might worry that Carr's case cannot be successful, because it
might be that in taking an intentional action as its object, an
attitude might very well ipso facto take a proposition as its object,
for example if the proposition is partly constituted by the intentional
action in question. Glick, for example, thinks it's
relatively easy to construe any attitude as a relation to a
proposition. As he says,


Take, for instance, abilities. For any action of φing, we could
map S's ability to φ onto the proposition that S
φs, and instead of saying that S is able to φ, we
could say that S ‘ables that he φs’. If we
had this linguistic convention, we might note that
‘abling’ is a relation to a proposition, but of course, by
hypothesis, we would be talking about the same thing we actually talk
about with ability attributions. (2011, 413)



Furthermore, even if knowledge-how is an epistemic relation to a
proposition—even a robust, interesting relation to a
proposition—that need not be the knowledge-relation. We have
already seen that Fodor seems to endorse the view that knowledge-how
involves standing in the tacit-knowledge-relation to the appropriate
proposition. We might also think that knowledge-how can involve merely
justified belief in the relevant proposition, as long as knowledge-how
can be Gettiered (as Poston (2009) argues).  Or knowledge-how might
require only a relation of believing-truly that the relevant
propositions are true (Zardini forthcoming). Or knowledge-how might
involve a relationship of “seeming” to the relevant
propositions: you know how to ride a bike only if there is a
way, w, such that w seems to be a way for you to
ride a bike (Cath 2012, 133). All these views would be inconsistent
with intellectualism, though they would still be views that made
knowledge-how a matter of being in a robust relation to a
proposition.


In any case, Carr's is not the most influential argument
against intellectualism. That, of course, is due to Ryle, where
the contemporary discussion of knowledge-how starts.
3.2 Ryle's Regress


Ryle's discussions of knowledge-how appear both in the second
chapter of his The Concept of Mind and in his (1946)
self-contained article, “Knowing How and Knowing That”
(reprinted in 1971). In these works he claims to be offering what
is a single core argument, expressed in different ways. But it
seems rather that he is offering a number of independent
arguments. One argument is that it is possible to have lots of
knowledge-that without possessing any knowledge-how. In an
oft-quoted passage, Ryle says that an expert chess play might impart
“to his stupid opponent so many rules, tactical maxims,
‘wrinkles’, etc. that he could think of no more to tell
him” (1971 [1946], 215) but that, despite knowing all these propositions,
the stupid chess player might not know how to play chess well: “a
fool might have all that knowledge without knowing how to
perform” (1971 [1946], 217 ff.).


But the central argument in both texts is a regress argument, and the
fundamental statement of the argument is as follows:



The crucial objection to the intellectualist legend is this.
The consideration of propositions is itself an operation the execution
of which can be more or less intelligent, more or less stupid.
But if, for any operation to be intelligently executed, a prior
theoretical operation had first to be performed and performed
intelligently, it would be a logical impossibility for anyone ever to
break into the circle. (Ryle 1949, 30)



How is the argument supposed to go? If all exercise of knowledge-how
is preceded by a prior consideration of a proposition, the prior
consideration is an act. Therefore, it had better be something we know
how to do. But the act will only count as an exercise of
knowledge-how—will only count as an intelligent act—if our
consideration of the proposition is something we know how to do and
isn't itself non-intelligent. If our consideration of the proposition
is somehow accidental or related in a haphazard way to the performance
of the act, then the act won't count as intelligent or an exercise of
knowledge-how. Therefore, the consideration of the act had itself
better be an exercise of knowledge-how and so had better—if
intellectualism is right—be preceded by another consideration of
a proposition.  The regress is generated and, once generated, seems
vicious.


But as a number of authors, most significantly Carl Ginet (1975),
have pointed out (see also Stanley & Williamson (2001) and Stanley
(2011)), exercises of knowledge-how can be manifestations of knowing
that something is the case even if they are not preceded by mental acts
of contemplation. As Ginet says,



…all that [Ryle] actually brings out, as far as I can see, is
that the exercise (or manifestation) of one's knowledge of how to
do a certain sort of thing need not, and often does not, involve any
separate mental operation of considering propositions and inferring
from them instructions to oneself. But the same thing is as
clearly true of one's manifestations of knowledge that
certain propositions are true, especially one's knowledge of
truths that answer questions of the form ‘How can
one…?’ or ‘How should one…?” I
exercise (or manifest) my knowledge that one can get the door
open by turning the knob and pushing it (as well as my knowledge
that there is a door there) by performing that operation quite
automatically as I leave the room; and I may do this, of course,
without formulating (in my mind or out loud) that proposition or any
other relevant proposition. (Ginet 1975, 7)



Of course, Ryle's passage does not explicitly mention
knowledge-how. Some scholars (e.g., Sax 2010 and Rosefeldt 2004) think
that Ryle should only be taken as attempting to show the minimal
conclusion that Ginet grants: that not all exercises of knowledge-how
are preceded by intelligent consideration of propositions. However,
taken to show the anti-intellectualism that most scholars attribute to
Ryle, many authors have taken Ginet's worry to be an insuperable
difficulty for the regress argument. The idea is that,
while consideration of a proposition is an act, and therefore
can fail to be performed intelligently—can fail to be
manifestation of know-how—manifestation of a bit of
knowledge-that is not an act.  Therefore, the regress ends. On the
other hand, if Ryle insists that manifestation of knowledge-that
requires a prior act, it seems there is no principled reason why
manifestations of knowledge-how wouldn't be subject to the same
requirement. Therefore, it looks like any regress generated for the
intellectualist is generated for Ryle as well (see Stanley (2011,
esp. 16–17), though see Fantl (2012) for a possible principled
difference between the regress generated for Ryle and the regress
generated for the intellectualist).
3.3 Unifying Know-How and Know-Wh Contexts


Is there anything more positive to be said in favor of the view that
what you know when you know how to do something is a proposition?
The most influential recent argument is that of Stanley and Williamson
(2001), much of which is inspired by Vendler (1972)—though
Stanley (2011) promises to be similarly important. What impresses
Stanley and Williamson (and Vendler) is the symmetry between
ascriptions of knowledge-how and ascriptions involving other
knowledge-wh expressions, like knowledge-where, knowledge-who, and
knowledge-why. For instance, just as we will say

(1) Leslie knows how to ride a bicycle,


we'll also say

(2) Leslie knows where her bicycle is,
(3) Leslie knows who rode her bicycle last, and
(4) Leslie knows why her bicycle was stolen.



One strategy is to give separate accounts of all of these locutions
and the states referred to. Knowledge-how is a different kind of
thing from knowledge-that, which is a different kind of thing from
knowledge-where, etc. But this disunified account seems
unmotivated at best, and also out of keeping with the fact that

it is a stable cross-linguistic fact that most of the sentences
[above] are translated with the same verb used in translations of
sentences of the form ‘X knows that p’. (Stanley 2011,
36)


 Says Stanley, 

The fact that we do not employ different
words for these notions suggests that they are at the very least
intimately related concepts. (2011, 37)


Ian Rumfitt (2003)
argues that the linguistic facts are overstated and that many
languages, e.g., French and Russian, contain distinct terms and
constructions for the kind of knowledge-how that Ryle was interested in
(though see Stanley (2011, 138–41) for a more detailed discussion of the
linguistic facts that also serves as a reply to Rumfitt).


An approach that unifies the various knowledge-wh constructions and
states would seem to have an admirable theoretical simplicity.
What is more, there is something approaching consensus in the
linguistics literature that 2, 3, and 4 should all receive treatment in
terms of knowledge-that. Relying heavily on Lauri
Karttunen's (1977) treatment, Stanley and Williamson argue that
we should construe statements like 2, 3, and 4 as follows:

(2*) Leslie knows, of some place p, that p is the place her bicycle is
located.
(3*) Leslie knows, of some person x, that x rode her bicycle.
(4*) Leslie knows, of some reason r, that r is the reason her bicycle
was stolen.


It seems only natural, then, to give a similar account of
know-how:

(1*) Leslie knows, of some way, w, that w is a way to ride a
bicycle.



This is, roughly, Stanley and Williamson's account.
Stanley (2011, esp Ch. 2) complicates the account by drawing from
Groenendijk and Stokhof (1982, 1997), but
the important lesson is still that the semantics of knowledge-wh
locutions are unified and, furthermore, pick out states that form a
metaphysical kind (Stanley 2011, 143 ff.).


Ryle himself occasionally uses knowledge-how locutions in the way
Stanley endorses. The question, Ryle might say, is not whether there
are some “knowledge-how” attributions that actually
attribute knowledge-that. The question is whether the kinds of
knowledge-how he's interested in are reducible to knowledge-that. In
the same vein, recall the earlier discussion of Glick's remarks on
practical and theoretical knowledge.  It should be clear even to
anti-intellectualists that there are readings of knowledge-how
ascriptions that obviously attribute propositional knowledge to the
relevant subjects. But if w is just a way for some person or
other to ride a bicycle, Leslie might know that fact, but still not
know how to ride a bicycle in the important sense in which Ryle is
interested if w isn't a way for Leslie to ride. Second, even
if w is a way for Leslie to ride a bicycle, Leslie might not
know that fact in the right way. Suppose that Leslie knows that one
way for her to ride a bicycle is to balance on the seat while
pedaling. Still, that dry description of the physical motions required
won't suffice to know how to ride a bicycle. Ryle is interested in a
sense of knowledge-how that doesn't allow for these kinds of gaps. It
looks like propositional knowledge does. Can intellectualists overcome
these difficulties?


Propositions can be presented to us under different modes. I
might know, under one mode of presentation, that Jeremy Fantl is
bald. But if I don't know that Jeremy Fantl is me, then it
seems that the same fact I know under one mode of presentation I
don't know under a different mode. I don't know that
I am bald. Likewise, if I know that I am bald, but don't
know that I am Jeremy Fantl. The knowledge I have will change its
type when I know the fact under one mode of presentation rather than
another. I will have first-personal knowledge when I know the
fact under the mode of presentation “I am bald”. I
will have third-personal knowledge when I know the fact under the mode
of presentation, “Jeremy Fantl is bald.” But neither
type of knowledge is any less propositional for the fact that I only
have it when the fact is presented to me in a certain way.


The same can be said, it seems, for Leslie's knowledge that w is
a way for her to ride a bicycle. That fact can be presented in
the dry way described above, or it can be presented to her in a more
demonstrative way—that this-thing-that-you-are-doing-right-now
is a way for you to ride a bicycle. This latter way of presenting
the fact is one way to instantiate what Stanley and Williamson call a
“practical mode of presentation”. According to
Stanley and Williamson, when Leslie knows that w is a way for her to
ride a bike under the practical mode, then Leslie knows how to ride a
bike. (See Koethe (2002, 327) for a worry about practical modes of
presentation—that it smuggles in an antecedent notion of
knowledge-how—and see Fantl (2009, 461) for a response.)


Stanley (2011) replaces the locution “practical mode of
presentation” with the locution “practical way of
thinking”. Though he thinks it is necessary for handling
other worries (2011, 130), he does not think it is necessary for handling the
primary worry it is designed to resolve in Stanley and Williamson
(2001). Recall that the worry is that the intellectualist needs a
way to say that Leslie can know that some way, w, is a way she could
ride a bicycle, without knowing how to ride a bicycle. Stanley
and Williamson explain the possibility by pointing out that Leslie can
know that w is a way she could ride a bicycle under a non-practical
mode of presentation. But Stanley (2011) instead appeals to the
different modal parameters used to interpret the modals in the two
sentences. To simplify Stanley's example (2011, 125), the
idea is this:

When a trainer in a gym says, “You can lift 200 pounds,” it
might mean very different things depending on various features of the
context. If you have walked into the gym for the first time and
are clearly out of shape, the trainer might mean that, with the proper
training, 200 pounds is something to aspire to. In modal terms,
in some possible worlds close to the one in which you have the proper
training, you lift 200 pounds. Alternatively, if you have just
lifted 200 pounds and the trainer says, “You can lift 200
pounds,” the trainer is saying that in some possible worlds close
to the actual world, you lift 200 pounds. Which possible worlds
matter for the truth of the sentence is a highly contextual matter,
though it's usually not difficult to figure out what the speaker
has in mind.


A similar approach can work for sentences like, “Leslie knows
that w is a way she could ride a bike” and “Leslie knows how to
ride a bike.” When the first is true and second is false,
we can assume that, by uttering, “Leslie knows that w is a way
she could ride a bike”, the speaker means that Leslie knows that
in some possible worlds close to the world in which, for example,
Leslie practices doing w properly for a long enough time, Leslie rides
a bike by doing w. However, when the speaker then says,
“Leslie does not know how to ride a bike,” she is saying
that there is no world (or not sufficiently many worlds) close to the
actual world in which Leslie rides a bike (see Stanley 2011, 126).


Bengson and Moffett (2012a) offer us a third way to explain the
difference between Leslie's third-person knowledge that some
heretofore untried way to ride a bike is a way for her to ride a bike,
and the knowledge she has after she learns how to ride a bike.
Bengson and Moffett argue that for Leslie to know how to ride a bike it
is both necessary and sufficient that Leslie has “familiarity and
acquaintance with a way of riding a bike” (what they call
“objectual knowledge” of that way) while “grasping a
correct and complete conception” of that way (2012, 187). To
satisfy these conditions is to have certain kind of understanding about
that way of riding a bike. The failure of this understanding need
not be traceable to the absence of an ability because it's
possible to have full understanding of a way of riding a bike without
being able to perform it. Rather, failures of understanding will
be traceable to various misguided propositional attitudes. In
that sense, the account is an intellectualist one. But it is not
intellectualist in the full sense we're discussing here:
Leslie's knowing how to ride a bike is not simply for her to know
a proposition. It's for her to understand a way.
4. Radical Anti-intellectualism


Making knowledge-how a kind of knowledge-that is not the only way to
unify knowledge-how and knowledge-that. An alternative is to make
knowledge-that a kind of knowledge-how. This view—radical
anti-intellectualism—has had fewer adherents than either
intellectualism or moderate anti-intellectualism. Notable radical
anti-intellectualists include Jane Roland (1958), John Hartland-Swann
(1956), and Stephen Hetherington (2006). Ryle himself at some
more extreme moments seems to offer arguments that point to a radical
anti-intellectualism: “knowledge-how is a concept logically prior
to the concept of knowledge-that” (1971 [1946], 215).


One advantage that radical anti-intellectualism might have over its
more moderate cousin is that it allows knowledge to be unified.
For example, radical anti-intellectualism is consistent with the claim
that all knowledge-wh locutions should be analyzed in terms of
knowledge-that, just as Stanley and Williamson, Vendler, and others
want to do. To know where to ride a bike is to know, of some
place p, that p is a place to ride a bike. But radical
anti-intellectualists will then insist that this bit of knowledge-that
be then accounted for in terms of irreducible knowledge-how.


Hetherington, in fact, argues that the radical
anti-intellectualist's account of knowledge allows for
greater theoretical unity than the
intellectualist's. That's because the intellectualist
has to make knowledge-that essentially a relation to a
proposition. Most traditional epistemologists think that the
relation in question is belief. Knowledge-that, then, is
identical to a kind of belief (a true, justified, unGettiered
one). But Hetherington points out that there are a variety of
ways to manifest knowledge-that, and belief is just one of them:

True acceptance is another, as is one's solving a
theoretical problem to which p is the correct answer.
There is also one's answering correctly—to oneself or
others—when asked—by oneself or others—whether
it is true that p. Arguably, there is even the
phenomenon of performing actions which would not be appropriate unless
p were true. (2006, 76) 


All of these seem to be
manifestations of a single common trait, feature, or state. But
the commonality can't be the true belief, because the true belief
is itself just a manifestation of the same thing that manifests
answering correctly, accepting truly, etc. What all these things
seem to manifest is, says Hetherington, an ability: the ability to
“manifest various accurate representations of p”
(2006, 75) or, put in a more detailed way, an ability

 to respond,
to reply, to represent, or to reason accurately that p.
(For short: it is the ability—the knowledge-how—to
register accurately that p.) (2006, 77)



Hetherington explicitly equates the ability to do this with the
knowledge how to do this (2006, 77), an equation that we have seen to be
troublesome. But that issue may not be so crucial here, because
even if Hetherington's account won't get us all the way to
the claim that knowledge-that is a kind of knowledge-how, it will get
us all the way to the claim that knowledge-that is a kind of ability,
rather than an intellectual relation to a proposition, and this may be
close enough. (In Hetherington 2011 he argues that we have no
reason to suppose that at least some kinds of knowledge-how, including
the kind on offer here, might not be a kind of ability (2011, 73).)


Adams (2009) suggests that the results from cognitive psychology that
present difficulties for intellectualism also undermine Hetherington's
radical anti-intellectualism. A second difficulty for Hetherington's
argument is that it may not take sufficient account of an alternative
intellectualist-friendly approach to knowledge-that: not the
traditional account according to which knowledge-that is identical to
a belief, but the so-called “knowledge-first” account
according to which knowledge-that is an irreducible mental state in
terms of which all other epistemic states must be analyzed. This
proposal, defended by Timothy Williamson most influentially in
his Knowledge and Its Limits (2000), would allow
Hetherington's manifestations of knowledge-that to all be explained by
single, underlying unified factor. But that underlying factor would
not itself be an ability. It might be that knowing that p
entails that one has the ability to “register accurately
that p.” Such claims of mere entailment are hinted at
more or less explicitly by various philosophers: John Hyman (1999),
Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath (2009), and John Hawthorne and Jason
Stanley (2008), among others. But Hetherington—and the other
radical anti-intellectualists—need more than this. They needs
knowing how to do something to be identical with the ability.


Does this equivalence get the order of explanation right?
It's tempting to ask, when you are able to get the right answer
to a question, “How were you able to pick the right
answer?” The natural response seems to be this one:
“I knew it was the right one.” We might then ask how
you knew that, and you would presumably respond by talking about the
experiences you had that gave you the knowledge. But it looks
like the experiences gave you the ability to pick the right answer
because they gave you the knowledge that the answer was right. On
the radical anti-intellectualist explanation, the explanation goes the
other way around. The experiences first give you the ability to
pick the right answer. And you know that the answer is right
because you have the ability to pick it. (Of course, you also
have the ability to pick the wrong answer. As we have seen, for
“ability” to play the role that anti-intellectualists want
it to play, it needs to be restricted to those abilities that ensure
success across a suitable range of possible worlds.) This may not
be the most natural way to construe the order of explanation.