Damaris Masham (1658-1708) was one of the earliest English woman
philosophers. The main sources for her philosophy are two published
books, A Discourse Concerning the Love of God (1696)
and Occasional Thoughts in Reference to a Vertuous and Christian
Life (1705), and her correspondence with Locke and with
Leibniz.
 
1. Life


Damaris Masham was born in 1658, the daughter of the Cambridge
Platonist, Ralph Cudworth, who was Master of Christ's College,
Cambridge. Little is known of her education, but she did have the
advantage of being born into a family with a considerable library.
However, despite the fact that her father was one of the most learned
men of his generation he did not teach her Latin or Greek, though she
did apparently learn French as was deemed requisite for a
gentlewoman of the time. She learned Latin, later in life, according
to the method recommended in Locke's Some Thoughts Concerning
Education. Her interest in philosophy was nurtured by her reading
of the Cambridge Platonists (Ralph Cudworth, Henry More and John
Smith), with whose works she was familiar by the time she met
Locke. It was her good fortune to make his acquaintance, since he
certainly encouraged her interest in philosophy. Thus, unlike most
women of her time, Damaris Cudworth had the relative advantages of a
family and a friendship that enabled her to develop her interest in
philosophy. On the other hand, her marriage in 1685, to Sir Francis
Masham, an Essex squire and widower with nine children, was hardly one
that enhanced her philosophical opportunities. She had one son,
Francis Cudworth Masham.


 Damaris Cudworth (as she then was) and Locke met sometime before 1682
(probably through their mutual friend, Edward Clark). By all accounts
Locke held her in high esteem as a philosophical mind, and she was to
be one of the earliest proponents of his philosophy. Their
acquaintance, at least in the early stages, was more than merely an
intellectual friendship. Among their earliest letters is a series of
pastoral love poems, conducted under the noms de plume,
Philoclea and Philander. They continued to correspond on a variety of
philosophical subjects during Locke's years in Holland. On his return
in 1688, he became guest and later permanent resident at her home at
Oates in Essex.


 Lady Masham's philosophical writings constituted only a small
part of her philosophical activity. Her letters to Locke and her
correspondence with Leibniz show that her interest in philosophy went
far beyond what she eventually published. Her two books, A
Discourse Concerning the Love of God (1696) and Occasional
Thoughts in Reference to a Vertuous or Christian Life (1705),
were printed anonymously. She also wrote a biography of Locke which is
the source of the first printed biographies of Locke. A Discourse and
Occasional Thoughts were published with encouragement from
Locke. Both books offer an optimistic view of human beings as rational
and social creatures motivated by the love of happiness. This
“earliest and strongest principle,” consists
of the enjoyment of pleasure achieved through the regulatory exercise
of reason. This directs us to the greatest happiness. The Lockean
elements of both books led to their being attributed by some to
Locke. Nonetheless the Platonism of her background remains evident,
especially in the religious and ethical position which connects both
her treatises which are both are concerned with practical ethics. Like
both Locke and the Cambridge Platonists, Lady Masham held that
morality is founded in reason and the freedom to act. They also agree
that the end of ethics is human happiness, and that the exercise of
virtue requires a right disposition of mind. While she is closer to
Locke in epistemology, on ethics, she is closer to Cudworth than Locke
on account of her acceptance that moral principles exist independently
as part of the nature of things, her belief in free will and in her
anti-voluntarism.
2. A Discourse Concerning the Love of God

A Discourse Concerning the Love of God (1696) was written
in response to a collection of letters by John Norris and Mary Astell
published as Letters Concerning the Love of God
(1695). Norris had, in 1690, attacked Locke's Essay in his
Cursory Reflections upon a Book Call'd Essay Concerning Human
Understanding. Lady Masham's critique of Norris and Astell is
also aimed, indirectly, at Nicolas Malebranche, of whom Norris was
the most important English disciple.  This may explain Lady Masham's
hostility to Norris, in spite of the fact that she was the dedicatee
of another book by Norris, Reflections upon the Conduct of Human
Life (London, 1690). In Occasional Thoughts, Lady
Masham takes a Lockean position when she argues that we derive our
knowledge of God by comparing ideas “received from Sense and
Reflection” and that the idea of God is “a Proposition
containing many complex Ideas in it; and which we are not capable of
framing till we have been long acquainted with pleasing
Sensations” (Occasional Thoughts, p. 66). She also defines love
in a Lockean manner as “complaisance.” Norris had
maintained that God is the immediate cause of pleasure for us and is
therefore the sole and proper object of our love. Creatures are
therefore merely the occasional causes of pleasing effects in us, and
our love of creatures is inferior and secondary to our love of
God. In response Lady Masham argues that our love of God comes not
from a divinely instilled idea of God in our minds, but from
observing the world around us, whence we conclude, rationally, that
we owe love to its creator, God. Her fundamental objection to
Norris's occasionalism is that it undermines the basis of morality
because, by denigrating God's works, it undermines the bonds of human
society and the very basis of Christian morality. In opposition to
Norris, Lady Masham emphasises the importance of practical morality,
arguing that it is integral to religious conduct.
3. Occasional Thoughts


 In Occasional Thoughts in Reference to a Vertuous or Christian
Life (1705) Masham sets out to defend reasonable Christianity
from Deism on the one hand and superstition on the other. The book is
also, in part, an answer to Mary Astell's The Christian
Religion as Professed by a Daughter of the Church which was
published as a reply to A Discourse Concerning the Love of
God. Her discussion of the role of reason in religious matters
includes the relationship between religion and morality. In developing
further the arguments about practical morality that she had set out in
Occasional Thoughts, she also sets out her views on
education. Against the Deists, Masham insists on the importance of
revelation and faith and denies that natural religion based purely on
reason is possible. On the other hand religious belief that ignores
the role of reason in religion is mere superstition and will result in
bigotry and atheism, for “an Irrational Religion can never
Rationally be conceived to come from God” (Occasional
Thoughts, p. 36). (In Masham's view, Roman Catholicism,
with its stress on the externals of religion is largely
superstition). For her part, Lady Masham emphasises the moral aspect
of religion, its practical application, rather that doctrinal
content. She shares Locke's view that virtuous living is more
important than religious ceremonial. Like Locke in the Epistola de
tolerantia, she argues that moral conduct is central to religious
practice. Accordingly she argues that morality and religion should not
be separated in religious instruction. Furthermore, civil and
religious liberties are necessary for the exercise of virtue. And
education is the key means to inculcate virtue, which is to be learned
not through precept but by developing a rational understanding of
moral principles. She emphasises the key role of mothers in laying the
foundations of morality through the education of their children. This
practical point leads her to argue for the education of women.
4. Leibniz Correspondence


 Between 1704 and 1705-6, Lady Masham corresponded with Leibniz, at
his instigation, perhaps because he hoped thereby, to have contact
with Locke. This gave her the opportunity to discuss Leibniz's
philosophy with him, and for Leibniz to discuss the philosophy of her
father, Ralph Cudworth. Lady Masham knew Leibniz's philosophy
only indirectly from the Journal des Savants of 1695, and
Bayle's article “Rorarius” in the first edition of his
Dictionnaire. She takes issue with Leibniz on a number of points,
including his theory of pre-established harmony, the nature of
substance and free will. Lady Masham's defence of her
father's True Intellectual System of the Universe is
revealing in a number of ways. It shows she was willing to disagree
with him (on the question of whether there could be such a thing as
unextended substance), whilst retaining her respect for him and being
prepared to defend him against his detractors (in this case Pierre
Bayle). It also indicates that she had not abandoned all the Platonist
tenets to which she subscribed before she met Locke.