Life is often defined in basic biology textbooks in terms of a list of
distinctive properties that distinguish living systems from
non-living. Although there is some overlap, these lists are often
different, depending upon the interests of the authors. Each attempt
at a definition are inextricably linked to a theory from which it
derives its meaning (Benner 2010).  Some biologists and philosophers
even reject the whole idea of there being a need for a definition,
since life for them is an irreducible fact about the natural
world. Others see life simply as that which biologists study.  There
have been three main philosophical approaches to the problem of
defining life that remain relevant today: Aristotle's view of life as
animation, a fundamental, irreducible property of nature; Descartes's
view of life as mechanism; and Kant's view of life as organization, to
which we need to add Darwin's concept of variation and evolution
through natural selection (Gayon 2010; Morange 2008).  In addition we
may add the idea of defining life as an emergent property of
particular kinds of complex systems (Weber 2010).


The focus of this entry is primarily the attempts to define life
during the twentieth century with the rise of biochemistry and
molecular biology. But this was the century that saw the rise of
artificial intelligence, artificial life, and complex systems theory
and so the concern includes these perspectives. Animate beings share a
range of properties and phenomena that are not seen together in
inanimate matter, although examples of matter exhibiting one or the
other of these can be found. Living entities metabolize, grow, die,
reproduce, respond, move, have complex organized functional
structures, heritable variability, and have lineages which can evolve
over generational time, producing new and emergent functional
structures that provide increased adaptive fitness in changing
environments.  Reproduction involves not only the replication of the
nucleic acids that carry the genetic information but the epigenetic
building of the organism through a sequence of developmental
steps. Such reproduction through development occurs within a larger
life-cycle of the organism, which includes its senescence and
death. Something that is alive has organized, complex structures that
carry out these functions as well as sensing and responding to
interior states and to the external environment and engaging in
movement within that environment. It must be remembered that
evolutionary phenomena are an inextricable aspect of living systems;
any attempt to define life in the absence of this diachronic
perspective will be futile. It will be argued below that living
systems may be defined as open systems maintained in steady-states,
far-from-equilibrium, due to matter-energy flows in which informed
(genetically) autocatalytic cycles extract energy, build complex
internal structures, allowing growth even as they create greater
entropy in their environments, and capable, over multigenerational
time. of evolution.
 
1. Prelude: Mechanist/Vitalist Debate


The last words written by Shelley in his unfinished poem The
Triumph of Life were “Then, what is life? I cried.” Clearly
Shelley meant this in the everyday sense rather than the technical
usage of what distinguishes animate from inanimate. C.U.M Smith (1976)
in his The Problem of Life sets out to answer Shelley's
question by addressing the problem not only of how matter could be
alive but also be conscious. Although conscious, living matter was a
problem for Democritean philosophers, it was not for other
pre-Socratics nor for Aristotle for whom living beings where
paradigmatic. “The phenomenon which seemed to [Aristotle] most
basic in the apparent flux of the world was the unity and persistence
of the individual living being” (Smith 1976, p. 72). Indeed,
Aristotle's biology and the philosophy he developed from it was
sophisticated and enduring (Lennox 2001). Thus for Aristotle there was
no problem of life, although there was a problem for an atomist view of
nature that seemed inconsistent with biological phenomena (Rosen 1991).
Descartes radically reconceptualized the problem by his dualism of
matter and mind; life was a problem for which an explanation was to be
sought in the mechanistic interactions of matter, and there was the
question of how mind was related to the matter in living beings. As
chemistry developed as a discipline in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries the goal of most advanced thinkers was to develop explanatory
theories of living things in terms of chemical matter and mechanisms.
Such attempts at what must be admitted to be premature reduction were
resisted by critics, including some vitalists, whose positions covered
a wide range from romantic anti-materialists, through chemists seeking
a new type of Newtonian force (“vital force”) in nature, to
materialists who had an intuition of the importance of the organized
whole (Fruton 1972, 1999).


The debate between the “mechanists” and the
“vitalists” about the relationship of matter and life as
well as matter and mind, spilled over into the twentieth century,
especially during the time that biochemists were defining their field
as a separate discipline from chemistry or physiology. Four books
published around 1930 capture the flavor of the debate (Woodger 1929;
Haldane 1929, 1931; Hogben 1930). J.S. Haldane, a physiologist,
resisted reduction of biological phenomena to mechanistic explanations,
as he saw the structure of biological organisms and their action being
disanalogous to what was seen in physical systems. The laws of
chemistry and physics just were not robust enough to account for
biology. “It is life we are studying in biology, and not
phenomena which can be represented by causal conceptions of physics and
chemistry” Haldane 1931, p. 28). He rejects, however, the search
for a vital force since it would reduce the complexity of biological
phenomena to a single principle. Rather, the phenomena of biology can
only be understood in a holistic perspective that is faithful to the
complexity observed in biological phenomena. Lancelot Hogben, in his
book The Nature of Living Matter, which was dedicated to
Bertrand Russell, argues for a reductionist epistemology and ontology.
For Hogben, as for Haldane, consciousness is seen as an integral part
of the problem of life, “an inquiry into the nature of life and
the nature of consciousness presupposes the necessity of formulating
the problem in the right way” (Hogben 1930, pp. 31–32). Indeed,
“no problem of philosophy is more fundamental than the nature of
life” (Hogben 1930, p. 80). But for Hogben the nature, indeed
glory, of science is that its answers are always incomplete and it does
not seek the finality that he saw as the goal of philosophy. He saw no
need to abandon the reductionist methodology that biochemistry was
developing and argued that Whitehead's assumption that science would
reveal a universe consistent with human ethical predilections should be
reversed and that philosophy would have to conform with the findings of
science. Woodger saw the issues in the mechanist-vitalist debate as
more complex than either side admitted. The resolution would come from
a recognition of the primary importance of biological organization and
of levels of biological organization, “by a cell therefore I
shall understand a certain type of biological organization, not a
concrete entity” (Woodger 1929, p. 296, emphasis in original).
Woodger urged abandoning the use of the word ‘life’ in
scientific discourse on the grounds that ‘living organism’
was what had to be explained. He saw the question of how life arose as
being outside science.
2. The Biochemical Conception of Life


Perhaps the venue where the issue of the nature of life was most
urgently addressed was the Department of Biochemistry at the University
of Cambridge. During the first half of the twentieth century, under the
guidance of its first Sir William Dunn Professor of Biochemistry, Sir
Frederick Gowland Hopkins, the department set much of the conceptual
framework, methodology, as well as educating many of the leaders in the
field (Needham & Baldwin 1949; Weatherall and Kamminga 1992;
Kamminga & Weatherall 1996; Weatherall & Kamminga 1996;
Kamminga 1997; de Chadarevian 2002). Hopkins's vision of the emerging
field of biochemistry was that it was a discipline in its own right
(not an adjunct to medicine or agriculture nor applied chemistry) that
needed to explore all biological phenomena on the chemical level. More
importantly, Hopkins had a belief that although living things did not
disobey any physical or chemical laws they instantiated them in ways
that required understanding of biological phenomena, constraints, and
functional organization. In his influential address to the British
Association for the Advancement of Science given in 1913, Hopkins
rejected both the reductionism of organic chemists who sought to deduce
in vitro what had to happen in vivo and the crypto-vitalism of many
physiologists who viewed the protoplasm of living cells as itself alive
and irreducible to chemical analysis (Hopkins 1913 [1949]). What
Hopkins offered instead was a view of the cell as a chemical machine,
obeying the laws of thermodynamics and physical chemistry generally,
but having organized molecular structures and functions. The chemistry
underlying metabolism was catalyzed and regulated by enzymes, protein
catalysts, and involved, because of biological necessity, small changes
in structure and energy of well-defined chemical intermediates. The
living cell is “not a mass of matter composed of a congregation
of like molecules, but a highly differentialed system: the cell, in the
modern phraseology of physical chemistry, is a system of co-existing
phases of different constitutions” (Hopkins 1913 [1949] p. 151).
Understanding how the organization was achieved was just as important
as knowing how the chemical reactions occurred. For Hopkins life is
“a property of the cell as a whole, because it depends upon the
organization of processes” (Hopkins 1913 [1949] p. 152). Indeed,
Hopkins was impressed with the philosophy of Whitehead with its
part/whole relationships and emphasis on processes rather than entities
(Hopkins 1927 [1949]; Kamminga & Weatherall 1996) and it formed an
explicit foundation for the research program he developed at Cambridge
and became an implicit assumption in the research programs developed by
many of the students who trained there (Prebble & Weber 2003). A
member of the department, Joseph Needham became actively engaged in
carrying Hopkins's vision to the broader intellectual community writing
on the philosophical basis of biochemistry (Needham 1925). He followed
Hopkins too in asserting that the crucial question no longer was the
relationship of living and non-living substance but also of mind and body,
with biochemistry conceding to philosophy and the then incipient
neurosciences, the latter question, so that it could focus on learning
about living matter. Another member of the biochemistry department,
N.W. Pirie, tackled the question of defining life and concluded that it
could not be adequately defined by a list of qualities nor even
processes since life “cannot be defined in terms of one
variable” (Pirie 1937, p. 21–22). There was a challenge for
Hopkins's program to figure out how rather simple physical and chemical
laws could produce the complexity of living systems. 


During the 1930s an informal group, known as the Biotheoretical
Gathering met in Cambridge and included several members of the
biochemistry department (Joseph & Dorothy Needham, and Conrad
Waddington) as well as a number of other Cambridge scientists (such as
crystallographers J.D. Bernal and Dorothy Crowford Hodgkins) and
philosophers (J.H. Woodger and Karl Popper). This group was consciously
exploring the philosophical approach of Whitehead with the goal of
building a trans-disciplinary theoretical and philosophical biology
which helped lay the foundation for the conceptual triumph of molecular
biology after World War II (Abir-Am 1987; de Chadarevian 2002). The
research program of Hopkins was well established by this period and
especially through the Needhams it was linked with the work of the
Biotheoretical Gathering, influencing J.B.S. Haldane, who made major
contributions to enzymology and to forging the modern evolutionary
synthesis or neo-Darwinism. Haldane, along with Bernal, would play a
major, early role in moving the concern from beyond the nature of life
to its origin as a subject for scientific study. Haldane suspected,
along with Pirie, that a fully satisfactory definition of life was
impossible, but he asserted that the material definition was a
reasonable goal for science. He saw life as “a pattern of
chemical processes. This pattern has special properties. It begets a
similar pattern, as a flame does, but it regulates itself as a flame
does not.” (Haldane 1947, p. 56). Use of the flame metaphor for
cellular metabolic activity implied a nonequilibrium process in an open
system capable of reproduction but also, by the limit of the metaphor,
self regulation. In this Haldane reflected the shifting concern to
working out how matter and physical laws could lead to biological
phenomena.


By the time of World War II it was meaningful to address the question
of “what is life?” in molecular terms and fundamental
physical laws. It was clear that there were several distinct ways in
which matter in living systems behaved in ways different from
non-living systems. For example, how could genetic information be
instantiated at a molecular level given that ensembles of atoms or
molecules behaved statistically? Or, how could biological systems
generate and maintain their internal order in the face of the
imperative of the second law of thermodynamics that all natural
systems proceed with increasing entropy?
3. Schrödinger's What is Life?


In 1943 Erwin Schrödinger gave a series of lectures at the Dublin
Institute for Advanced Studies, which were published as What is
Life? in 1944 (Schrödinger 1944). This little book had a major
impact on the development of twentieth century biology, especially upon
Francis Crick and James Watson and other founders of molecular biology
(Judson 1979; Murphy & O'Neill 1995). Schrödinger did not break
new ground, as has been pointed out by Perutz (1987), but rather
gathered together several strands of research and stated his questions
in a stark and provocative manner. Building upon the demonstration by
Max Delbrueck that the size of the ‘target’ of mutations
caused by X-rays had the dimensions of a molecule of a thousand or so
atoms, Schrödinger wondered how it could be that there could be
sustained order in the molecules responsible for heredity when it was
well known that statistical ensembles of molecules quickly became
disordered (with increased entropy as predicted by the second law of
thermodynamics). The problem of heredity then was reformulated at the
molecular level as to how order could give rise to order? The other
main topic that concerned Schrödinger was the thermodynamics of living
things in general, that is, how could they generate order from disorder
through their metabolism? It was through answering these two specific
questions from the perspective of a physicist that Schrödinger sought
to answer the big question, what is life? 


It was the answer to the first question that captured the attention
of the founders of the new biology. Schrödinger argued that the
molecular material had to be an ‘aperiodic’ solid that had
embedded in its structure a ‘miniature code.’ That is, the
pattern of constituent atoms comprising the molecule of heredity would
not have a simple periodic repetitive order of the same constituents or
subunits, but rather would have a higher-level order due to the pattern
of its molecular subunits; it was this higher-level but aperiodic order
that would contain the coded information of heredity. The elucidation
of the structure of DNA and the explosion of our understanding of
molecular genetics has eclipsed the other, but to Schrödinger equal,
arm of the argument, namely that the most important aspect of
metabolism is that it represents the cell's way of dealing with all the
entropy that it cannot help but produce as it builds its internal
order, what Schrödinger termed ‘negentropy.’ He noted that
the cell must maintain itself in a state away from equilibrium since
thermodynamic equilibrium is the very definition of death. By creating
internal order and organization within a living system (cells,
organisms or ecosystems) the metabolic activities must produce greater
disorder in the environment, such that the second law is not violated.
He tied the two notions, of order from order and order from disorder,
together by claiming, “an organism's astonishing gift of
concentrating a ‘stream of order’ on itself and thus
escaping the decay into atomic chaos — of ‘drinking
orderliness’ from a suitable environment — seems to be
connected with the presence of ‘aperiodic solids’, the
chromosome molecules, which doubtless represent the highest degree of
well-ordered atomic association we know of — much higher than the
ordinary periodic crystal — in virtue of the individual role
every atom and every radical is playing here” (Schrödinger 1944,
77). Although Schrödinger was giving a physicist's answer to Shelley's
question, he did not confine himself only to the question of what
distinguished the living from the non-living and in the epilogue
reflects on free will and consciousness. As with so many previous
attempts to address the nature of life, the issue of consciousness was
seen by Schrödinger too as connected to that of life itself.
4. Schrödinger's Dual “Legacy”


The impact of Schrödinger's slim volume on a generation of
physicists and chemists who were lured to biology and who founded
molecular biology is well chronicled (Judson 1979; Kay
2000). Knowledge about the protein and nucleic acid basis of living
systems continues to be obtained at an accelerating rate, with the
sequencing of the human genome as a major landmark along this path of
discovery. The “self-replicating” DNA has become a major
metaphor for understanding all of life. The world is divided into
replicators, which are seen to be fundamental and to control
development and be the fundamental level of action for natural
selection, and interactors, the molecules and structures coded by the
replicators (Dawkins 1976, 1989). Indeed, Dawkins relegates organisms
to the status of epiphenomenal gene-vehicles, or survival machines. A
reaction has set in to what is perceived as an over-emphasis on
nucleic acid replication (see for example Keller 1995, 2002; Moss
2003). In particular developmental systems theorists have argued for a
causal pluralism in developmental and evolutionary biology (see essays
and references in Oyama, Griffiths, & Gray 2001). However, the
rapid progress in gene sequencing is producing fundamental insights
into the relationship of genes and morphology and has added important
dimensions to our understanding of evolutionary phenomena (see for
example Graur & Li 2000; Carroll, Grenier, & Weatehrbee
2001).


What is less known is the over half-a-century of work inspired, in
part, by the other pillar of Schrödinger's argument, namely how
organisms gain order from disorder through the thermodynamics of open
systems far from equilibrium (Schneider & Kay 1995). Prominent
among early students of such nonequilibrium thermodynamics was Ilya
Prigogine (1947). Prigogine influenced J. D. Bernal in his 1947
lectures on the physical basis of life to start to understand both how
organisms produced their internal order while affected their
environment by not only their activities but through created disorder
in it (Bernal 1951). Harold Morowitz explicitly addressed the issue of
energy flow and the production of biological organization, subsequently
generalized in various ways (Morowitz 1968; Peacocke 1983; Brooks and
Wiley 1986: Wicken 1987; Schneider 1993; Swenson 2000; Morowitz 2002).
Internal order can be produced by gradients of energy (matter/energy)
flows through living systems. Structures so produced help not only draw
more energy through the system, lengthen its retention time in the
system, but also dissipate degraded energy, or entropy, to the
environment, thus paying Schrödinger's “entropy debt.”
Living systems then are seen an instance of a more general phenomena of
dissipative structures. “With the help of this energy and matter
exchange with the environment, the system maintains its inner
non-equilibrium, and the non-equilibrium in turn maintains the exchange
process…. A dissipative structure continuously renews itself and
maintains a particular dynamic regime, a globally stable space-time
structure” (Jantsch 1980). However, thermodynamics can deal only
with the possibility that something can occur spontaneously; whether
self-organizing phenomena occur depend upon the actual specific
conditions (initial and boundary) as well as the relationships among
components (Williams & Frausto da Silva 1999).


Seeing the cell as a thermodynamic ‘dissipative structure’
was not to be considered as reducing the cell to physics, as Bernal
pointed out, rather a richer physics of what Warren Weaver called
“organized complexity” (in contrast to simple order or
“disorganized complexity”) was being deployed (Weaver
1948). The development of this “new” physics of open
systems and the dissipative structures that arise in them was the
fulfillment of the development that Schrödinger foresaw (Rosen 2000).
Dissipative structures in physical and chemical systems are phenomena
that are explained by nonequilibrium thermodynamics (Prigogine &
Stengers 1984). The emergent, self-organizing spatio-temporal patterns
observed in the Belousov-Zhabotinski reaction are also seen in
biological systems (such as in slime mold aggregation or electrical
patterns in heart activity) (Tyson 1976; Sole and Goodwin 2000).
Indeed, related self-organizational phenomena pervade biology
(Camazine et al. 2001). Such phenomena are seen not only in cells and
organisms, but in ecosystems, which reinforces the notion that a
broader systems perspective is needed as part of the new physics
(Ulanowicz 1997).  Important to such phenomena are the dynamics of
non-linear interactions (where responses of a system can be much
larger than the stimulus) and autocatalytic cycles (reaction sequences
that are closed on themselves and in which a larger quantity of one or
more starting materials is made through the processes). Given that the
catalysts in biological systems are coded in the genes of the DNA, one
place to start defining life is to view living systems as informed,
autocatalytic cyclic entities that develop and evolve under the dual
dictates of the second law of thermodynamics and of natural selection
(Depew & Weber 1995; Weber & Depew 1996). Such an approach
non-reductively connects the phenomena of living systems with basic
laws of physics and chemistry (Harold 2001).  Others intuit that an
even richer physics is needed to adequately capture the
self-organizing phenomena observed in biology and speculate that a
“fourth law” of thermodynamics about such phenomena may
ultimately be needed (Kauffman 1993, 1995, 2000). In any event,
increasingly the tools developed for the “sciences of
complexity” and being deployed to develop better models of
living systems (Depew & Weber 1995; Kauffman 2000). Robert Rosen
has reminded us that complexity is not life itself but what he terms
“the habitat of life” and that we need to make our focus
on the relational. “Organization inherently involves functions
and their interrelations” (Rosen 1991, 280). Whether the
existing sciences of complexity are sufficient or a newer conceptual
framework is needed remains to be seen (Harold 2001). Living beings
exhibit complex, functional organization and an ability to become more
adapted to their environments over generational time, which phenomena
represent the challenge to physically-based explanations based upon
mechanistic (reductionistic) assumptions. By appealing to complex
systems dynamics there is the possibility of physically-based theories
that can robustly address phenomena of emergence without having
recourse to the type of “vitalism” that was countenanced
by some in the earlier part of the twentieth century.
5. Origin (Emergence) of Life


One of the biggest and most important of emergent phenomena is that of
the origin or emergence of life. Franklin Harold ranks the mystery of
life's origin as the most consequential facing science today (Harold
2001, 235). Michael Ruse claims that it is essential to incorporate
origin of life resarch into Darwinism since it is a necessary
condition for a scientifically and philosophically adequate definition
of life (Ruse 2008, 101).  Robert Rosen argued that the reason that
the question “what is life?” is so hard to answer is that
we really want to know much more than what it is, we want to know why
it is, “we are really asking, in physical terms, why a specific
material system is an organism and not something else” (Rosen
1991, 15). To answer this why question we need to understand how life
might have arisen.  While not attracting the attention nor levels of
funding of molecular biology, there was a continuous research program
during much of the twentieth century on the origin of life (for
historical summaries see Fry 2000; Lahav 1999). 


During the 1920s Alexander Oparin and J.B.S. Haldane independently
proposed the first modern hypotheses as to how life might have
originated on earth (Oparin 1929; Haldane 1929/1967). Key
assumptions were that the geophysical conditions on the primitive earth
were quite different from the present, most importantly there would
have been no molecular oxygen in the atmosphere (oxygen arising very
much later in time with the appearance of photosynthetic organisms that
used light energy to split water) and that in this chemically reducing
atmosphere an increasingly complex “soup” or organic
molecules would arise from which the precursors of living systems could
arise (for a recent discussion about the early atmosphere see Miyakawa
et al. 2002). In effect this type of approach can be termed a
metabolism-first view.


After the demonstration that some amino acids could be produced by
the action of an electrical discharge through a mixture of gases
thought to be present in the primitive atmosphere (Miller 1953),
another possible starting point for the sequence to living things was
considered, namely proteins, the polymers of amino acids formed under
conditions of high temperature (Fox & Harada 1958). This
protein-first view suggested that the chemistry that lead to life could
have occurred in a sequestered environment (globs of proteins) that
might also have some weak catalytic activity that would have
facilitated the production of the other molecular components needed
(Fox 1988).


With the understanding of the structure of DNA focus shifted to the
abiotic routes to nucleic acids, which could serve then serve as
templates for their own replication. Although Dawkins assumed a nucleic
acid, formed by chance, would be the start of life since it would
“self replicate” (Dawkins 1976), many approaches to getting
to nucleic acids involve a role for minerals to help form scaffolds that
serve as sorts of ordering templates and even as catalysts for nucleic
acid formation (Cairns-Smith 1982; see summary in Lahav 1999). The
discovery that RNA is capable of some catalytic activity has led to the
postulate of not only a nucleic acids first but more generally of an
‘RNA world’ (Gilbert 1986). Variants of this approach
represent the dominant mode of thinking about the early phases of the
emergence of life (Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995). Given that some
type of metabolism would be needed to sustain RNA replication, a number
of approaches blend replication-first with metabolism-first (Dyson
1982, 1999; de Duve 1995; Eigen 1992).


An alternative view, congenial to a thermodynamic and systems approach
to the emergence of life, takes the above move a step further and
emphasizes the need the presence of the main factors that distinguish
cells from non-cells: metabolism via autocatalytic cycles of catalytic
polymers, replication, and a physical enclosure within a chemical
barrier like that provided by the cell membrane. This might be termed
a proto-cell-first approach (Morowitz 1992; Weber 1998; Williams &
Frausto da Silva 2002, 2003). Chemical constraints and the
self-organizing tendencies of complex chemical systems in such a view
would have been critical in determining the properties of the first
living beings. (Kauffman 1993, 1995, 2000; Williams & Frausto da
Silva 1999, 2002, 2003; Weber 2007, 2009). With the emergence of the
first entities that could be termed living would come the emergence of
biological selection or natural selection in which contingency plays a
much greater part.


Darwin famously bracketed the question of the origin of life from
questions of descent with modification through natural selection.
Indeed, Darwinian theories of evolution can take living systems as a
given and then explore how novelties arise through a combination of
chance and necessity. However, an understanding of how life might have
emerged would provide a bridge between our view of the properties of
living systems and the evolutionary phenomena they exhibit. Such an
understanding ultimately is needed to anchor living systems in matter
and the laws of nature (Harold 2001, 235). This remains a challenge to
be met in order for science to provide a more full answer to Shelley's
question.
6. Artificial Life


Advances in computer technology in recent years have permitted
exploration of life “in silico” as it were. While
computer simulations are utilized by many theoretical biologists, those
who explore ‘Artificial Life’ or ‘A-Life’ seek
to do more than model known living systems. There goal is to place life
as it is known on earth in a larger conceptual context of any possible
forms of life (Langton 1989, 1995). Work in A-Life shifts our focus on
the processes in living things rather than the material constituents of
their structures per se (Emmeche 1994). In some ways this is a revival
of the process thinking of the Cambridge biochemists of the 1930s, but
involves a level of abstraction about the material structures that
instantiate these processes that they would not have shared. However,
such studies emphasize the organizational relationship between
components rather than the components themselves, an important focus in
the emerging age of “proteomics” in which, in the post
human genome era, the complex, functional interactions of the large
array of cellular proteins is being studied (Kumar & Snyder 2002). 


A-Life studies can help us to sharpen our ideas about what
distinguishes living from non-living and contribute to our definition
of life. Such work can help delineate the degree of importance of the
typical list of attributes of living entities, such as reproduction,
metabolism, functional organization, growth, responsiveness to the
environment, movement, and short- and long-term adaptations. A-Life
work can also allow exploration about which features of life are due to
the constraints of being enmattered in a particular manner and subject
to physical and chemical laws, as well as exploring a variety of
factors that might affect evolutionary scenarios (Etxeberria 2002). For
example, the relative potential roles of selection and
self-organization in the emergence of novel traits in evolutionary time
might be evaluated by A-Life research. It is too soon yet to know how
important the contribution of the A-Life program will be, but it is
likely to become more prominent in the discourse on the origin and
nature of life.
7. Conclusions


Our increased understanding of the physical-chemical basis of living
systems has increased enormously over the past century and it is
possible to give a plausible definition of life in these terms.
“Living organisms are autopoietic systems: self-constructing,
self-maintaining, energy-transducing autocatalytic entities” in
which information needed to construct the next generation of organisms
is stabilized in nucleic acids that replicate within the context of
whole cells and work with other developmental resources during the
life-cycles of organisms, but they are also “systems capable of
evolving by variation and natural selection: self-reproducing
entities, whose forms and functions are adapted to their environment
and reflect the composition and history of an ecosystem” (Harold
2001, 232).  Such a perspective represents a fulfillment of the basic
dual insights of Schrödinger near mid-century. Much remains to be
elucidated about the relationships among the complex molecular systems
of living entities, how they are constrained by the system as a whole
as well as by physical laws. Indeed, it is still an open question for
some as to whether we have yet a sufficiently rich understanding of
the laws of nature or whether we need to seek deep laws that lead to
order and organization (Kauffman 2000). At the start of the new
century there is a sense of the importance of putting
Schrödinger's program into a ‘systems’ context ( see
for example Rosen 1991, 2000; Kauffman 1993, 1995, 2000; Depew and
Weber 1995; Weber & Depew 1996, 2001; Ulanowicz 1997, 2001;
Williams and Frausto da Silva 1999; 2002, 2003; Harold 2001; Morowitz
2002; Bunge 2003; Macdonald and Macdonald 2010). Significant
challenges remain, such as fully integrating our new view of organisms
and their action with evolutionary theory, and to understand plausible
routes for the emergence of life. The fulfillment of such a program
will give us a good sense of what life is on earth. Work in A-Life and
empirical work seeking evidence of extra-terrestrial life may help the
formulation of a more universal concept of life.