The Many-Worlds Interpretation (MWI) of quantum
mechanics holds that there are many worlds which exist in parallel
at the same space and time as our own. The existence of the other worlds makes it
possible to remove randomness and action at a distance from quantum
theory and thus from all physics. 
 
1. Introduction


The fundamental idea of the MWI, going back to
 Everett 1957,
 is that there are myriads of worlds in the Universe in addition to
the world we are aware of. In particular, every time a quantum
experiment with different possible outcomes is
performed, all outcomes are obtained, each in a different world, even
if we are only aware of the world with the outcome we have seen. In
fact, quantum experiments take place everywhere and very often, not
just in physics laboratories: even the irregular blinking of an old
fluorescent bulb is a quantum experiment.

 There are numerous variations and reinterpretations of the original
Everett proposal, most of which are briefly discussed in the entry on
 Everett's relative state formulation of quantum mechanics.
 Here, a particular approach to the MWI (which differs from the
popular “actual splitting worlds” approach in
 De Witt 1970)
 will be presented in detail, followed by a discussion relevant for
many variants of the MWI.

 The MWI consists of two parts:

A mathematical theory which yields the time evolution of the
quantum state of the (single) Universe.
A prescription which sets up a correspondence between the
quantum state of the Universe and our experiences.



Part (i) is essentially summarized by the Schrödinger equation
or its relativistic generalization. It is a rigorous mathematical
theory and is not problematic philosophically. Part (ii) involves
“our experiences” which do not have a rigorous definition.  An
additional difficulty in setting up (ii) follows from the fact that
human languages were developed at a time when people did not suspect
the existence of parallel worlds.

The mathematical part of the MWI, (i), yields less than mathematical
parts of some other theories such as, e.g.,
 Bohmian mechanics.  The Schrödinger
equation itself does not explain why we experience definite results in
quantum measurements. In contrast, in Bohmian mechanics the
mathematical part yields almost everything, and the analog of (ii) is
very simple: it is the postulate according to which only the “Bohmian
positions” (and not the quantum wave) correspond to our
experience. The Bohmian positions of all particles yield the familiar
picture of the (single) world we are aware of. Thus, philosophically,
a theory like Bohmian mechanics achieves more than the MWI, but at
the price of adding the non-local dynamics of Bohmian particle
positions.

2. Definitions
2.1 What is “A World”?

A world is the totality of macroscopic objects: stars, cities,
people, grains of sand, etc. in a definite classically described
state.



The concept of a “world” in the MWI belongs to part (ii) of the theory,
i.e., it is not a rigorously defined mathematical entity, but a term
defined by us (sentient beings) in describing our experience. When we
refer to the “definite classically described state” of, say, a cat,
it means that the position and the state (alive, dead, smiling, etc.)
of the cat is maximally specified according to our ability to
distinguish between the alternatives, and that this specification
corresponds to a classical picture, e.g., no superpositions of dead
and alive cats are allowed in a single
 world.

 Another concept, which is closer to Everett's original proposal, see
 Saunders 1995,
 is that of a relative, or perspectival world defined for every physical
system and every one of its states (provided it is a state of
non-zero probability): I will call it a centered world. This
concept is useful when a world is centered on a perceptual state of a
sentient being. In this world, all objects which the sentient being
perceives have definite states, but objects that are not under
observation might be in a superposition of different (classical)
states. The advantage of a centered world is that a quantum phenomenon
in a distant galaxy does not split it, while the advantage of the
definition presented here is that we can consider a world without
specifying a center, and in particular our usual language is just as
useful for describing worlds that existed at times when there were no
sentient beings.  

The concept of a world in the MWI is based on the layman's
conception of a world; however, several features are different.
Obviously, the definition of the world as everything that
exists does not hold in the MWI. “Everything that exists” is the
Universe, and there is only one Universe. The Universe incorporates
many worlds similar to the one the layman is familiar with.
A layman believes that our present world has a unique past and
future. According to the MWI, a world defined at some moment of time
corresponds to a unique world at a time in the past, but to a
multitude of worlds at a time in the future.

2.2 Who am “I”?

“I” am an object, such as the Earth, a cat,
etc. “I” is defined at a particular time by a complete
(classical) description of the state of my body and of my
brain. “I” and “Lev” do not refer to the same
things (even though my name is Lev). At the present moment there are
many different “Lev”s in different worlds (not more than
one in each world), but it is meaningless to say that now there is
another “I”. I have a particular, well defined past: I
correspond to a particular “Lev” in 2012, but not to a
particular “Lev” in the future: I correspond to a
multitude of “Lev”s in 2022. In the framework of the MWI
it is meaningless to ask: Which Lev in 2022 will I be? I will
correspond to them all. Every time I perform a quantum experiment
(with several possible results) it only seems to me that I obtain a
single definite result. Indeed, Lev who obtains this particular result
thinks this way.  However, this Lev cannot be identified as the only
Lev after the experiment. Lev before the experiment corresponds to all
“Lev”s obtaining all possible results.


 Although this approach to the concept
of personal identity seems somewhat unusual, it is plausible in the
light of the critique of personal identity by
 Parfit 1986.
 Parfit considers some artificial situations in which a person splits
into several copies, and argues that there is no good answer to the
question: Which copy is me? He concludes that personal identity is
not what matters when I divide.
Saunders and Wallace 2008a  argue that based
on the semantics of Lewis 1986 one can find a
meaning for this question. However, in their reply
  2008b  to
 Tappenden 2008 
they emphasise that their work is not about the nature of ‘I’, but
about “serviceability”. Indeed, as it will be explained below, I
should behave as if “Which copy is me?” is a legitimate question.

3. Correspondence Between the Formalism and Our Experience
We should not expect to have a detailed and complete explanation of
our experience in terms of the wave function of 1033
particles that we and our immediate environment are made of. We just
have to be able to draw a basic picture which is free of paradoxes.
There are many attempts to provide an explanation of what we see based
on the MWI or its variants in
 Lockwood 1989,
 Gell-Mann and Hartle 1990,
 Albert 1992,
 Saunders 1993,
 Penrose 1994,
 Chalmers 1996,
 Deutsch 1996,
 Joos et al. 2003,
 Schlosshauer 2007,
 Zurek  2009, and
 Wallace 2012.
 A sketch of the connection between the wave function of the Universe
 and our experience follows.
 
3.1 The Quantum State of a Macroscopic Object
 The basis for the correspondence between the quantum state (the wave
function) of the Universe and our experience is the description that
physicists give in the framework of standard quantum theory for objects
composed of elementary particles. Elementary particles of the same kind
are identical. Therefore, the essence of an object is the quantum state
of its particles and not the particles themselves (see the elaborate
discussion in the entry on
 identity and individuality in quantum theory):
 one quantum state of a set of elementary particles might be a cat
and another state of the same particles might be a small
table. Clearly, we cannot now write down an exact wave function of a
cat. We know, to a reasonable approximation, the wave function of
some elementary particles that constitute a nucleon. The wave
function of the electrons and the nucleons that together make up an
atom is known with even better precision. The wave functions of
molecules (i.e. the wave functions of the ions and electrons out of
which molecules are built) are well studied. A lot is known about
biological cells, so physicists can write down a rough form of the
quantum state of a cell. Out of cells we construct various tissues and
then the whole body of a cat or a table. So, let us denote the
quantum state constructed in this way
|Ψ›OBJECT.


 In our construction
 |Ψ›OBJECT
 is the quantum state of an object in a definite state and
 position.
 According to the definition of a world we have adopted, in each
world the cat is in a definite state: either alive or dead.
Schrödinger's experiment with the cat leads to a splitting
of worlds even before opening the box. Only in the alternative
approach is Schrödinger's cat, which is in a superposition
of being alive and dead, a member of the (single) centered world of
the observer before she opens the sealed box with the cat (the
observer perceives directly the facts related to the preparation of
the experiment and she deduces that the cat is in a superposition).


Formally, the quantum state of an object which consists of N 
particles is defined in 3N dimensional configuration space.
However, in order to make a connection to our experience it is crucial
to understand the quantum state as an entangled wave function of
N particles in 3 dimensional space. Physical
interactions are local in 3 dimensions and we only experience
objects defined in 3-space. The density of the wave function of
molecules of the macroscopic object in 3-space is the bridge between
the wave function of the object and our experience of that
object. This concept, which is a property of the wave function only,
plays the role of the primitive ontology present in other
interpretations of quantum mechanics,
 Allori et al. 2014.

3.2 The Quantum State of a World

The wave function of all particles in the Universe corresponding to any
particular world will be a product of the states of the sets of particles
corresponding to all objects in the world multiplied by the quantum
state
|Φ›
 of all the particles that do not constitute “objects”. Within a
world, “objects” have definite macroscopic states by
 fiat:



|ΨWORLD›
  =
 |Ψ›OBJECT 1
 |Ψ›OBJECT 2
 ...
 |Ψ›OBJECT N
   
 |Φ›.
(1)



The product state is only for variables which are relevant for the
macroscopic description of the objects. There might be some
entanglement between weakly coupled variables like nuclear spins
belonging to different objects. In order to keep the form of the
quantum state of the world (1), the quantum state of such variables
should belong to |Φ›.

Consider a text-book description of quantum measurements based on the
von Neumann 1955 approach according to which each
quantum measurement ends up with the collapse of the wave function to
the eigenstate of the measured variable.  The quantum measurement
device must be a macroscopic object with macroscopically different
states corresponding to different outcomes. In this case, the MWI
all-particles wave function corresponding to a world with a particular
outcome is the same as in the von Neumann theory provided there is a
collapse to the wave function with this outcome. 
 Von Neumann 1955 
analysis helps in understanding the correspondence
between the wave function and our perception of the world. However, as
Becker 2004 explains, the status of the wave
function for von Neumann is not ontological as in the MWI described
here, but epistemic: it summarises information about the results of
measurements.


In most situations, only macroscopic objects are relevant to our
experience. However, today's technology has reached a point in which
interference experiments are performed with single particles. In such
situations a description of a world with states of only macroscopic
objects, such as sources and detectors, is possible but cumbersome.
Hence it is fruitful to add a description of microscopic objects.
 Vaidman 2010 argues that the proper way to describe
the relevant microscopic particles is by the two-state vector which
consists of the usual, forward evolving state specified by the
measurement in the past and a backward evolving state specified by the
measurement in the future. Such a description provides a simple
explanation of the weak trace the particles leave, Vaidman 2013.

3.3 The Quantum State of the Universe

The quantum state of the Universe can be decomposed into a
superposition of terms corresponding to different worlds:
 



|ΨUNIVERSE›
 =
 ∑αi
|ΨWORLD i›.
(2)




Different worlds correspond to different classically described
states of at least one object. Different classically described states
correspond to orthogonal quantum states. Therefore, different worlds
correspond to orthogonal states: all states
  |ΨWORLD i›
 are mutually orthogonal and
 consequently,
 ∑|αi| 2 = 1.
3.4 FAPP


The construction of the quantum state of the Universe in terms of the
quantum states of objects presented above is only approximate; it is
good only for all practical purposes (FAPP). Indeed, the
concept of an object itself has no rigorous definition: should a mouse
that a cat just swallowed be considered as a part of the cat? The
concept of a “definite position” is also only
approximately defined: how far should a cat be displaced in order for
it to be considered to be in a different position? If the displacement
is much smaller than the quantum uncertainty, it must be considered to
be in the same place, because in this case the quantum state of the
cat is almost the same and the displacement is undetectable in
principle. But this is only an absolute bound, because our ability to
distinguish various locations of the cat is far from this quantum
limit. Furthermore, the state of an object (e.g. alive or dead) is
meaningful only if the object is considered for a period of time. In
our construction, however, the quantum state of an object is defined
at a particular time. In fact, we have to ensure that the quantum
state will have the shape of the object not only at that time, but for
some period of time. Splitting of the world during this period of time
is another source of ambiguity because
there is no precise definition of when the splitting occurs. The time
of splitting corresponds to the time of the collapse in the approach given by
 von Neumann 1955. He provided a very extensive
discussion showing that it does not matter when exactly the collapse
occurs, and this analysis shows also that it does not matter when the
splitting in the MWI occurs.


The reason that it is possible to propose only an approximate
prescription for the correspondence between the quantum state of the
Universe and our experience is essentially the same as the reason that led
 Bell 1990
to claim that “ordinary quantum mechanics
is just fine FAPP”. The concepts we use: “object”,
“measurement”, etc. are not rigorously defined. Bell and
many others were looking (until now in vain) for a “precise
quantum mechanics”. Since it is not enough for a physical theory
to be just fine FAPP, a quantum mechanics needs rigorous foundations.
Indeed, the MWI has rigorous foundations for (i), the “physics
part” of the theory; only part (ii), the correspondence with our
experience, is approximate (just fine FAPP). But “just fine
FAPP” means that the theory explains our experience for any
possible experiment, and this is the goal of (ii). See
 Wallace 2002, 2010a for more
arguments why a FAPP definition of a world is enough.
3.5  Preferred Basis

The mathematical structure of the theory (i) allows infinitely many
ways to decompose the quantum state of the Universe into a
superposition of orthogonal states.  The basis for the decomposition
into worlds follows from the common concept of a world that consists
of objects in definite positions and states (“definite” on
the scale of our ability to distinguish them).  In the alternative
approach, the basis of a centered world is defined directly by an
observer.  Therefore, given the nature of the observer and her
concepts for describing the world, the particular choice of the
decomposition (2) follows (up to a precision which is good FAPP, as
required). If we do not ask why we are what we are, and why the world
we perceive is what it is, but only how we can explain relations
between the events we observe in our world, then the problem of the
preferred basis does not arise: we and the concepts of our world
define the preferred basis.


 But if we do ask why we are what we are, we can explain more. Looking at
the details of the physical world, the structure of the Hamiltonian,
the value of the Planck constant, etc., one can understand  why the
sentient beings we know are of a particular type and why they have
their particular concepts for describing their worlds. The main
argument is that the locality of interactions yields
stability of worlds in which objects are well localized. The
small value of the Planck constant allows macroscopic objects to be
well localized for a long  period of time.   Worlds corresponding 
to localized quantum states
 |ΨWORLD i›
do not split for a long enough time such that sentient beings can
perceive the locations of macroscopic objects.  By contrast, a “world”
obtained in another decomposition, e.g., the “world +” which is
characterized by the relative phase of a superposition of states of
macroscopic objects being in macroscopically distinguishable states A
and B,
 1/√2(|ΨA›+|ΨB›)
 |Φ› ,
splits immediately, during a period of time which is much smaller than the
perception time of any feasible sentient being, into two worlds: 
the new “world +” and  the “world −”:
  1/√2(|ΨA›−|ΨB›)
 |Φ′›.
 This is the phenomenon of decoherence
 which has attracted enormous attention in recent years, e.g.,
  Joos et al. 2003,
 Zurek 2003,
 Schlosshauer 2007,
 also in the  “decoherent histories” framework of
 Gell-Mann and Hartle 1990,
 see Saunders 1995.
  
3.6 The Measure of Existence

There are many worlds existing in parallel in the Universe. Although
all worlds are of the same physical size (this might not be true if we
take into account the quantum aspects of early cosmology), and in
every world sentient beings feel as “real” as in any other
world, there is a sense in which some worlds are larger than others. I describe
this property as the measure of existence of a world.

 The measure of existence of a world quantifies its ability to
interfere with other worlds in a gedanken experiment, see
 Vaidman 1998
 (p. 256), and is the basis for introducing (an illusion of ) 
probability in
the MWI. The measure of existence is the parallel of the
probability measure discussed in
 Everett 1957
 and pictorially described in
 Lockwood 1989
 (p. 230). 


Given the decomposition (2), the measure of existence of the world
i is
 µi
 =
|αi|2.
 It can also be expressed as the expectation value of
Pi, the projection operator on
the space of quantum states corresponding to the actual values of all
physical variables describing the world i:




μi
 ≡
 ‹ΨUNIVERSE ∣ Pi ∣ ΨUNIVERSE›.
(3)



 “I” also have a measure of existence. It is the sum of
the measures of existence of all different worlds in which I exist; it
can also be defined as the measure of existence of my perception
world. Note that I do not directly experience the measure of my
existence. I feel the same weight, see the same brightness,
etc. irrespectively of how tiny my measure of existence might be. 
4. Probability in the MWI

The probability in the MWI cannot be introduced in a simple way as in
quantum theory with collapse. However, even if there is no probability
in the MWI, it is possible to explain our illusion of apparent
probabilistic events. Due to the identity of the mathematical
counterparts of worlds, we should not expect any difference between
our experience in a particular world of the MWI and the experience in
a single-world universe with collapse at every quantum measurement.

4.1 Probability from Uncertainty


The difficulty with the concept of probability in a deterministic
theory, such as the MWI, is that the only possible meaning for
probability is an ignorance probability, but there is no
relevant information that an observer who is going to perform a
quantum experiment is ignorant about. The quantum state of the
Universe at one time specifies the quantum state at all times. If I am
going to perform a quantum experiment with two possible outcomes such
that standard quantum mechanics predicts probability 1/3 for outcome A
and 2/3 for outcome B, then, according to the MWI, both the world with
outcome A and the world with outcome B will exist. It is senseless to
ask: “What is the probability that I will get A instead of
B?” because I will correspond to both “Lev”s: the
one who observes A and the other one who observes B.


To solve this difficulty, Albert and Loewer 1988
proposed the Many Minds interpretation (in which the different worlds
are only in the minds of sentient beings). In addition to the quantum
wave of the Universe, Albert and Loewer postulate that every sentient
being has a continuum of minds. Whenever the quantum wave of the
Universe develops into a superposition containing states of a sentient
being corresponding to different perceptions, the minds of this
sentient being evolve randomly and independently to mental states
corresponding to these different states of perception (with
probabilities equal to the quantum probabilities for these states). In
particular, whenever a measurement is performed by an observer, the
observer's minds develop mental states that correspond to perceptions
of the different outcomes, i.e. corresponding to the worlds A or B in
our example. Since there is a continuum of minds, there will always be
an infinity of minds in any sentient being and the procedure can
continue indefinitely. This resolves the difficulty: each
“I” corresponds to one mind and it ends up in a state
corresponding to a world with a particular outcome. However, this
solution comes at the price of introducing additional structure into
the theory, including a genuinely random process.  

Saunders 2010 claims to solve the problem without
introducing additional structure into the theory. Working in the
Heisenberg picture, he uses appropriate semantics and
 mereology according to which distinct worlds
have no parts in common, not even at early times when the worlds are
qualitatively identical.  In the terminology of
 Lewis 1986 (p. 206) we have the divergence of
 worlds rather than overlap.
 Wilson 2013
develops this idea by introducing a
framework called “indexicalism,” which involves a set of
distinct
diverging “parallel” worlds in which each observer is
located in only one world and all propositions are construed as
self-locating (indexical). In
Wilson's words, “indexicalism allows us to vindicate treating the
weights as a candidate objective probability measure”. However,
it is
not clear how this program can succeed since it is hard to identify
diverging worlds in our experience and there is nothing in the
mathematical formalism of standard quantum mechanics which can be a
counterpart of diverging worlds, see also Kent
2010 (p. 345).  In the next section, the weights associated with
worlds are related to subjective ignorance probability.
  
4.2 Illusion of Probability from Post-Measurement Uncertainty

Tappenden 2011 supports the proposal for explaining how 
the illusion of probability arises,
 Vaidman1998, 2012, in which I
identify the ignorance probability with the post-measurement
uncertainty.  It seems senseless to ask: “What is the
probability that Lev in the world A will observe
A?” This probability is trivially equal to 1. The task is
to define the probability in such a way that we could reconstruct the
prediction of the standard approach where the probability for A
is 1/3. It is indeed senseless to ask you what is the
probability that Lev in the world A will observe A, but
this might be a meaningful question when addressed to Lev in the world of
the outcome A. Under normal circumstances, the world A
is created (i.e. measuring devices and objects which interact with
measuring devices become localized according to the outcome A)
before Lev is aware of the result A. Then, it is sensible to
ask this Lev about his probability of being in world A. There is a
definite outcome which this Lev will see, but he is ignorant of this
outcome at the time of the question. In order to make this point
vivid, I proposed an experiment in which the experimenter is given a
sleeping pill before the experiment. Then, while asleep, he is moved
to room A or to room B depending on the results of the
experiment. When the experimenter has woken up (in one of the rooms),
but before he has opened his eyes, he is asked “In which room
are you?” Certainly, there is a matter of fact about which room
he is in (he can learn about it by opening his eyes), but he is
ignorant about this fact at the time of the question. 

This construction provides the ignorance interpretation
of probability, but the value of the probability has to be postulated:

Probability Postulate

An observer should set his subjective probability of the outcome of a
quantum experiment in proportion to the total measure of existence of
all worlds with that outcome.


This postulate (named the
 Born-Vaidman rule by  Tappenden 2011) is a
counterpart of the collapse postulate of the standard quantum mechanics
according to which, after a measurement, the quantum state collapses to a
particular branch with probability proportional to its squared
amplitude. (See the section on the measurement problem in
the entry on
 philosophical issues in quantum theory.)
 However, it differs in two aspects. First, it  parallels
only the second part of the collapse postulate, the Born Rule, and
second, it is related only to part (ii) of the MWI, the connection to
our experience, and not to the mathematical part of the theory
(i).

The question of the probability of obtaining A also makes sense for
the Lev in world B before he becomes aware of the outcome.  Both
“Lev”s have the same information on the basis of which they should
give their answer. According to the probability postulate they will
give the same answer: 1/3 (the relative measure of existence
of the world A). Since Lev before the measurement is associated with
two “Lev”s after the measurement who have identical ignorance
probability concepts for the outcome of the experiment, I can
define the probability of the outcome of the experiment to be
performed as the ignorance probability of the successors of Lev for being
in a world with a particular outcome.

The “sleeping pill” argument does not reduce the probability of an
outcome of a quantum experiment to a familiar concept of probability
in the classical context. The quantum situation is genuinely
different.  Since all outcomes of a quantum experiment are
realized, there is no probability in the usual sense. Nevertheless, my construction
  leads all believers in the MWI to behave according to the following
principle:

Behavior  Principle

 We care about all our successive worlds in proportion to their
measures of existence.


With this principle our behavior should be similar to the behavior of a
believer in the collapse theory who cares about possible future
worlds in proportion to the probability of their occurrence.   

 There are other arguments supporting the Probability Postulate. In
 an earlier approach, Tappenden 2000 (p. 111)
 adopts a different semantics according to which “I” live in all
branches and have “distinct experiences” in different
“superslices”. He uses “weight of a
superslice” instead of measure of existence and argues that it
is intelligible to associate probabilities according to the Probability Postulate.  
Exploiting a variety of ideas in decoherence
theory such as the relational theory of tense and theories of identity over
time,
  Saunders 1998 also argues for the
“identification of probability with the Hilbert Space norm” (which
equals the measure of existence).
 Page 2003
 promotes an approach  named Mindless
Sensationalism. The basic concept in this approach is a
conscious experience. He assigns weights to different
experiences depending on the quantum state of the universe, as the
expectation values of presently-unknown positive operators
corresponding to the experiences (similar to the measures of
existence of the corresponding worlds
 (3)).
 Page writes “… experiences with greater weights exist in some
sense more …” In all of these approaches, the postulate is
introduced through an analogy with treatments of time, e.g., the
measure of the existence of a world is analogous to the duration of a
time interval. Note also Greaves 2004 who
 advocates  the “Behavior Principle” on the basis of the
 decision-theoretic reflection principle related to the next section.

4.3 Probability Postulate from Decision Theory


In an ambitious work Deutsch 1999 claimed to
derive the Probability Postulate from quantum
formalism and classical decision theory. In Deutsch's argument the
notion of probability is operationalised by being reduced to an
agent's betting preferences. So an agent who is indifferent between
receiving $20 on those branches where spin “up” is observed and
receiving $10 on all branches by definition is deemed to give
probability 1/2 to the spin-up branches. Deutsch then attempts to
prove that the only rationally coherent strategy for an agent is to
assign these operationalised “probabilities” to equal the
quantum-mechanical branch weights.  Wallace 2003,
2007, 2010b,
 2012 developed this approach by making explicit the
tacit assumptions in Deutsch's argument.  In the most recent version
of these proofs, the central assumptions are (i) the symmetry
structure of unitary quantum mechanics; (ii) that an agent's
preferences are consistent across time; (iii) that an agent is
indifferent to the fine-grained branching structure of the world per
se.  Early criticisms of the Deutsch-Wallace approach focussed on
circularity concerns (Barnum et al.2000,
 Baker 2007,
 Hemmo and Pitowsky 2007). As the program led to 
more explicit proofs, criticism turned to the decision-theoretic
 assumptions being made (Lewis 2010,
 Albert 2010,
 Kent 2010,
 Price 2010).
 Vaidman 2012 believes that to derive
 the Probability Postulate, at least some
 connection between the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics
 and probability has to be postulated and points out that
  it is enough to assume that the probability of an outcome of
 a quantum measurement depends only on the measure of existence 
of the corresponding world.
Thus, if all the worlds in which a particular experiment took place
have equal measures of existence, then the probability of a particular
outcome is simply proportional to the number of worlds with this
outcome.  The measures of existence of worlds are, in general, not
equal, but the experimenters in all the worlds can perform additional
specially tailored auxiliary measurements of some variables such that
all the new worlds will have equal measures of existence. The
experimenters should be completely indifferent to the results of these
auxiliary measurements: their only purpose is to split the worlds into
“equal-weight” worlds.  This procedure reconstructs the standard
quantum probability rule from the counting worlds approach;
see  Deutsch 1999 and Zurek 2005 
for details. Another derivation is based on
 Gleason's 1957
 theorem about the uniqueness of the probability measure. Similar conclusions
 can be reached from  the analysis of the frequency operator
originated by  Hartle 1968.
Note that many of these arguments can be applied in the frameworks of
 various interpretations of quantum  mechanics, not just the MWI.


There are also more speculative proposals to deal with the issue of
probability in the MWI. Weissman 1999 has
proposed a modification of quantum theory with additional non-linear
decoherence (and hence with even more worlds than in the standard MWI)
which can lead asymptotically to worlds of equal mean measure for
different outcomes.  Hanson 2003, 2006
 proposed decoherence dynamics in which
observers of different worlds “mangle” each other such that
approximate Born rule is obtained. Van Wesep 2006
used some algebraic method for deriving the probability rule.
  Buniy et al. 2006 used the ideas of
decoherent histories approach of
 Gell-Mann and Hartle 1990.
 
5. Tests of the MWI

It has frequently been claimed, e.g. by
 De Witt 1970,
 that the MWI is in principle indistinguishable from the ideal
collapse theory. This is not so.
The collapse leads to effects that do not exist if the MWI is the
correct theory. To observe the collapse we would need a super
technology which allows for the “undoing” of a quantum experiment,
including a reversal of the detection process by macroscopic
devices. See
 Lockwood 1989 (p. 223),
 Vaidman 1998 (p. 257),
 and other proposals in Deutsch 1986.
 These proposals are all for gedanken experiments that
cannot be performed with current or any foreseeable future technology.
Indeed, in these experiments an interference of different worlds has to
be observed. Worlds are different when at least one macroscopic object
is in macroscopically distinguishable states. Thus, what is needed is
an interference experiment with a macroscopic body. Today there are
interference experiments with larger and larger objects (e.g.,
 fullerene molecules C70, see
 Brezger et al. 2002 ),
but these objects are still not large enough to be considered
“macroscopic”. Such experiments can only refine the
constraints on the boundary where the collapse might take place. A
decisive experiment should involve the interference of states which
differ in a macroscopic number of degrees of freedom: an impossible
task for today's technology.  It can be argued, however, that the
burden of an experimental proof lies with the opponents of the MWI,
because it is they who claim that there is a new physics beyond the
well tested Schrödinger equation. As the analysis of
 Schlosshauerl 2006 shows, we have no such
evidence.

The MWI is wrong if there is a physical process of collapse of the wave
 function of the Universe to a single-world quantum state. Some ingenious
 proposals for such a process have been made (see
 Pearle 1986
 and the entry on
 collapse theories).
 These proposals (and
  Weissman's 1999
 non-linear decoherence idea) have additional observable effects, such as a
tiny energy non-conservation, that were tested in several
experiments, e.g. Collett et al. 1995. 
The effects were not found and some (but not all!)  of
these models have been ruled out, see
 Adler and Bassi 2009.  

Much of the experimental evidence for quantum mechanics is statistical
in nature.  Greaves and Myrvold 2010 made a
careful study showing that our experimental data from quantum
experiments supports the Probability Postulate of the MWI no less
than it supports the Born rule in other approaches to quantum
mechanics. Thus, statistical analysis of quantum experiments should
not help us testing the MWI, but I might mention speculative
cosmological arguments in support of the MWI by
 Page 1999, Kragh 2009,
 Aguirre and Tegmark 2011, and
 Tipler 2012.

6. Objections to the MWI

Some of the objections to the MWI follow from misinterpretations due to
the multitude of various MWIs. The terminology of the MWI can be confusing:
“world” is “universe” in
 Deutsch 1996,
 while “universe” is “multiverse”. There are 
two very different
approaches with the same name “The Many-Minds Interpretation (MMI)”.
The  MMI of
 Albert and Loewer 1988
 mentioned above should not
be confused with the MMI of
 Lockwood et al. 1996
 (which  resembles the approach of  Zeh 1981).
 Further, the MWI in the Heisenberg representation,
 Deutsch 2002,
 differs significantly from the MWI presented in the Schrödinger
representation (used here). The MWI presented here is very close to
Everett's original proposal, but in the entry on
 Everett's relative state formulation of quantum mechanics,
 as well as in his book,
 Barrett 1999,
 uses the name “MWI” for the splitting worlds
view publicized by
 De Witt 1970.
 This approach has been justly criticized: it has both some kind of
collapse (an irreversible splitting of worlds in a preferred basis)
and the multitude of worlds. Now I will consider some  objections in
detail.
6.1 Ockham's Razor


It seems that the majority of the opponents of the MWI reject it
because, for them, introducing a very large number of worlds that we
do not see is an extreme violation of Ockham's principle:
“Entities are not to be multiplied beyond necessity”. However, in
judging physical theories one could reasonably argue that one should
not multiply physical laws beyond necessity either (such a version of
Ockham's Razor has been applied in the past), and in this
respect the MWI is the most economical theory. Indeed, it has all the
laws of the standard quantum theory, but without the collapse
postulate, which is the most problematic of the physical laws.  The MWI is also
more economic than Bohmian mechanics ,which has in addition the
ontology of the particle trajectories and the laws which give their
evolution.
 Tipler 1986 (p. 208)
has presented an effective analogy with the criticism of Copernican
theory on the grounds of Ockham's razor.


One might also consider a possible philosophical advantage of the plurality of worlds
in the MWI, similar to that claimed by realists about possible worlds, such as
 Lewis 1986
 (see the discussion of the analogy between the MWI and Lewis's
theory by
 Skyrms 1976).
 However, the analogy is not complete: Lewis' theory considers
all logically possible worlds, far more than all the worlds that are incorporated
in the quantum state of the Universe.
6.2 The Problem of Preferred Basis

A common criticism of the MWI stems from the fact that the formalism
of quantum theory allows infinitely many ways to decompose the
quantum state of the Universe into a superposition of orthogonal
states. The question arises: “Why choose the particular decomposition
(2) and not any other?” Since other decompositions might lead to a
very different picture, the whole construction seems to lack
predictive power.  
The locality of physical interactions defines the preferred basis.
As described in Section 3.5, only localized states of macroscopic
objects are stable. And indeed, due to the extensive research on
decoherence, the problem of preferred basis is not considered as a
serious objection anymore, see Wallace 2010a.
 Singling out position as a preferred variable for solving
the preferred basis problem might be considered as a weakness, but on
the other hand, it is implausible that out of a mathematical theory of
vectors in Hilbert space one can derive what our world should be. (So
it is not surprising that
 Schwindt 2012 could not do it.)  We have to add some
ingredients to our theory and adding locality, the property of all
known physical interactions, seems to be very natural. Position as a
preferred variable is not an ontological claim (as options discussed
in the next section), but it helps to build a bridge between the
ontology of quantum mechanics and our experience.
  
6.3 The Wave Function is not Enough
As mentioned above, the gap between the mathematical formalism of
the MWI, namely the wave function of the Universe, and our experience
is larger than in other interpretations. This is the reason why many
thought that the ontology of the wave function is not enough. 
 Bell 1987 (p.201) felt that either the wave function
is not everything, or it is not right. He was looking for a theory
with local “beables”. Many followed Bell in search of a 
“primitive ontology” in 3+1 space-time, see
 Allorri et al. 2014. 

A particular reason why the wave function of the Universe cannot be
the whole ontology lies in the argument, led by
 Maudlin 2010, that this is a wrong type of object. 
The wave function of
the Universe is defined in 3N dimensional configuration space, while
we need an entity in 3+1 space-time (like the primitive ontology), see
discussion by Albert 1996,
 Lewis 2004,
 Monton 2006,
 Ney 2012.  Addition of “primitive 
ontology” to the wave function of
the Universe helps us understand our experience, but complicates the
mathematical part of the theory. It is not necessary. The expectation
values of the density of each particle in space-time, which is the concept
derived from the wave functions corresponding to different worlds, can
play the role of “primitive ontology”. Since interactions between
particles are local in space, this is what is needed for finding
causal connections ending at our experience.  The density of particles
is gauge independent and also properly transforms between different
Lorentz observers. Thus, explanation of our experience is unaffected
by the “narratability failure” problem of
 Albert 2013: the wave function description might be different for
different Lorentz observers, but the description in terms of densities
of particles is the same.  Note also an alternative approach based on
3+1 space-time by Wallace and Timpson 2010 who,
being dissatisfied with the wave function ontology, introduced the
 Spacetime State Realism.
 
6.4 Derivation of the Probability Postulate

A popular criticism of the MWI in the past, see
 Belinfante 1975, which was recently repeated by
 Putnam 2005, is based on the naive derivation of the
probability of an outcome of a quantum experiment as being
proportional to the number of worlds with this outcome. Such
a derivation leads to the wrong predictions, but accepting the idea of
probability being proportional to the measure of existence of a world
resolves this problem. Although this involves adding a postulate, we
do not complicate the mathematical part (i) of the theory since we do
not change the ontology, namely, the wave function.  It is a postulate
belonging to part (ii), the connection to our experience, and it is a
very natural postulate: differences in the mathematical descriptions
of worlds are manifest in our experience, see
 Saunders 1998.
  
Another criticism related to probability follows from the claim,
apparently made by Everett himself and later by many other proponents
of the MWI, see De Witt 1970, that the
Probability Postulate can be  derived  just from the
formalism of the MWI. Unfortunately, the criticism of this derivation
(which might well be correct) is considered to be a criticism of the
MWI, see Kent 1990. The recent revival of this
claim involving decision theory, Deutsch 1999,
which also encountered strong criticism (see Section 4.4), drew
negative publicity to the MWI. It might be that the MWI has no
advantage over other interpretations insofar as the derivation of the
Born rule is concerned, but it also has no disadvantage, so criticism on 
these grounds is not founded, see
 Papineau 2010.

The issue, named by Wallace 2003 as the
“incoherence” probability problem, is arguably the most serious
difficulty. How to talk about probability when all possible outcomes
happen? This led Saunders and Wallace 2008a
to introduce uncertainty to the MWI.  However, Section 4.2 shows how
one can explain the illusion of probability of an observer in a world,
while the Universe incorporating all the worlds remains
deterministic. Albert 2010 argues that the
probability I introduce appears too late.
 Vaidman 2012 answers Albert by viewing the
 probability as the value of a
rational bet on a particular result.  The results of the betting of
the experimenter are relevant for his successors emerging after
performing the experiment in different worlds. Since the experimenter
is related to all of his successors and they all have identical
rational strategies for betting, then this should also be the strategy
of the experimenter before the experiment.
6.5 Social Behavior of a Believer in the MWI


There are claims that a believer in the MWI will behave in an
irrational way. One claim is based on the naive argument described in
the previous section: a believer who assigns equal probabilities to
all different worlds will make equal bets for the outcomes of quantum
experiments that have unequal probabilities.


Another claim,
 Lewis 2000,
 is related to the strategy of a believer in the MWI who is offered
to play a quantum Russian roulette game. The argument is
that I, who would not accept an offer to play a classical Russian
roulette game, should agree to play the roulette any number of times if
the triggering occurs according to the outcome of a quantum
experiment.  Indeed, at the end, there will be one world in which Lev
is a multi-millionaire and in all other worlds there will be no
Lev Vaidman alive. Thus, in the future, Lev will be a rich and
presumably  happy man.

 However, adopting the
 Probability Postulate
leads all believers in the MWI to behave according to the
 Behavior Principle and with this principle our
behavior is similar to the behavior of a believer in the collapse
theory who cares about possible future worlds according to the
probability of their occurrence. I should not agree to play quantum
Russian roulette because the measure of existence of worlds with Lev
dead will be much larger than the measure of existence of the worlds
with a rich and alive Lev.

Although in most situations the Behavior Principle makes the MWI
believer act in the usual way, there are some situations in which a belief in the
MWI might cause a change in a social behaviour,
 Vaidman 1990 (Section 16). If I decided to fill a
lottery ticket, I can toss a coin several times to get a random number
and hope to win the prize, or I can split the world several times
using the 
 Quantum World Splitter
 such that every number will be filled by
Lev Vaidman at least in one world in our Universe, so I can be sure
that there will be a Lev Vaidman with the big prize. The choice,
however, is not obvious, since in choosing the quantum coin I also
make sure that there will be many worlds in which I lost.
 (Albrecht and Phillips 2012 claim that even a toss of
a regular coin splits the world, so there is no need for a quantum
splitter.)


7. Why the MWI?


The reason for adopting the MWI is that it avoids the collapse of the
quantum wave. (Other no-collapse theories are not better than MWI for
various reasons, e.g., nonlocality of Bohmian mechanics; and the
disadvantage of all of them is that they have some additional
structure.)  The collapse postulate is a physical law that differs
from all known physics in two aspects: it is genuinely random and it
involves some kind of action at a distance.  According to the collapse
postulate the outcome of a quantum experiment is not determined by the
initial conditions of the Universe prior to the experiment: only the
probabilities are governed by the initial state.  There is no
experimental evidence in favor of collapse and against the MWI.  We
need not assume that Nature plays dice: science has stronger
explanatory power. The MWI is a deterministic theory for a physical
Universe and it explains why a world appears to be indeterministic for
human observers.

 The MWI allows for a local explanation of our Universe.
 The most celebrated example of nonlocality  given by
 Bell 1964
in the context of the
 Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen argument
 cannot get off the ground  in the framework of the MWI
 because it requires a predetermined single outcome
of a quantum experiment, see discussion in
 Bacciagaluppi 2002 .
 There is no action at a distance in our Universe, 
but there is an entanglement. And a  “world” is a 
nonlocal concept. This explains why we observe
 non-local correlations in a particular world.
  

Deutsch 2012 claims to provide an alternative
vindication of quantum locality using a quantum information
framework. This approach started with
 Deutsch and Hayden 2000 analyzing the flow of 
quantum information using
the Heisenberg picture. After discussions by
 Rubin 2001 and Deutsch 2002,
 Hewitt-Horsman and Vedral 2007 analyzed the
 uniqueness of the
physical picture of the information flow. 
 Timpson 2005 and
 Wallace and Timpson 2007 questioned
the locality demonstration in this approach and the meaning of the
locality claim was clarified in Deutsch 2012.
 Rubin 2011 suggested that this approach might
provide a simpler route toward generalization of the MWI of quantum
mechanics to the MWI of field theory.


The MWI resolves most, if not all, paradoxes of quantum mechanics
(e.g., Schrödinger cat), see Vaidman 1994.
A physical paradox is a phenomenon contradicting our intuition. The
laws of physics govern the Universe incorporating all the worlds and
this is why, when we limit ourselves to a single world, we may run
into a paradox.  An example is getting information about a region from
where no particle ever came using the interaction-free
measurement of Elitzur and Vaidman 1993.
 Indeed, on the scale of the Universe there is no paradox: in
other worlds particles were in that region.  

Vaidman 2001 finds it advantageous to think about
all worlds together even in analysing a controversial issue of
classical probability theory,
 Sleeping Beauty Problem.
 Accepting the Probability Postulate reduces the
analysis of probability to a calculation of the measures of existence
of various worlds. Note, however, that the Quantum Sleeping Beauty
also became a topic of a hot controversy:
 Lewis 2007, Papineau and Durà-Vilà 2009,
 Bradley 2011, Wilson 2014,
Schwarz 2012,
 Groisman et al. 2013.
 

The strongest proponents of the MWI can be found among cosmologists,
e.g., Aguirre and Tegmark 2011. In quantum
cosmology the MWI allows for discussion of the whole Universe, thereby
avoiding the difficulty of the standard interpretation which requires
an external observer. Recently, Bousso and Susskind 2012
 argued that even considerations in the framework of string
theory lead to the MWI.
 

Another community where many favor the MWI is that of the
researchers in quantum information.  In quantum computing, the key
issue is the parallel processing performed on the same computer; this
is very similar to the basic picture of the MWI. Recently the
usefulness of the MWI for explaining the speedup of quantum
computation has been questioned:
 Steane 2003, 
 Duwell 2007, and
 Cuffaro 2012.
It is not that the quantum computation cannot be understood without
the framework of the MWI; rather, it is just easier to think about quantum
algorithms as parallel computations performed in parallel worlds,
 Deutsch and Jozsa 1992. There is no way to use all
the information obtained in all parallel computations — the quantum
computer algorithm is a method in which the outcomes of all
calculations interfere, yielding the desired result. The cluster-state
quantum computer also performs parallel computations, although it is
harder to see how we get the final result. The criticism follows from
identifying the computational worlds with decoherent worlds. Quantum
computer process has no decoherence and the preferred basis is chosen
to be the computational basis.
 

Recent studies suggest that some of the fathers of quantum mechanics
held views close to the MWI: Allori et al. 2011 
say this about Schrödinger, and
 Becker 2004 about von Neumann. At the birth of the MWI
 Wheeler 1957 wrote: “No escape seems possible from
this relative state formulation if one wants to have a complete
mathematical model for the quantum mechanics ...”  Since then, the MWI
struggles against the
 Copenhagen interpretation, see
 Byrne 2010, gaining some
legitimacy only in recent years Deutsch 1996,
 Bevers 2011, and Barrett 2011.
The current controversial status of the MWI can be learned from the
very diverse opinions in the talks of its 50th anniversary
celebrations:
 Oxford 2007,
 Perimeter 2007 .