What is the relationship between a clay statue and the lump of clay
from which it is formed? We might say that the lump
constitutes the statue, but what is this relation of
material constitution? Some insist that constitution is
identity, on the grounds that distinct material objects cannot
occupy the same place at the same time. Others argue that
constitution is not identity, since the statue and the lump
differ in important respects. Still others take cases like this to
motivate revisionary views about the nature of persistence, parthood,
modality, identity, or existence.

This article presents some of the most important puzzles of material
constitution and evaluates some of the most popular responses.
 

1. The Puzzles

Puzzles of material constitution played an important role in the
development of philosophy and continue to be a source of much debate
today. Here, we introduce four of the most famous puzzles.

The Debtor’s Paradox. The ancient playwright Epicharmus
tells the tale of a poor but resourceful debtor. When approached for
payment, the man responds with a riddle. If you add a pebble to a
collection of pebbles, you no longer have the same number. If you add
a length to a cubit, you no longer have the same measure. In the same
way, if you add a bit of matter to a portion of matter you no longer
have the same entity. Since man is nothing more than a material object
whose matter is constantly changing, we do not survive from one moment
to the next. The debtor concludes that he is not the same person who
incurred the debt, so he cannot be held responsible for payment. The
exasperated creditor then strikes the debtor, who protests the abusive
treatment. The creditor expresses sympathy, but points out that he
cannot be held accountable for the assault. After all, material change
has already taken place so, by the debtor’s own line of
reasoning, the guilty party is no longer present. The scene is
intended to be comedic, but the argument is no laughing matter. The
man who incurred the debt was constituted by one portion of matter,
M1. The man who is approached for payment is constituted by
a distinct portion of matter, M2 (let us assume, for the
sake of argument, that M2 consists of M1,
together with some new matter). If constitution is identity, the
debtor’s reasoning is sound: the man who is approached for
payment is not the man who incurred the debt. More generally, this
version of the argument would show that it is impossible for human
persons to survive the addition of any new parts. 

The Puzzle of Dion and Theon. The Stoic philosopher
Chrysippus invites us to consider the case of Dion and Theon, where
Dion is a normal human being and Theon is a large part of Dion
consisting of everything but Dion’s right foot. Suppose now that
the right foot is removed. Theon obviously survives the operation, for
his parts remain completely unchanged. But in that case it seems as if
Dion does not survive the operation, for otherwise we would
have two people in the same place at the same time. Hence, Dion does
not survive the loss of his foot. More generally, the argument would
show that human persons cannot survive the loss of any constituent
parts. (A modern variation on the ancient puzzle, due to Peter Geach
1962 by way of David Wiggins 1967, concerns Tibbles and Tib, where
Tibbles is a cat and Tib a cat-part consisting of everything but
Tibbles’s tail.)

The Ship of Theseus Puzzle. The ancient historian Plutarch
recounts the story of the famous ship of Theseus, which was displayed
in Athens for many centuries. Over time, the ship’s planks wore
down and were gradually replaced. In the ancient world, the ship
became “a standing example among the philosophers, for the
logical question as to things that grow; one side holding that the
ship remained the same, and the other contending it was not the
same” (Clough 1859, p. 21). In the modern era, the case took on
added interest, owing to a twist from Thomas Hobbes. Suppose that a
custodian collects the original planks as they are removed from the
ship and later puts them back together in the original arrangement. In
this version of the story, we are left with two seafaring vessels, one
on display in Athens and one in the possession of the custodian. But
where is the famous Ship of Theseus? Some will say that the ship is
with the museum, since ships can survive the complete replacement of
parts, provided that the change is sufficiently gradual. Others will
say that the ship is with the custodian, since ships can survive being
disassembled and reassembled. Both answers seems right, but this leads
to the surprising conclusion that, at the end of the story, the ship
of Theseus is in two places at once. More generally, the argument
suggests that it is possible for one material object to exist in two
places at the same time. We get an equally implausible result by
working backwards: There are clearly two ships at the end of the
story. Each of those ships was also around at the beginning of the
story, for the reasons just given. So, at the beginning of the story,
there were actually two ships of Theseus occupying the same place at
the same time, one of which would go on to the museum and one of which
would enter into the care of the custodian.

The Puzzle of the Statue and the Clay. Various ancient
philosophers, including Aristotle, pointed out that statues seem to
differ in important respects from the portions of matter from which
they are made. To illustrate: Suppose that, on Monday, a sculptor
purchases an unformed lump of clay, which he names ‘Lump’.
Suppose further that, on Tuesday, the artist sculpts the clay into the
form of the biblical king David and names his statue
‘David’. It is tempting to say that, in this case, there
is only one object in the sculptor’s hands—David just
is Lump. But, on reflection, this identification is problematic,
since Lump and David seem to differ in various respects. First, Lump
and David differ in their temporal properties: Lump existed
on Monday, while David did not. Second, they differ in their
persistence conditions (i.e., the conditions under which they
would and would not continue to exist): Lump could survive being
squashed, David could not. Third, they differ in kind: Lump
is a mere lump of clay, while David is a statue. More generally, we
can say that Lump and David differ in their non-categorical
properties, where these include all of the various ways that a
thing was, will, would, could, or
must be. (Fine 2003 argues that Lump and David also differ in
their aesthetic properties, among other things.) But if Lump
and David differ in even one respect, they are not the same
thing, for Leibniz’s Law tells that, for any x
and y, if x = y, then x and
y have all the same properties. Thus, it seems as if the
sculptor holds not one, but two, material objects in his hands: a
statue and a lump of clay. More generally, it is possible for
two material objects to exist in the same place at the same time. 

The four puzzles differ in details, but present a common problem. (A
fifth puzzle about material constitution—the problem of the
many—raises significantly different issues and is dealt
with in a separate entry. See the entry on the
 problem of the many.)
 We will focus on the case of the statue and the clay, and we will
formulate the argument as follows: 

David did not exist on Monday (but does exist on Tuesday).
Lump did exist on Monday (and also exists on Tuesday).
If (1) and (2), then David is not identical to Lump.
[So] David is not identical to Lump. 


The premises are plausible, but the conclusion seems absurd, for it
implies the possibility of spatially coincident objects. As
David Wiggins notes, “It a truism frequently called in evidence
and confidently relied upon in philosophy that two things cannot be in
the same place at the same time.” (1968, p. 90) Since the
conclusion contradicts the truism, we are left with a paradox:
seemingly true premises have led to a seemingly false conclusion. 

Generally speaking, there are five possible replies to the paradox.
First, one could simply accept (4) and admit that David is not
identical to Lump. We consider this response in sections 2 and 3,
where we discuss the constitution view of David Wiggins
(1968) and the temporal parts theory of David Lewis (1976).
Second, one could deny (1) by either denying the existence of David or
by insisting that David existed on Monday. We consider these responses
in section 4, where we discuss the eliminativist views of
Peter Unger (1979), Peter van Inwagen (1990), and Roderick Chisholm
(1979). Third, one could deny (2) by either denying the existence of
Lump (as the eliminativist does) or by denying that Lump survives
being shaped into a statue. We consider this second option in section
5, where we discuss the dominant kinds view of Michael Burke
(1992). Fourth, one could deny (3) by rejecting the standard
formulation of Leibniz’s Law. We consider this response in
section 6, where we discuss the relative identity theory of
Peter Geach (1967). Fifth and finally, one could respond to the
paradox by insisting that the underlying issues are in some sense
verbal, so that there is no fact of the matter about which premise (if
any) is false. We consider this response in section 7, where we
discuss the deflationist views of Rudolf Carnap (1950) and
others.

One final note: Our focus will be on puzzles about material
objects, but similar problems arise for other kinds of
entities, including events, properties, and groups. Suppose, for
example, that Jackie attacks his enemy by kicking him. What is the
relation between the attack and the kick? We might say that the kick
constitutes an attack, but what is the relation of event
constitution? (For an introduction to the parallel debate over
events, see Davidson 1969, Goldman 1970, and Pfeifer 1989. For the
debate over property constitution, see Shoemaker 2003. For the debate
over group constitution, see Uzquiano 2004a.) 
2. Coincident Objects

The most popular reply to the paradox of material constitution is to
embrace the conclusion: Lump and Statue exist at the same place at the
same time, but differ in their non-categorical properties, so it is
possible for there to be two material objects in the same place at the
same time. This view is sometimes referred to as the constitution
view since it holds that the statue is constituted by, but not
identical to, the lump of clay from which it is formed. In a slogan:
constitution is not identity. (Johnston 1992, Baker 1997)
Constitution is distinguished from identity insofar as it is an
asymmetric relation: Lump constitutes Statue, but not
vice versa. Constitution is also taken to be a
dependence relation: As David Wiggins puts it, the statue
“consists in” and is “nothing over and above”
the lump of clay (1968, p. 91; for more on the nature of constitution,
see Wasserman 2004).

The constitution view is extremely popular, having been defended, in
some form or other, by Baker (1997, 2000, 2002, 2007), Chappell
(1990), Doepke (1982, 1996), Fine (2003), Forbes (1987), Johnston
(1992), Koslicki (2004), Kripke (1971), Levey (1997), Lowe (1983,
1995), Oderberg (1996), Pollock (1974, pp. 157–174), Salmon
(1981, pp. 224–9), Shoemaker (1999, 2003), Shorter (1977),
Simons (1985, 1987, pp. 210–252), Thomson (1983, 1998), and
Yablo (1987). Indeed, the view is so common that it has been labeled
“the standard account” (Burke 1992). Why not join the
crowd?

“Just try to walk through a wall,” quips the skeptic.
“Two things can’t be in the same place at the same
time!” We will call this the impenetrability objection,
since it appeals to the common idea that impenetrability is the mark
of the material.

The constitution theorist has a ready reply to the obvious objection:
unlike you and the wall, David and Lump share the same matter
and the same parts and it is in virtue of these facts that
those two objects are able to occupy the same place at the same time
(Wiggins 1968). In short: spatial coincidence (the sharing of place)
is explained by material coincidence (the sharing parts). Material
coincidence also helps to answer another common complaint: suppose
that Lump weighs 10lbs; David will then weigh 10lbs. as well. So why
don’t you get a reading of 20lbs. when you place both on the
scale? “Why don’t the two together weigh twice as
much?” (Lewis 1986, p. 252) Answer: because the two objects
share the same weight as a result of sharing the same
parts. (Zimmerman 1995, p. 89, fn. 57. As Zimmerman notes, we do
not calculate the weight of something by summing the weights of all
its parts—weigh the bricks and the molecules of a wall
and you will get the wrong result, since you will have weighed some
parts more than once. According to the constitution theorist, weighing
David and Lump involves the same kind of
double-counting.)

Material coincidence may explain how spatial coincidence is possible,
but what about material coincidence itself? On the face of it, the
claim that different things can be made up out of the same parts at
the same time is no more plausible than the claim that different
things can be located in the same place at the same time. We will call
this the extensionality objection, since it appeals to the
common idea that wholes are individuated by their parts in the same
way that sets are individuated by their members. More formally, the
principle is this:

Extensionality: ∀x∀y
[x = y ↔ ∀z(Pzx ↔
Pzy)]


Note three things about this principle. First, ‘P’ stands
for the generic parthood relation, which is to be distinguished from
the relations of improper parthood (x is an improper
part of y if and only if x =y) and
proper parthood (x is a proper part of y if
and only if x is a part of y and x ≠
y). Second, the extensionality principle is formulated in
terms of a two-place parthood relation. Constitution theorists,
however, typically employ a three-place relation that holds
between parts, wholes, and times. So, for example, it is said
that my baby teeth are a part of me at one time, but not
at another (for more on the relation between the constitution
view and temporally-relativized mereology, see Thomson 1983 and
Thomson 1998). Having noted this point, I will now leave temporal
qualifiers implicit. Third, and most importantly, note that
extensionality is a theorem in standard systems of mereology,
the logic of parts and wholes (see the entry on
 mereology).
 The problem, of course, is that the extensionality principle is
inconsistent with the constitution view if we assume that coinciding
objects occupy the same place at the same time by having all of the
same parts at those times. If David and Lump share all of the same
parts, for example, extensionality tells us that David is
Lump.

One obvious response to this objection is to deny extensionality
(Thompson 1983). But this move comes at a cost, since extensionality
follows from the standard assumption that the parthood relation is
both reflexive and antisymmetric: 

Reflexivity: ∀x(Pxx)


Antisymmetry:
∀x∀y[(Pxy & Pyx)
→ x = y] 


Reflexivity tells us that everything is part of itself, so if
x and y share all of the same parts, then each must
be a part of the other. Antisymmetry then implies that x is
identical to y. (The extensionality objection is sometimes
framed in terms of a different Extensionality principle according to
which objects are identical if and only if they share all of the same
proper parts. This principle does not follow from Reflexivity
and Antisymmetry, but it is a theorem of standard systems of
mereology—see the entry on
 mereology
 for more details.)

A second response is to say that coinciding objects share all of their
material parts, but that they differ in some
non-material aspect (Rea 1998, Paul 2002, McDaniel 2001). The
most familiar version of this view traces back to Aristote and the
idea that material objects are compounds of matter and
form. If one accepts this view, then one could say that David
and Lump differ in their parts since only David has the form
Statue as a non-material part. (For a recent defense of an
Aristotle-inspired view, see Koslicki 2008. For more details on
Aristotle’s own views, see the entry on
 Aristotle’s metaphysics.)

According to the constitution view, David and Lump share the same
matter. As a result, those objects share many of the same properties.
Both have the same weight, the same shape, and the same coloring.
Generalizing, we can say that those two objects share all of the same
categorical properties. Of course, David and Lump also differ
with respect to their non-categorical properties (where these
include temporal properties, persistence conditions, and kind
properties). So we should ask: What could account for these
differences? How can two things that are exactly alike in so many ways
still differ in these other respects? We will call this the
grounding objection since it appeals to the common idea that
non-categorical properties are grounded in categorical properties.
(For alternative statements of the objection, see Burke 1992, Heller
1990, pp. 30–2, Oderberg 1996, p. 158, Simons 1987, pp.
225–6, and Zimmerman 1995, pp. 87–8. Note: The grounding
objection is sometimes framed in terms of supervenience, but this is a
mistake for supervenience and grounding are importantly different
relations. For more on this issue, see Zimmerman 1995, Olson 2001, and
Bennett 2004. See the entry on
 metaphysical grounding
 and Section 5.5 of the entry on
 supervenience.)

One response to the grounding objection attempts to ground the
non-categorical features of coinciding objects in relational
facts about those objects. For example, Lynne Rudder Baker suggests
that David is a statue, rather than a mere lump of
clay, because it is essentially related to an artworld—it
is the sort of thing that is admired, reviewed, and discussed. Lump
does not receive this sort of attention and for this reason it differs
in kind. (Baker 2000, pp. 35–46) The problem with this
explanation is that it seems to get things exactly backwards, for it
is natural to say that David is admired, reviewed, and discussed by
those in the art community because it is a statue (rather
than a mere lump of clay). A second, related, response attempts to
ground the non-categorical features of coinciding objects in
historical facts. For example, one might point out that Lump
was created by a claymaker whose intent was to create some clay, while
David was created by a sculptor whose intent was to create a statue.
One can then claim that the relevant difference in kind membership is
determined, at least in part, by these historical facts. Consider an
analogy. A counterfeit dollar bill may be qualitatively identical to a
genuine dollar bill, but those two objects would still differ in kind
since only one would be an actual dollar bill. Presumably,
this difference in kind is explained by historical facts about how
those bills came into being. According to the constitution theorist,
the same kind of explanation applies in the case of the statue and the
clay. The general problem with this line of response is that it cannot
be extended to every case of constitution. Consider, for example, Alan
Gibbard’s (1975) famous example of Lumpl and Goliath.
An artist sculpts a statue of the biblical giant Goliath in two
pieces—bottom and top halves—and then brings the two
pieces together. In so doing, he creates a new statue (which he names
‘Goliath’) and a new piece of clay (which he names
‘Lumpl’). After a brief tour of the local art galleries,
the statue is then smashed to bits, simultaneously destroying both
Goliath and Lumpl. The crucial feature of this case is that Lumpl and
Goliath share all of their historical properties and appear
to stand in the same relations to everything else around
them. For example, both are created at the same time, by the same
person, with a single set of intentions. Both are put on display in
the same galleries and gazed upon by the same patrons. Both are
destroyed at the same time, in exactly the same way. In short, Lumpl
and Goliath seem to share all of their categorical
properties—including their relational properties—while
still differing with respect to their modal properties and kind
properties. But, in that case, it seems as if there is nothing to
ground these non-categorical differences. (For a potential reply to
this and other worries, see Sutton 2012.) 

At this point we have reviewed the three most common objections to the
constitution view: the impenetrability objection, the extensionality
objection, and the grounding objection. A fourth and final concern is
what we might call the anthropic objection. (Sider 2001, pp.
156–8 refers to this as the “arbitrariness worry”.
For a classic statement of the problem, see Sosa 1987. For a more
recent statement, see section 2.5 of the entry on
 ordinary objects.)
 Thus far, we have focused on the question of whether two material
objects—like David and Lump—could exist at the same place
and time. But why stop at two? Consider the mereological
sum of material simples that is made up out of all the simples
that currently compose David and Lump. Those simples existed long
before David or Lump came into existence, so the sum is distinct from
the other two objects. So now it seems as if we have three objects in
the same place at the same time: a lump, a statue, and a sum. But why
stop at three? Consider the instatue that coincides
with David whenever that statue is indoors and then goes out of
existence whenever David is taken outside. (This example is inspired
by Eli Hirsch’s 1982, p. 32 example of incars and
outcars.) Now it looks as if we have four objects in the same
place at the same time: a lump, a statue, a sum, and an instatue. But
why stop at four? There is also the tablestatue (that exists
when and only when the statue is on a table), the litstatue (that
exists when and only when the statue is in the light), the
dinnerstatue (that exists when only when the statue’s sculptor
is eating dinner), and so on. Ernest Sosa (1987) refers to this
multiplication of entities as “the explosion of reality”.


Defenders of the constitution view may run from the explosion and
insist that there are only two (or three or four) objects in the same
place at the same time. But what justifies this exclusionary attitude?
Granted, we humans do not normally concern ourselves with
instatues, litstatues, and the rest. Ordinary English does not even
have sortal terms for discussing these entities. But these
are facts about our interests and linguistic decisions. Why
should we think that there is a correspondence between the sortal
terms in our language and the kinds of objects in the
world? One way to explain this correspondence would be to claim that
reality is determined, in some sense, by our conceptual scheme. But
the constitution view is typically offered as an alternative
to anti-realist doctrines of this kind. Perhaps, then, the
constitution theorist should accept Sosa’s explosion and say
that our inattentiveness does not exclude instatues, litstatues and
all the rest from the realm of being? Perhaps all of those objects
exist at the same place at the same time, sharing the same parts and
the same matter? Perhaps. But accepting this explosion brings us very
close to endorsing a second view on material constitution. It is to
this view that we now turn.
3. Temporal Parts

Consider the case of Interstate 5. I-5 runs through Washington,
Oregon, and California, but the road is not wholly present in any of
those states. Rather, I-5 exists in different states by having
different road segments in each—there is the Washington segment
of I-5, the Oregon segment of I-5, and the California segment of I-5.
According to the temporal parts theorist (or
four-dimensionalist), persistence through time is exactly
like that (see Quine 1953a, Lewis 1976, and Sider 2001). Just
as roads exist at different places by having distinct spatial parts at
those places, material objects exist at different times by having
distinct temporal parts at those times. In the case of David
Lewis, for example, there is the 1970s segment, the 1980s segment, and
the 1990s segment. More formally, we can say that x is a
temporal part of y at (or during) t if and only if
(i) x is a part of y at (or during) t, (ii)
x overlaps everything that is a part of y at (or
during) t, and (iii) x exists only at (or during)
t. (Sider 2001, p. 60) Informally, we can say that a temporal
part of something just consists of all and only that object’s
parts at some time (or during some temporal interval). If you want to
know what a temporal part looks like, just look in the
mirror—what you see is your current temporal part. (Of course,
you can also see yourself in the mirror by seeing your
current temporal part, just as you can see a road by seeing one of its
segments.) 

Consider now the case of U.S. Route 29, which runs from the western
suburbs of Baltimore, Maryland, to Pensacola, Florida. As U.S. 29
passes through Charlotte it becomes Tyson St.—a street wholly
located within the state of North Carolina. The two roadways in this
case are not identical, but they are partly identical, for
Tyson St. is identical to a proper spatial part of U.S. 29. According
to the temporal parts theorist, the case of the statue and the clay is
just like that. Lump exists for some period of time and then
“turns into” David. If the sculptor is unsatisfied with
her work and squashes the statue, then Lump—but not
David—continues to exist, in which case David is nothing more
than a proper temporal part of Lump. 

There are, of course, various arguments for and against the doctrine
of temporal parts. (For a summary, see the entry on
 temporal parts.)
 Here, we focus on the relevance of the doctrine to the puzzles of
material constitution and, in particular, to the challenges facing the
constitution view.

The impenetrability objection. The first problem for the
constitution view was that it allowed for two material objects to
exist in the same place at the same time. The temporal parts theorist
avoids this objection for he will say that, whenever Lump and David
exist, there is a single object that exactly occupies the relevant
location—a temporal part that is shared by both David and Lump.
Of course, the friend of temporal parts will admit that there is a
sense in which two material objects can exist in the same place
at the same time, since two persisting objects that share a common
temporal will be partly present at the same location. But
this is no more problematic than two roads being partly present at the
same place by virtue of sharing a common road segment. 

The extensionality objection. The second problem for the
constitution view was that it allowed for two objects to be composed
of all the same parts. The temporal parts theorist avoids this problem
in the case of the statue and the lump, since he will say that those
objects share some, but not all, of the same temporal parts. Of
course, he will also admit that there is a sense in which two
objects can have all of the same parts, since two objects that share a
common temporal part will have all the same parts at that
time. But this is no more problematic than two roads that share a
common road segment and, thus, have all of the same parts at that
place.

The grounding objection. The third challenge for the
constitution theorist was to identify a ground for the non-categorical
features of coinciding objects. The same challenge can be put to the
friend of temporal parts. In the case of the statue and the lump of
clay, for example, we have two objects that share all of the same
categorical properties whenever they both exist—in virtue of
what, then, do they differ with respect to their temporal properties,
kind properties, and so on? The temporal parts theorist could follow
the constitution theorist in claiming that the relevant objects differ
in kind, for example, in virtue of their historical properties or he
could simply insist that the difference in kind is grounded in the
fact that the two objects have different temporal parts. (See
Wasserman 2002 for more on temporal parts and the grounding
problem.)

The anthropic objection. The last worry for the constitution
view was that it postulated an unexplained correspondence between the
sortal terms in our language and the kinds of objects in the world.
The temporal parts theorist avoids this worry as well. On the standard
four-dimensionalist picture, persisting objects are ultimately
composed of instantaneous temporal parts and, for any
collection of these parts, there is a further object that they
compose. Thus, there is a material object corresponding to every
filled region of spacetime. (Quine 1960, p. 171) For example, there is
an object composed of all and only the temporal parts of David
when that statue is indoors. This would be what we earlier
called an “instatue”. There is also an object composed of
all and only the temporal parts of David when that statue is in
the light. This is what we earlier called a
“litstatue”. In this way, the temporal parts theorist
finds a place for all of the objects introduced earlier, and thereby
avoids an implausible correlation between the sortal terms of our
language and the kinds of objects in the world. (Of course, he avoids
this objection by accepting Sosa’s explosion, which many take to
be an even more objectionable result—see, for example, Markosian
1998, p. 228.)

The temporal parts theorist thus avoids all of the objections facing
the constitution view, at least when we restrict our attention to the
original puzzle of Lump and David. Unfortunately, matters are not so
simple in Gibbard’s case of Lumpl and Goliath. Those objects
exist at all of the same times and thus share all of the same temporal
parts. The four-dimensionalist who accepts extensionality will thus be
forced to conclude that Lumpl is identical to Goliath. But, in that
case, he faces the following kind of argument:

Goliath is essentially statue-shaped.
Lumpl is not essentially statue-shaped.
If (1) and (2), then Goliath is not identical to Lumpl.
[So] Goliath is not identical to Lumpl.


(1) appears true, since Goliath could not survive being rolled up into
a ball, for example. But Lumpl could survive that change in
shape, so (2) appears true as well. Finally, (3) appears to follow
from Leibniz’s Law. Goliath has the property of being
essentially statue-shaped and Lumpl does not, so Goliath is not
identical to Lumpl. 

The most popular reply to this objection is due to David Lewis (1971,
1986), who defends a counterpart theory of de re
modal ascriptions (like (1) and (2) above). According to this view,
ordinary individuals like Goliath and Lumpl are
worldbound—they exist in only one possible
world—but have counterparts at many other possible
worlds. These counterparts serve as the truth-makers for de
re modal ascriptions. Roughly, we say that something is
essentially F just in case all of its counterparts are F and
we say that something is contingently F just in case one or
more of its counterparts are not-F. The counterpart relation is a
relation of similarity, rather than identity, and, as with
all similarity talk, claims about counterparts will be vague and
sensitive to context. The most important point in this connection is
that names and other referring expressions are often associated with
kinds that determine the appropriate counterpart relation for
assessing de re modal claims involving those terms. In
Gibbard’s case, for example, we introduced the name
‘Goliath’ for the statue and the name
‘Lumpl’ for the piece of clay. Thus, claims that
include the name ‘Goliath’ invoke a
statue-counterpart relation, whereas claims that include the
name ‘Lumpl’ invoke a piece-of-clay-counterpart
relation. (1), for example, attributes to Goliath the property of
being such that all of its statue-counterparts are
statue-shaped. And (2) denies Lumpl the property of being
such that all of its piece-of-clay-counterparts are
statue-shaped. Since the predicates in the two premises express
different properties, Leibniz’s Law has no application. (For a
criticism of this response, see Fara and Williamson 2005.) 
4. Eliminativism

The simplest way of avoiding the puzzles of material constitution is
to deny the existence of some of the objects that give rise to those
problems. For example, if one claims that there are no such things as
statues and lumps of clay, then there is no threat of having a statue
and a lump of clay in the same place at the same time. In this
section, we briefly introduce three versions of this eliminativist
view. 

Eliminativism is often associated with Peter Unger (1979), who
(previously) defended the thesis of mereological nihilism.
Nihilism is the view that there are there are no composite objects
(i.e., objects with proper parts); there are only mereological simples
(i.e., objects with no proper parts). The nihilist thus denies the
existence of statues, ships, humans, and all other macroscopic
material objects. On this view, there are only atoms in the void.
Since the nihilist denies the existence of statues in general, he will
deny the existence of the particular statue, David. Hence, he will
reject the very first premise of the original argument for coincident
objects. He will also reject the second premise of that argument,
since he will deny the existence of the relevant lump. (Terminological
note: Unger called himself a ‘nihilist’, but his use of
the term differed slightly from current usage—see van Inwagen
1990, p. 73.) 

The nihilist makes two main claims, one negative and one positive.
Both claims can be challenged. Let us begin with the negative thesis
that there are no composite objects and no statues in particular. The
most common reaction to this claim is an incredulous stare. For many,
the existence of composite objects is a Moorean fact, more certain
than any premise that could be used to argue against it. The nihilist
may reply by pointing out that there is a sense in which
statues do exist. In our original case, for example, the nihilist will
say that, strictly speaking, there is no statue, but there
are some simples arranged statuewise. Those simples jointly
occupy a statue-shaped region of space, jointly resemble the biblical
king David, and jointly sit on some simples arranged tablewise. So,
loosely speaking, we can say that there is a statue of David
on the table. Similarly for all talk of statues, ships, and other
composite objects—wherever commonsense says that there is a
composite object belonging to the kind K, the nihilist will
say that there are some simples arranged K-wise and so,
loosely speaking, a K. (For more details on this paraphrasing
strategy, see van Inwagen 1990, chapter 10. For worries, see
O’Leary-Hawthorne and Michael 1996, Uzquiano 2004b, and McGrath
2005.) This brings us to the nihilist’s positive thesis that
there are material simples. This claim can also be challenged (see
Sider 1993, Zimmerman 1996, and Schaffer 2003). It was once thought
that chemical atoms were fundamental particles, until the discovery of
protons and neutrons. And it was thought that protons and neutrons
were mereological simples, until the discovery of quarks. One might
think it is possible for this process goes on without limit, in which
case our world would be gunky (i.e., it would have no simples
as proper parts). The problem is that this possibility is inconsistent
with nihilism, which seems to imply that a material world must contain
material simples. 

A second version of eliminativism is associated with Peter van Inwagen
(1990), who defends the following thesis about composition: There is
some y such that the xs compose y if and
only if the activity of the xs constitute a life. According
to this thesis, the only composite objects are living organisms.
Beyond that, there are only material simples. So, for example, van
Inwagen recognizes the existence of apple trees, but not apples. Van
Inwagen’s view is closely related to nihilism, but has one
notable advantage—it allows for the existence of human persons.
For example, in the case of Dion and Theon, van Inwagen will say that
Dion exists at the beginning of the story, since the activity of the
relevant simples constitutes a life (the life of Dion). But van
Inwagen will deny that Theon exists, for the activity of the relevant
simples only constitutes a part of Dion’s life at that
time. (Of course, the activity of those same simples constitutes a
life after Dion’s right foot is removed, at which point the
simples come to compose Dion.) More generally, van Inwagen denies the
existence of what he calls “arbitrary undetached parts”:


The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts (DAUP): For every
material object m, time t, and regions
r1 and r2, if m
occupies r1 at t and
r2 is a sub-region of r1, then
there is a part of m that occupies r2 at
t. (cf. van Inwagen 1981, p. 123)


Let m = Dion, t = a pre-operation time,
r1 = the region occupied by Dion at t,
and r2 = the region corresponding to all of Dion
except for his right foot at t. If DAUP were correct, Theon
would exist, for it would just be the proper part of Dion that
occupies r2 at t. Van Inwagen denies the
existence of Theon, so he denies DAUP as well. (For more on DAUP and
its role in puzzles of material constitution, see van Inwagen 1981,
Olson 1996, and Parsons 2004.) 

Van Inwagen’s version of eliminativism is subject to the same
objections raised against nihilism, but it also faces problems of its
own. Here is one worry. There are borderline cases where it is vague
whether or not the activity of some simples constitutes a life
(consider, for example, the question of when, exactly, a person comes
into existence or passes away). But, if it is vague whether the
activity of some simples constitutes a life then, according to van
Inwagen, it is vague how many objects exist. But it cannot be vague
how many objects exist, since cardinality claims can be made in a part
of language where nothing is vague. Suppose, for example, that there
are exactly one-million simples and suppose it is vague whether or not
the activity of those simples constitutes a life. Now consider the
numerical sentence that asserts the existence of (at least)
one-million and one objects. (A numerical sentence is a
first-order sentence asserting the existence of some objects. For
example, the numerical sentence that there exist at least two objects
is: ∃x∃y(x ≠ y).)
If van Inwagen is correct, it is indeterminate whether or not the
relevant numerical sentence is true, in which case one of the
constituent expressions—‘∃’,
‘x’, ‘y’, ‘~’,
‘=’—must be vague. Yet many philosophers have
claimed that the terms of first-order logic do not admit of borderline
cases. (For a more detailed presentation of this argument, see Lewis
1986, pp. 212–213, Sider 2001, pp. 120–132, and section
2.2 of the entry on
 ordinary objects.
 For potential replies, see Hirsch 2002b, Liebesman and Eklund 2007,
and van Inwagen 1990, Chapter 13.) 

A third version of eliminativism is often associated with Roderick
Chisholm (1973), who defends the doctrine of mereological
essentialism: For any x and y, if x is
a part of y then, necessarily, y exists only if
x is a part of y. This doctrine is an
“eliminativist” view insofar as it denies the existence of
mereologically ductile objects. For example, in the Ship of Theseus
case it is natural to think that there is a ship which survives the
replacement of at least some of its parts. The essentialist’s
response to the paradox is to deny this apparent truism. In the same
way, the Debtor’s Paradox and the Puzzle of Deon and Theon only
arise on the assumption that human persons can gain and lose parts.
The essentialist solves these puzzles by rejecting this assumption.
The Puzzle of the Statue and the Clay remains problematic, however,
for that example involved a change in shape, rather than a change in
parts. In order to respond to this puzzle, the essentialist must
endorse an additional principle: For any xs and for any
y, if the xs compose y then, necessarily,
the xs exist only if they compose y. This thesis
says that the whole is essential to the parts, so that whenever you
have the same parts, you have the same whole. We will refer to the
combination of this principle and the doctrine of mereological
essentialism as the thesis of mereological constancy. The
defender of this thesis will say that, in our earlier case, Lump
exists on both Monday and Tuesday, for the same clay parts are there
on both days. The same is true of David. The parts that compose David
on Tuesday are present on Monday, in which case the first premise of
the earlier argument is false—David did exist on
Monday. In that case, the defender of mereological constancy is free
to identify David and Lump and thereby avoid commitment to coincident
objects. 

Viewed from one perspective, the doctrine of mereological constancy
can seem somewhat intuitive. When one rearranges the dining room
furniture, one does not bring new furniture into existence—one
simply brings existing furniture into a new arrangement. In the same
way, rearranging the material contents of the universe does not bring
new material objects into existence—it simply puts existing
objects into new arrangements. Thus, when the artist sculpts the lump
of clay she gives that object a new form, but does not create a new
object. Viewed from another perspective, however, mereological
constancy seems completely absurd, for it implies that if we
annihilate a single subatomic particle from David, the entire statue
will be destroyed. (More frightening still, if we annihilate a single
particle from your body, you will no longer exist.) The mereological
essentialist may reply that, if we were to annihilate a particle from
David, there would still be a statue left in its place—call it
David*. David* would not be identical to David, but it would
be very similar to David. For example, it would have roughly the same
mass, the same shape, and the same location. In one sense, then, we
could say that the earlier statue is the same as the latter
statue. So we could say that, loosely speaking, David
survives. (In Chisholm’s terminology, David* is a
“statue-successor” of David, and what we would normally
think of as the statue is nothing more than a “logical
construction” out of these and other successive objects—it
is what Chisholm calls an ens successivum.) Here is a second
worry for the defender of mereological constancy. Imagine that the
artist who sculpted David becomes dissatisfied with her work and
squashes the statue. All of David’s clay parts would survive the
squashing, so the thesis of mereological constancy tells us that
David, the statue, survives. But this seems absurd—statues
cannot survive being squashed. We get an equally absurd result in the
opposite direction. David’s parts existed prior to the
sculpting, so David itself existed prior to the sculpting. But how can
a statue exist before it is sculpted? The defender of mereological
constancy may reply by pointing out that that the thing which is
(currently) a statue may have existed prior to the sculpting, but it
was not (then) a statue. In this sense, at least, we can say that the
statue did not exist prior to sculpting. Similarly, the thing which is
(currently) a statue may survive being squashed, but it will not
(then) be a statue. So, loosely speaking, the statue will not
survive the squashing. (For more details on this paraphrasing
strategy, see Chisholm 1976, chapter 3.)
5. Dominant Kinds

In the previous section, we examined various ways of resisting the
first premise of our original argument: David did not exist on
Monday. Let us now turn our attention to the second premise of
that argument: Lump did exist on Monday. Eliminativists like
Unger and van Inwagen will reject this premise, since they deny the
existence of lumps like Lump. But there are other theories that lead
to the rejection of this premise as well. One such theory is the
dominant kind view, which is defended by Michael Burke (1994,
1997a, 1997b). 

Burke begins with the assumption that there is a single object present
on Tuesday. For the moment, let us simply refer to this object as
Rex. Burke assumes that Rex is both a lump of clay and a
statue. This is a perfectly natural assumption, but it is also
problematic. As we have seen, kinds like lump of clay and
statue are associated with different modal properties and
different persistence conditions in particular. To return to an
earlier example, the kind lump of clay is associated with the
persistence condition of being able to survive squashing,
while the kind statue is associated with the persistence
condition of being unable to survive squashing. Now consider
the following principle: For any object o and kind
K, if o is a K, then o has the
persistence conditions associated with K (Burke 1994, p.
598). If this principle is correct, we have a problem. Rex is both a
lump of clay and a statue, so the principle tells us that it is able
to survive squashing and that it is not. Burke concludes that the
proposed principle is false: It is possible for an object to be a
K without having the persistence conditions associated with
that kind. In particular, Burke claims that Rex is a statue and a lump
of clay, but it only has the persistence conditions associated with
one of those kinds. Which one? Burke answers that, in general, an
object has the persistence conditions associated with its dominant
kind. What is a dominant kind? Burke answers that, in general, an
object’s dominant kind is the kind that “entails
possession of the widest range of properties” (1994, p. 607; for
an alternative account of dominance, see Rea 2000). For example, if
something is a lump of clay, then it must have certain physical
properties. If something is a statue, on the other hand, it must
have both physical properties and aesthetic
properties. In this sense, statue entails a wider range
of properties than lump of clay. Hence, statue
dominates lump of clay. Rex therefore has the persistence
conditions associated with the kind statue. Rex, in other
words, is just David. What about Lump? In the original story, the name
‘Lump’ is introduced for the lump of clay that exists on
Monday. At that point there was no statue, so Lump’s dominant
kind is simply lump of clay. Let us now introduce the name
‘Lump*’ for the lump of clay that exists on Tuesday. The
lump of clay that exists on Tuesday is also a statue (Lump* is David,
i.e., Rex), so Lump*’s dominant kind is statue. Hence,
Lump ≠ Lump*. On Burke’s view, the process of sculpting a
lump of clay into a statue destroys one object (a mere lump of clay)
and replaces it with another (a statue). The resulting statue is also
a lump of clay, but it is numerically distinct from the lump of clay
with which we began. Burke concludes that Lump exists on Monday, but
does not exist on Tuesday. Hence, the second premise of the original
argument is false. 

The dominant kinds view has several advantages over the eliminativist
views discussed in the previous section. Most notably, the dominant
kinds view recognizes the existence of ordinary objects like statues
and lumps of clay and allows for these objects to gain and lose parts.
However, some of the objections raised in previous sections apply to
Burke’s view as well. For example, the anthropic objection from
section 2 can also be raised against the dominant kinds view (Sider
2001, p. 165). In addition, the view faces problems of its own. 

First, there is the objection from commonsense. According to Burke,
sculptors can destroy lumps of clay by doing nothing more than
reshaping them in accordance with certain artistic intentions. In
fact, given certain theories of what constitutes an artwork, the
sculptor doesn’t even have to do that much. Suppose that an
artist takes a liking to a particular rock in his yard. He gives it
the title Rocky and invites art critics to admire his new
work. If this is all it takes to create a work of art, then this is
all it takes to destroy a rock. After all, the rock at the beginning
of the story has piece of rock as its dominant kind, while
the rock that exists at the end of the story has piece of art
as its dominant kind. Hence, the latter rock is numerically distinct
from the former—the original rock is no more. Yet this seems
absurd. We are not gods. We cannot create and destroy material objects
with the power of thought alone. Burke replies to this objection by
distinguishing various readings of ‘the rock’. (1994,
596–7) ‘The rock’ can be understood as a singular
description that denotes the rock (a single object).
‘The rock’ can also be understood as a plural description
that denotes all of the little pieces of rock. Finally,
‘the rock’ can be understood as a mass description that
denotes the relevant rocky stuff. On the first reading, the
rock from the beginning of the story is not the same as the rock at
the end of the story. But, on the second and third readings, the rock
from the beginning of the story is the same as the rock at
the end of the story. The artist may destroy the relevant object, but
he does not destroy the little pieces of rock that compose that object
or the rocky stuff that constitutes that object. Hence, there is a
good sense in which “the rock” survives. Burke claims that
this is enough to satisfy the demands of commonsense. (For more on
mass descriptions and the distinction between stuff and things, see
the entry on
 the metaphysics of mass expressions.)
 

A second problem concerns Burke’s account of dominance. Burke
claims that one kind dominates another when it entails a wider range
of properties. This seems to get the current case correct, for there
is a natural sense in which statue entails a wider range of
properties than lump of clay. But other cases are less clear.
Take, for example, the case of a performance artist who poses his own
body to form a statue. The relevant object is both a human person and
a statue. The kind statue entails having certain physical and
aesthetic properties, but does not entail having any mental
properties. The kind human person entails having certain
physical and mental properties, but one could argue that it does not
entail having any aesthetic properties. In that case, neither kind
dominates the other, so Burke’s account fails to tell us what
the object is or what persistence conditions it possesses.
(For more on these kinds of cases, see Rea 2000.) 

A third problem for the dominant kinds view is that it cannot be
extended to cover all cases of constitution. Take, for example, the
Ship of Theseus Puzzle. In that case, we seem to have two objects in
the same place at the same time, where both of the objects are
ships. Since there is a single kind at issue, the
question of dominance does not arise and Burke’s account
provides no help.
6. Relative Identity

In the previous two sections, we discussed various ways of challenging
the first two premises of the argument for coincident entities. Let us
now turn our attention to the third and final premise: If David
did not exist on Monday and Lump did exist on Monday, then David is
not identical to Lump. The premise follows from Leibniz’s
Law: for any x and y, if x is identical to
y, then x and y share all of the same
properties. The denial of Leibniz’s Law therefore provides one
way of resisting the final premise of the argument. 

The denial of Leibniz’s Law is sometimes associated with Peter
Geach (1962, 1967), who defends a view called the relative
identity theory. Geach’s central thesis is that there is no
relation of absolute identity—there are only relations of
relative identity. In particular, identity is always relative to a
kind. Thus, we can say that David is the same statue
as Lump and we can say that David is the same lump of clay as
Lump, but it makes no sense to say that David is the same as Lump
simpliciter. The consequent of the third premise is therefore
nonsense—saying ‘David is not identical to Lump’ is
like saying ‘David is not to the left of’. More generally,
Geach rejects the standard formulation of Leibniz’s Law as
incomplete, since it includes a non-relativized identity predicate. In
this way, the relative identity theorist is able to block the third
step of the argument for coincident objects. 

Geach makes many interesting claims about the behavior of relative
identity relations. For example, he claims that it is possible for
a to be the same K as b, but not the same
K*, where ‘K’ and
‘K*’ are sortal terms denoting distinct kinds.
Take the Debtor’s Paradox. In that case, we have an earlier
portion of matter, M1, and a later portion of matter
M2. According to Geach, M1 is not the same
portion of matter as M2, but it is the same person. In this
way, he is able to allow for the persistence of persons through
changes in parts. (For further details on Geach’s view, see the
entry on
 relative identity.)
 

The relative identity theorist may deny the standard formulation of
Leibniz’s Law, but there is significant pressure to accept
some version of that principle since it seems to capture a
central fact about identity. An obvious suggestion is to offer a
relativized version of Leibniz’s Law: For any x and
y, if x is the same K as y, then x
and y share all of the same properties (where ‘K’
is a sortal denoting a kind). If Geach’s relative identity
relations do not conform to this law, one might worry that they are
not identity relations at all. And here we have a potential
problem. Take the case of David and Lump. As we have seen, some
philosophers want to say that David is both a statue and a lump of
clay (it is not a mere lump of clay, since it is also a
statue, but it is still a lump of clay). Lump is obviously a lump of
clay. Since there is only one lump of clay on Tuesday, David must be
the same lump of clay as Lump. But then, by the relativized version of
Leibniz’s Law, David and Lump must share all of the same
properties. This, once again, seems false. Lump existed on Monday, but
David did not, so there is a property that Lump has and David lacks:
having existed on Monday. In response, the relative identity
theorist might appeal to another component of Geach’s view.
Geach suggests that proper names are always associated with kinds. For
example, ‘David’ is associated with the kind
statue and ‘Lump’ is associated with the kind
lump of clay. Taking a cue from the counterpart theorist
(section 3), the relative identity theorist may go on to claim that
this association creates opaque contexts when we ascribe modal
properties. Take, for example, the following pair of statements:

Lump existed on Monday.
David existed on Monday.


The relative identity theorist could say that (1) is true if and only
if there was a lump of clay on Monday which is the same lump
of clay as Lump. (2), on the other hand, is true just in case there
was statue on Monday which is the same statue as David. Given
these truth conditions, (1) is true and (2) is false, for there was a
lump of clay on Monday (the same lump of clay as Lump), but no statue.
More importantly, on this analysis the predicates in (1) and (2)
express different properties, in which case the relativized version of
Leibniz’s Law has no application. So, one cannot move from (1)
and the negation of (2) to the conclusion that Lump and David are
distinct lumps of clay.

A second worry for Geach is that it seems as if the relative identity
theory cannot solve all of the puzzles with which we began. Take, once
again, the Ship of Theseus Puzzle. In that case, we have the original
ship of Theseus (A), the museum’s ship (B), and the
custodian’s ship (C). The problem is that B seems to be the same
ship as A, which seems to be the same ship as C. If the same ship
as relation is transitive, we get the absurd conclusion that B is
the same ship as C. The relative identity theorist might deny
transitivity, of course, but this would give us another reason to
suspect that relativized identity relations are not identity
relations, for transitivity seems to be a central feature of identity.
(For more on this worry, see Gupta 1980.) 

A third and final worry for Geach concerns his denial of absolute
identity. As many commentators have pointed out, this denial has
drastic implications for logic, semantics, and set theory. To take
just one example, consider the set theorist’s axiom of
extensionality: For any sets A and B, if
A and B have the same members, then A is
the same set as B. Let A be David’s unit set
and let B be Lump’s unit set. Is A the same
set as B? The relativist must reject this question as
ill-formed. It makes no sense to ask whether x and y
are the same members, since this requires a notion of absolute
identity (intuitively, ‘member’ does not denote a genuine
kind, so ‘same member as’ does not express a relative
identity relation). As a result, the relative identity theorist must
deny extensionality, which throws set theory into jeopardy. (For a
detailed discussion of this and other concerns, see Hawthorne
2004.)
7. Deflationism

Imagine a debate between two friends over whether or not boats are
ships. One party points to a rowboat and says, “That boat is a
ship. After all, a ship is a vessel that floats on water and the
rowboat is obviously a vessel that floats on water.” The second
party demurs: “A ship is a sufficiently large vessel
that floats on water and the rowboat is not sufficiently large. So the
boat is not a ship.” Clearly, there is something defective about
this debate. Note three things in this connection. First, there are
two “candidate meanings” for the predicate
‘ship’, namely a vessel that floats on water and
a sufficiently large vessel that floats on water. Second,
neither of these candidate meanings is more “natural” than
the other—unlike ‘water’ or ‘electron’,
the predicate ‘ship’ does not correspond to a natural kind
in the world. Third, the two parties to the debate agree on all of the
“non-ship” facts—in particular, both parties agree
that the rowboat is a vessel, that it floats on water, and that it is
relatively small in size. Given these points, it is tempting to say
that the two parties agree on all of the facts and that their
dispute is merely verbal. Note that this conclusion is
consistent with the view that one of the parties is actually mistaken.
Suppose, for example, that the doctrine of semantic
externalism is correct, so that the meaning of our shared terms
is determined by the overall pattern of use within our linguistic
community (see the entry on
 externalism about mental content).
 That pattern of use may determine that one of the candidate
meanings—presumably the second—is the actual meaning of
‘ship’ in English. In that case, the first party in the
debate is simply mistaken: the rowboat is not a ship. Still, there is
a clear sense in which the debate is verbal, for there is a possible
language (“English*”) that (a) employs a different,
equally natural meaning for the predicate ‘ship’, (b) is
adequate for describing all of the facts, and (c) is such that the
first party’s statements come out true, relative to that
language. Thus, we might say that the real dispute between the two
parties is over whether or not English is English*. And that is
clearly a verbal dispute. 

Some philosophers have suggested that the debate over material
constitution is defective in exactly the same way. There is no genuine
dispute between Lewis and Unger, for example, over whether or not
statues exist. Both parties agree on all of the relevant
facts—in particular, both parties agree that there are simples
arranged statuewise. And both parties agree that there are two
possible languages (“Lewis-English” and
“Unger-English”) where the sentence “Statues
exist” comes out true in one and false in the other. So the real
disagreement between Lewis and Unger is over whether English is
Lewis-English or whether it is Unger-English. In other words, the
debate is merely verbal. This kind of deflationist view is
often associated with Rudolf Carnap (1950), Hilary Putnam (1987, 1994,
2004) and, more recently, Eli Hirsch (2002a, 2002b, 2005). The issues
raised by deflationism are extremely complicated; here, we will limit
ourselves to a few initial observations. (For a longer introduction to
these issues, see Chalmers, Manley, and Wasserman 2009. For an
extended defense of deflationism, see Thomasson 2015.)

In the imagined dispute, we know exactly what the disputed term is
(‘ship’) and exactly what the relevant candidate meanings
are (a vessel that floats on water and a sufficiently
large vessel that floats on water). In the actual dispute between
Lewis and Unger, matters are not so clear. One might suspect that the
disputed term in this case is the predicate ‘statue’, but
it turns out to be fairly difficult to specify the relevant candidate
meanings. For example, we might say that, in Lewis-English,
‘statue’ simply means a collection of simples arranged
statuewise. Whether or not that is a plausible interpretation of
what Lewis means depends in part on the meaning of
‘collection’ (for discussion, see Sider 2009, pp.
388–90). In any case, it is even more difficult to specify an
appropriate candidate meaning for ‘statue’ in
Unger-English. More importantly, even if we are able to specify the
relevant candidate meanings, we will not have succeeded in showing
that the general dispute between Lewis and Unger is verbal, for the
dispute can be brought out without using the predicate
‘statue’ (or any non-logical predicate, for that matter).
Consider, for example, a world that contains one-million simples
arranged statuewise and nothing else. And consider the numerical
sentence (see section 4) which asserts the existence of (at least)
one-million and one things. Lewis and Unger will disagree over the
truth of that sentence. But that sentence contains only logical
vocabulary. Hence, if the two parties are really talking past each
other, then they must assign different meanings to one or more of the
logical constants.

The most plausible suggestion is that Lewis and Unger assign (or, at
least, intend to assign) different meanings to the existential
quantifier, ‘∃’ (as well as quantificational phrases
like ‘there are’, ‘there is’, and
‘some’). And, indeed, this is where deflationists have
focused their attention. Putnam, for example, writes that “[T]he
logical primitives themselves, and in particular the notions of object
and existence, have a multitude of different uses rather than one
absolute ‘meaning’.” (1987, p. 71) This
thesis—the thesis that there are many meanings for the
existential quantifier that are equally natural and equally adequate
for describing all the facts—is often referred to as“the
doctrine of quantifier variance” (Hirsch 2002b, Sider 2009).
What exactly are the candidate meanings in question? Once again,
matters are not so clear. Lewis could, of course, simply interpret
Unger to be using a restricted quantifier that ranges only
over simples. On that interpretation, Unger speaks truthfully when he
asserts “Statues do not exist”, since there are no statues
among the simples. The problem with this interpretation is that it
seems manifestly implausible, given that Unger will insist that his
quantifiers are to be understood as unrestricted. Even more worrying
is the question of how Unger is supposed to interpret Lewis. He
cannot, for example, say that Lewis is using a less restrictive
quantifier, for that would be to say that there are things (that
Lewis’s quantifier ranges over) that do not exist (by
Unger’s own lights). Unger could, perhaps, take a more holistic
approach and interpret Lewis’s assertion of “Statues
exist” to mean there are some simples arranged
statuewise. More generally, Unger could interpret Lewis by
replacing singular quantifiers over composites with plural quantifiers
over simples, and by replacing each predicate of composites with an
irreducibly plural predicate of simples. Once again, we should expect
protest—Lewis will reject the proposed translation and insist
that he is using singular quantification when he asserts
“Statues exist”. 

These initial observations bring out one disanalogy between the
ontological dispute and paradigm verbal disputes. In the earlier
argument over whether or not boats are ships, the proposed
translations are friendly, since the first party will admit
that he uses ‘ship’ to mean a vessel that floats on
water and the second will grant that he uses ‘ship’
to mean a sufficiently large vessel that floats on water.
Given this disambiguation, the dispute will evaporate. The
deflationist’s proposals are instead hostile, for
neither Lewis nor Unger will accept the deflationist interpretation
offered by his opponent. (For further discussion on this point, see
Sider 2009, section 5.) This does not mean that the ontologists’
debate is non-verbal, but it does mean that the issues involved here
are more complicated than those in paradigm verbal disputes.