First proposed by John Duns Scotus (1266–1308), a haecceity is a
non-qualitative property responsible for individuation and identity. As understood
by Scotus, a haecceity is not a bare particular in the sense of
something underlying qualities. It is, rather, a
non-qualitative property of a substance or thing: it is a
“thisness” (a haecceitas, from the Latin haec,
meaning “this”) as opposed to a “whatness” (a
quidditas, from the Latin quid, meaning
“what”). Furthermore, substances, on the sort of
metaphysics defended by Scotus, are basically collections of tightly
unified properties, all but one of them qualitative; the one
non-qualitative property is the haecceity. In contrast to more modern
accounts of the problem of individuation, Scotus holds that the
haecceity explains more than just the distinction of one substance
from another. According to Scotus, the fact that individual substances
cannot be instantiated — are indivisible or incommunicable, as
Scotus puts it — also requires explaining. In short a haecceity
is supposed to explain individuality.
 
1. Individuation and the identity of indiscernibles

 The possible existence of such non-qualitative properties as
explanations of numerical distinction between substances can be made
plausible by considering a famous counterexample to the identity of
indiscernibles suggested by Max Black. A wants to defend
the principle, and B attack it, and B does so by
proposing the following case:

 Isn't it logically possible that the universe should have contained
nothing but two exactly similar spheres? We might suppose that each was made
of chemically pure iron, had a diameter of one mile, that they had the same
temperature, colour, and so on, and that nothing else existed. Then every
quality and relational characteristic of the one would also be a property of
the other. Now if what I am describing is logically possible, it is not
impossible for two things to have all their properties in common. This seems
to me to refute the principle.
(Black [1952], 156)
 

 Clearly, if Leibniz's Law is understood — as Leibniz intended
— to assert that any two individuals must differ in some qualitative
or relational way, B's counterexample seems sufficient to refute
it. But on the face of it there is an easy answer available to
A. For A could assert that the two spheres differ in
some property neither qualitative nor relational: they could differ by
haecceity. This leaves intact a trivial reading of Leibniz
(that if individual x is distinct from individual y,
then there must be some property had by x and not by y,
or vice versa), and thus the obviously true version of the principle
secure. (Haecceities may not be the only way to preserve the principle
against B's counterexample. But the solution gives some
prima facie plausibility to the possibility of
haecceities.)

 Theories of haecceities may want to assign more or less ontological
weight to haecceities, and, indeed, to properties in general. Medieval
accounts of forms, properties, and predicates tend to make a
distinction between those predicates that involve some sort of
ontological commitment, and those that do not — that is to say,
between those that signify some kind of metaphysical constituent of
substances, and those that do not. In this context, the relevant
metaphysical constituents would for a medieval thinker most naturally
be understood as forms, corresponding to Aristotle's division of the
categories. A form F-ness of a substance or substrate x
is a particular, naturally dependent on x, in virtue of which
x is F. For Scotus, however, there is a further
group of metaphysical constituents, labeled by him
‘formalities’, or ‘realities’: not concrete
things (“res”) but abstract realities
— abstract particulars — with some kind of real being,
such that a subject of such formalities is inseparable from them, and
they from it. We could label an account of predicates that does not
involve any commitment to such kinds of metaphysical constituents
— whether forms or formalities — nominalist, and think of
such a nominalist account of properties as something distinct from a
nominalist account of universals. Nominalism on the question of
universals does not require nominalism on the question of properties
as such. Properties could, after all, be as particular as the
substances of which they are properties. According to Scotus,
haecceities and essences are distinct real properties of
substances. Scotus is not, in other words, a nominalist about these
properties. But such a realist account of these properties is not
necessary for my easy refutation of B; it would be possible
to hold that there is no purely qualitative or relational criterion
for identity without holding that haecceities are metaphysical
ingredients of things. It is possible to argue that any medieval
opponents of haecceities (in Scotus's robust sense) in fact covertly
accept this weaker form of haecceitism — and thus that at least
part of the debate between Scotus and his later opponents has to do
with the status of properties as such, rather than the question of
individuation.

So haecceities are bare particulars, but they are not supposed to
underlie properties. Some medieval Aristotelians hold that matter,
construed as a substrate for forms and properties, individuates; and
it would be possible to hold that the individuation of a substance is
explained by some bare particular that underlies properties. Scotus
rejects the view that matter could be responsible for individuation,
on the grounds that we require too an explanation for the
individuation of (chunks of) matter (Scotus, Ordinatio II,
d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 187 (Scotus [OO], 7:483; Spade (1994),
106–107)). Neither would Scotus have been able to make any sense
of a bare particular in the sense of a bare possessor of qualities, a
view that would doubtless have struck him as inconsistent with
essentialism (on this, see Park [1990]). But, as Scotus sees it, the
more nominalist view of haecceities is not available to him, and the
reason is that he is a realist on the question of
universals. Basically, the reality of shared natures entails, for
Scotus, that individuation is explained by some real property distinct
from the nature. First, then, we have to provide an explanation of
Scotus's theory of common natures, followed, in a third section, by a
description of the theory of haecceity and the relation of these two
theories to each other.
2. Common natures

 Building on insights gained through the thirteenth century, Scotus
distinguishes two closely related issues in individuation: explaining
how a substance is such that it cannot be instantiated (explaining its
individuality, its “indivisibility in itself”), and
explaining how a substance is such that it is distinct from all other
substances (explaining its “division from others”; on this
see Park [1988]). The first of these is on the face of it far more
complex, and requires certain moves to be made in the theory of
universals. For various complex historical reasons, medieval realists
tend to suppose that common (shared) natures or essences are
somehow divided into their instantiations — as Scotus
puts it, divided into “subjective parts.” It is not easy
to explain precisely what this divisibility amounts to. Explaining
both divisibility and its opposite, Scotus states the problem of
individuation as follows:

Because there is among beings something indivisible into
subjective parts — that is, such that it is formally incompatible for
it to be divided into several parts each of which is it — the
question is not what it is by which such a division is formally
incompatible with it (because it is formally incompatible by
incompatibility), but rather what it is by which, as by a proximate
and intrinsic foundation, this incompatibility is in it. Therefore,
the sense of the questions on this topic [viz. of individuation] is:
What is it in [e.g.] this stone, by which as by a proximate foundation
it is absolutely incompatible with the stone for it to be divided
into several parts each of which is this stone, the kind of division
that is proper to a universal whole as divided into its subjective
parts? (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d.  3, p. 1. q. 2, n. 48
(Scotus [OO], 7:412-413; Spade (1994), 69))
 

I have italicized the relevant portions here. A universal (a
common nature, in Scotus's technical parlance) is
“divided into several parts each of which is it.” As
Scotus sees it, individuality and numerical unity or singularity are
co-extensive. Since the nature is not individual, it is not
numerically one thing: it has "less-than-numerical" unity:

 In the thing [viz. in extramental reality] the nature according to
[its primary] entity has true real being outside the soul. And
according to that entity, it has a unity [viz. less than numerical
unity] in proportion to it…  . That unity is a proper attribute of
the nature according to its primary entity. Consequently, the nature
is intrinsically this neither from itself nor according to its
proper unity, which is necessarily included in the nature according to
its primary entity. (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, q. 1,
n. 34 (Scotus [OO], 7:404-405; Spade (1994), 64-65))
 

On the one hand, the doctrine is not supposed to be obscure. The basic
thought is that a common nature cannot be numerically singular —
if it were, it would be a particular, and the distinction between
universals and particulars would simply break down. (Of course,
someone accepting the numerical identity of a universal in its various
instantiations could propose some other way to distinguish particulars
and universals as subsets of the class of singular things.) The
thought that numerical singularity could be proper to particulars does
not seem especially startling; Scotus's account of common natures is
an attempt to develop the insight given that nominalism is
false. Still, on the other hand, understanding exactly what Scotus has
in mind here is not a straightforward matter (on this, see Cross
[2003]). Clearly, the sense should be that the whole common nature is
in each instantiation of it. But the whole common nature is not to be
understood to be identically (numerically) the same in each
instantiation, as Scotus makes clear elsewhere, and as in any case we
might expect, given the part-whole language that Scotus uses in the
passage just quoted. It seems as though there are both intensional and
extensional aspects to the nature: intensionally, it is fully in each
instantiation, but extensionally the nature somehow becomes many on
instantiation. (Not just: comes to exist in many things, unless this
be construed to mean that the nature becomes many when it comes to
exist in many things.) At least from an extensional point of view,
there is more to humanity than just what is found in me.  Another way
of thinking about the relevant relation might be to think of natures
as in some sense ‘content’, and each individual as the
‘carrier’ of this content. The nature, as far as its
content is concerned, is fully in each carrier of the content, but is
multiplied in its carriers (such that each carrier bears fully the
same content, and so the same one content becomes many in its
carriers, just as the content of a book is multiplied in its several
copies).

 Why should we accept this sort of account of universals? Scotus
defends it in the context of a rejection of a theory according to
which the singularity of a nature requires no explanation other than
the nature itself.  The theory is in principle capable of development
in one of two different directions, and Scotus seems to regard it as a
matter of indifference which of these two directions his opponent has
in mind. One direction is nominalist: there could be individual
natures (of the same kind), and each such nature be of itself
particular. The other is extreme realist: there could be indivisible
Platonic universals, and each such universal be of itself numerically
singular. As Scotus sees it, the only way to explain both
instantiability and commonality of kind is to posit the existence of
entities (viz. natures) that are divisible. It is the divisibility of
the nature that allows its instantiability, and the unity of the
nature that explains commonality of kind. Platonism lacks
instantiability, and nominalism lacks an explanation for commonality
of kind. Scotus makes the crucial claim about natures as follows:


 Anything with a real, proper, and sufficient unity less than
numerical is not of itself one by numerical unity — that is, it is
not of itself a this.  But the proper, real or sufficient unity
of the nature existing in this stone is less than numerical
unity. Therefore [the nature existing in this stone is not of itself
one by numerical unity]. (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 2, p. 1,
q. 1, n. 8 (Scotus [OO], 7:395; Spade (1994), 59))
 

Here the premises speak of Scotus's “less than numerical
unity,” the unity of something that is divisible into
numerically many subjective parts. Scotus provides a total of seven
arguments in favor of the minor premise — in favor, in other
words, of the position that there is something with
less-than-numerical unity. Four of these appeal to Aristotelian
authority, and of these the third is most interesting:


 According to the Philosopher, Metaphysics V, the chapter on
relation [c. 15, 1021a9–12], the same, the similar and the
equal are all based on the notion of one, so that even though a
similarity has for its foundation a thing in the genus of quality,
nevertheless such a relation is not real unless it has a real
foundation and a real proximate basis for the founding. Therefore, the
unity required in the foundation of the relation of similarity is a
real one. But it is not numerical unity, since nothing one and the
same is similar or equal to itself.  (Scotus, Ordinatio II,
d. 3, p. 1, q. 1, n. 18 (Scotus [OO], 7:398; Spade (1994), 61))
 

The point here is that relations of similarity between two particulars
cannot be self-explanatory; they must have some explanation (some
“real foundation”) in the things that are similar. This is
amongst other things an argument against resemblance nominalism. But
it is also supposed to be an argument against the view that a
universal could be numerically identical in each instantiation. Since
it is the universal that is supposed to explain the relation of
similarity, positing that the universal is numerically identical in
each instantiation might lead merely to the conclusion that the
universal in each instantiation is similar to itself.  But
that is not what needs to be explained. (Despite the way he talks,
Scotus does not mean here to deny that similarity is a reflexive
relation; his view is that reflexivity is a property merely of what
the medievals labeled “rational relations,” and that the
similarity that obtains between two distinct objects is not such a
rational relation. The point is not worth dwelling on.)

 Of the arguments from reason (rather than from the authority of
Aristotle), one particularly focuses on a claim with which Ockham
will, a few years later, strongly disagree: 

 If every real unity is numerical unity, then every real diversity is
numerical diversity. The consequent is false. For every numerical
diversity, in so far as it is numerical, is equal. And so all things
would be equally distinct. In that case, it follows that the intellect
could not abstract something common from Socrates and Plato any more
than it could from Socrates and a line. Every universal would be a
pure figment of the intellect. (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3,
p. 1, q. 1, n.  23 (Scotus [OO], 7:400-401; Spade (1994), 62))
 

 The obvious claim here is supposed to be that not all real diversity
is numerical, and Scotus supports it by claiming that, if the only way
in which things differed were numerical, then all things would be
equally distinct. But there are degrees of distinction: Socrates and
Plato are not distinguished in species, for example, as we can tell
from our capacity to abstract. Unity and diversity here are
inter-definable contradictories, so it is not the case that every real
unity is numerical unity. Of course, Scotus is supposing that there
are in some sense real (i.e. non-conventional) species. Clearly,
Scotus is trying to force a nominalist opponent into accepting
conventionalism. His argument, if successful, will thus damage those
nominalists — such as most medieval nominalists — who want
to deny conventionalism.

 Much of the account of common natures can be found in nuce
in Aquinas's De ente et essentia. But Scotus's account is
usually thought to diverge from Aquinas's in at least one crucial
way. According to both Scotus and Aquinas — following some
suggestions in Avicenna — it is possible to consider a nature in
itself, abstracting both from its existence as a universal concept and
as the particulars into which it is divided. (Hence Avicenna's famous
slogan “equinity is just equinity”: Avicenna, Liber de
scientia divina, V, c. 1 (Avicenna [LPP], 2:228–229).)
Aquinas is clear that this bare nature lacks numerical unity (see
Aquinas, De ente et essentia, c. 3 (Aquinas [DEE],
24–25)). Aquinas does not believe, however, that the nature as
thus described has any sort of being or existence — and it is on
this point that Scotus diverges from him. It is perhaps worth noting,
in passing, that a plausible case can be made for tracing this
moderate sort of realism on the question of universals to the
Aristotelian tradition (specifically, Alexander of Aphrodisias: see
Tweedale [1993]). One might also argue, as his famous commentator
Cajetan did, that Aquinas would after all be willing to attribute some
sort of unity and proportionally some sort of being to the absolutely
considered nature, even if he denies to it numerical unity and the
corresponding actual, real existence. For Cajetan's exposition of the
issue, carefully distinguishing Aquinas's from Scotus's position, and
for useful references to both authors, see Cajetan [CBE], c. 4
(nn. 55–62), pp. 134–155.  Scotus, while clearly in this
same tradition, evidently considers the sort of account found in
Aquinas to be insufficient, and thus is far more clearly to be placed
in the realist camp than Aquinas on this question. Thus, far from
holding that the nature in itself lacks any kind of reality, Scotus
holds that the primary reality of the nature belongs to the nature in
itself. I have already quoted a passage in which Scotus correlates the
nature's less than numerical unity with its primary entity or
being.

The reason that the common nature — has some kind of existence
or (as he puts it) entity is that the nature is supposed to be subject
to the accidental modification of existing as this or that particular,
and it is not possible for the subject of a real modification not
itself to be real:


Although it [viz. the nature] is never without some of these features
[viz. being in extramental particulars or being thought of], yet it is
not any of them of itelf, but is naturally prior to all of them.
(Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, q. 1, n. 32 (Scotus [OO],
7:403; Spade (1994), 63))
 

So in order to possess in itself this non-numerical unity, the nature
must have, in itself, some sort of being too, proportional to it (such
that the real entity of the nature is diminished in proportion to the
diminished real unity that it has). Scotus does not mean that the
nature is some sort of universal ante rem; if there were no
instantiations, there would be no nature, but once there are
instantiations there is too some subject for instantiation (the
nature), and this subject has some sort of being in itself. Indeed,
this subject is in some sense prior (but not temporally prior) to its
instantiations: while the identity of its instantiations depends on
it, its identity does not depend on those of its instantiations. (It
makes no difference to the identity of human nature whether or not I
exist, though the reality of human nature certainly requires that at
least one human being exist: see Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3,
p. 1, q. 1, n. 34 (Scotus [OO], 7:404; Spade (1994), 64).) As
instantiated, the nature receives the (accidental) modification of
being numerically many in numerically many things.  
3. Haecceity in Duns Scotus

 Common natures have non-numerical unity, and are thus in the relevant
sense divisible. As Scotus sees it, the fundamental issue to be
explained by haecceity is that of indivisibility:


 I explain what I understand by individuation or numerical unity or
singularity: Certainly not the indeterminate unity by which anything
in a species is said to be one in number. Rather, I mean designated
unity as a this, so that just as it was said above that an
individual is incompossible with being divided into subjective parts
and the reason for that incompossibility is asked there, so too I say
here that an individual is incompossible with not being a designated
this by this singularity and the cause is asked not of
singularity in general but of this designated singularity in
particular — that is, as it is determinately this. (Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, q. 4, n. 76 (Scotus [OO],
7:426–427; Spade (1994), 76); see too q. 2, n. 48 [Scotus (1950–),
7:412–413]; qq. 5–6, n. 165 (Scotus [OO], 7:473))
 

 The point is not just that an account of numerical singularity in
general is required (the “indeterminate unity by which anything in a
species is said to be one in number”). What is required, rather, is an
account of the individuality of any given particular, and this account
will explain its being indivisible into subjective parts. (Scotus does
not use the term ‘haecceity’ [haecceitas] in the
work that I am using here — the
Ordinatio.  He talks rather about the individual difference, or
individual entity. But he does elsewhere talk about this entity as a
haecceitas [a term of Scotus's own invention]: for the
change in terminology, see Dumont [1995]).

 Divisibility into subjective parts, of course, is on the face of it
very different from the question of division from all other things, so
nicely exemplified in Black's example of the qualitatively identical
spheres.  Scotus's assumption, however, is that both questions can be
answered in the same way. Thus Scotus supposes that the explanation
for distinction is the explanation for indivisibility, and the rough
outline of what he is thinking looks as follows. The explanation for
distinction is primary, in the sense that what distinction needs is
explanation by items that are irreducibly numerically distinct from
each other — as Scotus puts it, “primarily diverse” (primo
diversa), and have nothing real whatever in common: “they agree
in nothing the same” (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1,
qq. 5–6, n. 186 (Scotus [OO], 7:483; Spade (1994), 106)). (This
does not entail that the things thus distinguished have nothing
whatever in common. Scotus’s point is that the haecceity is
needed as a constituent of a being that shares its nature with
something else in the manner described in the previous section.)
According to Scotus, numerical distinction — as opposed to (say)
specific distinction — entails that each of the things
distinguished has numerical singularity. And numerical singularity
entails indivisibility (into subjective parts), for what allows a
common nature to be divided (into subjective parts) is its possession
of less-than-numerical unity. 

 The claim that the explanations for indivisibility and distinction
are the same gains some plausibility from an analogy with the
distinction between different specific differences in relation to a
genus — an analogue that Scotus evidently regards as less
controversial, and more familiar to his readers. A specific difference
distinguishes two different species of a genus from each other. But
the specific difference is — as all agree — likewise explanatory of
the impossibility of a species being divided into sub-species.  Scotus
in fact uses at some length the analogy to a specific difference to
try to explicate his own theory of haecceity. A specific difference is
something indivisible into further species, and, indeed, explanatory
of a species's indivisibility into further species (Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 177 (Scotus [OO],
7:478; Spade (1994), 103–104)). Equally, an ultimate specific
difference is “primarily diverse” from any other, in the
sense that such a specific difference “has a concept that is
absolutely simple” (and thus cannot even overlap with the
concept of any other such difference) (Scotus, Ordinatio II,
d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 183 (Scotus [OO], 7:481; Spade (1994),
105)). It does not seem overly puzzling that a specific difference
could perform these two functions: the absolute conceptual simplicity
of any ultimate specific difference seems to entail both distinction
from every other specific difference, and its indivisibility into any
further species. And Scotus believes that these sorts of consideration
can help explicate the function of a haecceity relative to
individuation too. That is to say, he believes that something wholly
devoid of common (shared) conceptual content — a haecceity
— can explain not only indivisibility into further particulars,
but also distinction from all other particulars
(Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 177
(Scotus [OO], 7:478; Spade (1994), 103–104); n. 183 (Scotus
[OO], 7:481; Spade (1994), 105)).

 So Scotus holds that the explanations for indivisibility and
distinction are the same. To understand why he supposes that this
explanation needs to be something real, we need to keep in mind his
theory of the reality of common natures, for the reality of common
natures is a premiss in Scotus’s defense of the existence of
haecceities. Since such natures are real, Scotus reasons, the
haecceities that tie such natures to individuals must be equally real
too:

 Just as unity in common follows per se on some entity in
common, so too does any unity follow per se on some entity or
other. Therefore, absolute unity (like the unity of an individual
… that is, a unity with which division into several subjective
parts is incompatible and with which not being a designated
this is incompatible), if it is found in beings (as every
theory assumes), follows per se on some per se
entity. But it does not follow per se on the entity of the
nature, because that has a certain per se real unity of its
own, as was proved…. Therefore, it follows on some other entity
that determines this one. And that other entity makes up something
per se one with the entity of the nature, because the whole to
which this unity belongs is perfect of itself. (Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 169 (Scotus [OO],
7:474–475; Spade (1994), 101))
 

 And later Scotus notes that it “does not seem probable”
that the common nature has some kind of entity and yet that the
individuating feature does not. (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3,
p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 178 (Scotus [OO], 7:478–479;
Spade (1994), 104))

Scotus elsewhere considers the view of Henry of Ghent that the
explanation for individuation could be merely a negation. The point
about a negation is that it is not in any way real: it is not
a thing, or a real form or property of a thing. As Scotus sees it,
claiming that individuation could be by a negation is just a way of
restating the problem, not of proposing an explanatory solution to it
(Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, q. 2, n. 49 (Scotus [OO],
7:413; Spade (1994), 69)). In fact, Scotus takes himself to have not
merely an explanation for individuation, but also an explanation for
identity. The contrast with modern accounts of haecceities is thus
quite sharp. In much modern literature, an item's haecceity is simply
the primitive property of being that item, or being identical with
that item. For Scotus, the haecceity is supposed to explain
that property. (See further discussion of this in section 6
below.)

 Supposing that a haecceity is something real, where does it fit into
the range of things that exist? Is it, for example, a form, or
something else?  According to Scotus, it is something like a form, and
sometimes, indeed, he calls it such (while elsewhere denying the same
claim: on these insignificant terminological shifts, see Dumont
[1995]). The reason is that a haecceity is clearly something like a
property of a thing — hence like a form — but is at the same time
wholly devoid of any correspondence to any conceptual contents. It is
not at all a qualitative feature of a thing — not at all a
“quidditative” feature, in the technical vocabulary. As
irreducibly particular, it shares no real feature in common with any
other thing. This does not mean that haecceities cannot fall under
the extension of a concept. Being an individuating feature is
not a real property of a haecceity (it cannot be, since any haecceity
is wholly simple, and shares no real features with any other thing);
but any concept of what a haecceity is certainly includes among its
components being an individuating feature. A concept of a
haecceity includes representations merely of logical, not real,
features of any haecceity.

 Scotus's position on the reality of both the nature and the
haecceity seems to raise a number of problems. Perhaps the most acute
— a problem which Scotus himself raises — is this:


 If there is some real unity less than numerical unity, it belongs to
something that is either in what is numerically the same or in
something else.  Not in what is numerically the same, because whatever
is numerically the same is numerically one. Neither is it in two,
because there is nothing really one in those two. (Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 171 (Scotus [OO],
7:476; Spade (1994), 102))
 

 This is what has come to be known as Ockham's problem (see King
[1992], 51): how can the nature as instantiated retain its
non-numerical unity? Scotus's apparent solution is that the nature in
itself has non-numerical unity, but that as existent in particulars it
has, in each particular, numerical unity.  Scotus thus — consistent
with his basic insight — believes that the nature has two different
sorts of extramental existence:

 In the same item that is one in number there is some kind of entity
from which there follows a unity less than numerical unity is. Such
unity [viz.  numerical] is real, and what such unity belongs to is of
itself formally one by numerical unity. I grant therefore that this
real unity [viz. numerical] does not belong to anything existing in
two individuals, but in one. (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1,
qq. 5–6, n. 172 (Scotus [OO], 7:476; Spade (1994), 102))
 

 Numerical unity somehow inheres (over and over again) in the common
nature (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 173
(Scotus [OO], 7:477; Spade (1994), 103)), so that the nature is
in itself non-numerically one, and denominatively
numerically one in any given instantiation.  Denominative predication
obtains in the case that the predicate is true of the subject as the
result of the subject's possession of some further, accidental,
feature. Thus, qualifying the predication as “denominative” in this
way does not make the predication any less real. Being accidentally
numerically one is a case of being numerically one, not of being
non-numerically one, and what Scotus is really trying to say is that
the nature in this particular is indeed really (though
accidentally) numerically one. (Note that the denominative numerical
singularity of the nature in the particular is still compatible with
the common nature's being numerically one in some other particular,
and this is because the nature in itself (not as in this or that
particular) is less-than-numerically one (Scotus, Ordinatio II,
d. 3, p. 1, q. 1, n.  34 (Scotus [OO], 7:404-405; Spade (1994),
64)). Being non-numerically one, then, is presumably compatible both
with being accidentally numerically one in any one instantiation, and
accidentally numerically many in more than one instantiation.)

 Scotus explains his position by exploiting the analogy between a
haecceity or individual difference, and a specific difference:


 Color in whiteness is specifically one, but it is not so of itself or
per se or primarily but only denominatively. But a specific
difference is primarily one, because it is primarily incompatible with
it to be divided into what are several in species. Whiteness is
specifically one per se but not primarily, because it is
specifically one through something intrinsic to it (for example,
through the difference). So I grant that whatever is in this stone is
numerically one, either primarily or per se or
denominatively. Primarily, say, as that through which such a unity
belongs to this composite. Per se, the stone itself, of which
what is primarily one with this unity is a per se part. Only
denominatively, what is potential and is perfected by the actual and
is so to speak denominatively related to its actuality. (Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, nn. 174–175
(Scotus [OO], 7:477–478; Spade (1994), 103))
 

 This gives us, in effect, three entities in addition to the common
nature (the nature in itself): the nature-in-the-particular, the
individual difference or haecceity, and the particular itself. Setting
aside the common nature, since the nature-in-the-particular is simply
an accidental modification of the common nature, Scotus holds that
there is some sort of distinction between all three of these entities:
the nature-in-the-particular and the haecceity are something like
components of the particular itself. These two components are
distinct, in the sense that one (the nature-in-the-particular) is
merely denominatively one, whereas the other (the haecceity) is per
se and primarily one (that is to say, essentially one in such a
way that there can be no further explanation for its unity). Scotus
here invokes his famous “formal” distinction. Clearly, the
nature-in-the-particular and the haecceity are something like
(necessary) properties or features of a particular. Scotus is, as we
have seen, a realist about these features (on the grounds that,
otherwise, they could perform no explanatory role of the kind they are
supposed to perform). And they clearly are not the same feature. So
there must be some kind of distinction between them. This distinction
cannot be real: the features are not separable from each other any
more than they are separable from themselves; neither are they
anything like discrete parts of some whole. They are, as Scotus puts
it, “formally distinct”:

 This individual entity is not matter or form of the composite,
inasmuch as each of these is a nature. Rather, it is the ultimate
reality of the being that is matter or that is form or that is the
composite. Thus whatever is common and yet determinable can still be
distinguished (no matter how much it is one thing) into several
formally distinct realities of which this one is not formally that
one. This one is formally the entity of singularity and that one is
formally the entity of the nature. These two realities cannot be
distinguished as thing and thing.  … Rather when in
the same thing, whether in a part or in the whole, they are always
formally distinct realities of the same thing. (Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, qq. 5–6, n. 188 (Scotus [OO],
7:483–484; Spade (1994), 107))
 

 The formal distinction in this context is fundamentally a way of
distinguishing the necessary properties of a particular substance, in
cases where the natures of which the substances are instantiations are
not coextensive. Given this, what sort of relation “ties”
these two formally distinct components together? Scotus suggests that
this relation is real (i.e.  numerical) sameness, a kind of unity
falling short of absolute identity (Scotus, Ordinatio I,
d. 2, p. 2, qq. 1–4, n. 403 (Scotus [OO], 2:356)). This sameness
is presumably something rather like the relation of compresence found
in Russell and others, though unlike compresence, real identity is not
only symmetrical but also transitive (see Tweedale [1999],
2:463–464). Scotus is able to claim transitivity for the
relation of real sameness since, as we have seen, he believes that the
common nature instantiated in two distinct particulars does not itself
have real (i.e. numerical) identity (see Tweedale [1999], 488). The
haeeceity and the nature in the particular can thus be really the same
without different concrete particulars of the same kind being really
the same as each other.

What should we say about the indiscernibility of identicals in these
kinds of case (real identity, formal distinction)? Haecceities explain
the identity of the complete concrete objects that they compose. So
complete concrete objects have self-identity. So too does each of the
formalities that compose such a concrete object. But these formalities
are discernible from each other. Real sameness falls short of absolute
identity. (I discuss some of these issues, and others related to the
varieties of distinction in Scotus, in Cross [2004].)

 Given the huge problems that such an account seems to raise, it is
worth seeing just why Scotus believes he needs to accept
it. Basically, his argument for haecceities depends on his view of
individuation as, fundamentally, a matter of explaining indivisibility
(into subjective parts). Scotus defends haecceities by rejecting all
alternative theories of individuation known to him. Rejecting
qualitative theories is easy for the scholastics. Suppose that all
things of a given kind in some sense share the same nature. The nature
as such cannot explain individuation. So the explanation must be
somehow non-essential. But non-essential qualitative or accidental
features of a thing are posterior to the thing itself, since although
the substance must have some accidental features, precisely which ones
it has is a matter of historical chance (Scotus, Ordinatio II,
d. 3, p. 1, q. 4, n.  87 (Scotus [OO], 7:432-433; Spade (1994),
79)). Things are not identical with their life-stories (on this, see
Cross [1999b]). Indeed, Scotus goes so far as to suggest that the
accidents of a substance — at least, its quantities, qualities, and
relations — are individuated by their own haecceities, something that
is not often spotted in the commentaries (on this, see Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, q. 4, n. 89 (Scotus [OO], 7:434;
Spade (1994), 79–80)). The great 17th century Scotist, John
Poncius, extends this claim to cover even so-called propria,
necessary but non-defining properties: paradigmatically, a capacity to
smile in human beings (see Poncius, Disputatio Metaphysica VI,
q. 9 [Poncius (1659), 138b]).

 But this far from exhausts the options, and Scotus considers a number
of non-qualitative theories too. In addition to the two theories
discussed above, to the effect that things just are individuals
(either through the nature itself, or through the negation of
division), he considers a view according to which existence
individuates, and two views according to which the explanation for
individuation is matter, respectively matter as such, and matter +
extension.  Actual existence, perhaps a prima facie plausible
non-qualitative or non-essential feature of a thing, is rejected by
Scotus as an individuator on the grounds that existence as such — as
opposed to the things that exist — does not seem to be different from
case to case: in itself, it seems wholly undifferentiated (Scotus,
Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, q. 3, n. 61 (Scotus [OO],
7:418–419; Spade (1994), 72–73)).  Nothing about existence
seems irreducibly particular in the way required.

 Perhaps the most interesting non-qualitative approach is the theory,
often associated with Aquinas (but attacked by Scotus in the forms
presented by Godfrey of Fontaines and Giles of Rome), that
individuation is by extended matter: by, as we might say,
chunks of matter. Scotus's way of understanding the
problem of individuation becomes important in his rejection of this
theory. For his fundamental strategy against this sort of material
individuation is that such a theory, while it may be able to explain
numerical distinction, certainly cannot explain indivisibility:

 Quantity is not the reason for divisibility into
individuals…. For a universal whole, which is divided into
individuals and into subjective parts, is predicated of each of those
subjective parts in such a way that each subjective part is it. But
the quantitative parts into which a continuous whole is divided never
admit of the predication of the whole that is divided into
them. (Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1, q. 4, n. 106 (Scotus
[OO], 7:443; Spade (1994), 85))
 

 Scotus has other arguments too, most notably variants of the theme
that the same chunk of matter (matter + extension) seems to persist
through substantial change, and thus not to be sufficient as an
account of individuation (see Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3,
p. 1, q. 4, nn. 77–81 (Scotus [OO], 7:427–429; Spade
(1994), 77)). Individuation on Scotus’s view is not,
fundamentally, a case of instantiating forms in matter.
4. Haecceity in other realist contexts

 Thus far, haecceity has been considered entirely in the context of a
very distinctive moderately realist theory of universals, one
according to which universals fail to be (numerically) identical in
all their particulars. Thus, as Scotus presents it, one of the
motivations for positing haecceities — and perhaps the only one given
the variety of other possible accounts of individuation — is to
explain numerical indivisibility (the numerical identity of a
particular).  Modern accounts of universals do not on the whole accept
that universals have, in themselves, the strange kind of non-numerical
identity that Scotus supposes. Could haecceities have any relevance in
this sort of context?  Presumably haecceities would not be needed to
explain indivisibility, since everything — whether particular or
universal — is indivisible in the required sense (numerically
indivisible; numerically identical in anything in which it
exists). Could haecceities be required to explain numerical
distinction (from every other particular, in the case of particulars,
and from every other universal, in the case of universals)?
Haecceities would not be required to explain the identity of a
universal, since the identity of a universal can clearly be fixed
along merely qualitative lines. Haecceities could be required to
explain the identity of particulars (i.e. their distinction from all
other particulars), provided that such identity can be explained
neither qualitatively nor materially (as it is on most rival
accounts). For example, one modern realist, Richard Swinburne, denies
that haecceities are required to individuate material substances
(since matter can individuate these), but claims nevertheless that
haecceities are required to individuate immaterial substances, if such
there be (Swinburne [1994], 33–50).

 Scotus adopts such a realist theory of universals in one case — that
of the Trinity. The divine essence cannot be divisible in the way that
a creaturely common nature is, since then — given that there are
three divine persons — there would be more than one God, more than
one instance of a nature divided into many. Generally, Scotus accepts
the standard view that the three divine persons are distinct by their
relations. But he is happy too to countenance the view that the three
divine persons could be distinct by non-relational properties (on
this, see conveniently Cross [1999a], 65–67).  Such properties could
presumably be qualitative, provided that, as a matter of necessity, no
divine person shares precisely the same set of distinguishing
features. But they could be non-qualitative, and in this case Scotus
would have something analogous to a haecceity responsible for
distinguishing each divine person. (“Analogous to,” because
the relevant property would explain distinction but not
indivisibility, on the grounds that the persons are exemplifications
of an indivisible essence — of an essence that is numerically the
same in each of them. Indeed, Scotus holds that, in this context, it
is not appropriate to think of the divine persons as individuals at
all, in the sense that they are not instances of a divided nature.) In
this case, a non-qualitative property would be responsible for
explaining distinction, but not for explaining indivisibility.
5. Later medieval and early modern accounts of haecceities

 Acceptance of haecceities is a distinctive feature of the thought of
many followers of Scotus, though there are some sixteenth-century
scholastics who accept haecceities without accepting many other
distinctively Scotist teachings.  Having said this, some early
followers of Scotus reject haecceities and the theory of the common
nature altogether, and of those who accept haecceities, some found the
correct understanding of the nature of the distinction between an
individual's nature and its haecceity a troublesome matter. One
of the earliest Scotists, Francis of Meyronnes, writing his commentary
on the Sentences around 1320, accepts the theory of the
non-numerical unity of common natures (In Sent. II, d. 34, q. 3
[Francis of Meyronnes (1520), 157rbG]), and the claim that
individuation is by haecceity (In Sent. II, d. 34, q. 4
[Francis of Meyronnes (1520), 157vaK-L]; I, d. 3, q. 4
[Francis of Meyronnes (1520), 18raA]). But he holds that it
is inappropriate to talk of a formal distinction in this context.
Formal distinction obtains only between things that have some sort of
quidditative content (In Sent. I, d.  8, q. 5 [(1520),
48vbQ-49raB]). Haecceities have no such
quidditative content (In Sent. I, d.  8, q. 5 [(1520),
48rbG]), and thus cannot be formally distinct from their
nature. Rather, a haecceity is modally distinct from its nature
(In Sent.  II, d. 34, q. 3 [(1520), 157vaL]). A
modal distinction, according to Meyronnes, obtains between a thing and
an intrinsic mode of that thing, where an intrinsic mode is something
which “when added to a thing does not vary its formal definition
… since it does not of itself imply any quiddity or formal
definition” (In Sent. I, d. 42, q. 3 [(1520),
120vaL; 120vbO]; see too In Sent. I,
d. 8, q. 5 [(1520), 49rbE]). A haecceity does not affect a
thing’s kind; it is thus an intrinsic mode of the thing.

 It may look as though this is just a terminological shift, but it is
not so in at least the following way: a modal distinction is a lesser
kind of distinction than a formal distinction. Formal distinctions
obtain between genus and specific difference; thus, the difference
between species/nature and haecceity, for Meyronnes, is less than the
difference between genus and difference. Scotus, contrariwise, makes
no such distinction between degrees of difference in this context (for
this contrast between the two thinkers, see Dumont [1987], 18). Still,
without some principled way of spelling out degrees of difference,
this contrast between Scotus and Meyronnes amounts to nothing of any
philosophical interest. To this extent the difference between the two
thinkers might as well be merely terminological, and Meyronnes needs
to do more work if he is to make any significant philosophical point
here.

 Amongst baroque scholastics, the most notable adherent of haecceities
is the Jesuit Peter Fonseca (1528–1599), whose monumental commentary
on Aristotle's Metaphysics (Fonseca [1599]) includes an
extensive discussion of haecceities. (Fonseca, with something of a
humanist background, worries about the barbarous nature of Scotus's
neologism, and suggests in passing that 'haeccity'
[haeccitas] would have been a more comfortable formulation
[In Met. V, c. 6, q. 5, sect. 1 (Fonseca [1599], vol. 2,
col. 381D)] — compare ‘quiddity.’) Like many of the
sixteenth and seventeenth-century scholastics, Fonseca — most
notable for coming up with a theory of divine “middle knowledge” at
much the same time as Molina — is not a follower of any one
earlier philosopher, preferring to learn from any of his predecessors
on various points as he sees fit. According to Fonseca,

 the principle of individuation is a certain positive difference,
primarily incommunicable, which, when added to the species, in itself
constitutes the individual … which difference others call haecceities.
(Fonseca, In Met. V, c. 6, q. 5, sect.
1 [Fonseca (1599), vol. 2, col. 181C-D])
 

 Fonseca engages particularly with the rejection of haecceities in the
Thomist Cajetan (most notably in Cajetan's commentary on Aquinas's
De ente, c. 2, q. 5, nn. 33–36 (Cajetan [CBE],
94–98)). Cajetan worries that haecceities need to be in some
sense similar to each other — and specifically that the
haecceities of Socrates and Plato must be more similar than the
haecceities of Plato and some white patch (Cajetan, In de
ente, c. 2, q. 5, n. 36 (Cajetan [CBE], 97); see Fonseca, In
Met. V, c. 6, q. 5, sect. 2 [Fonseca (1599), vol. 2,
col. 185C-D]). According to Fonseca, haecceities are similar to each
other without having anything real in common: they are thus primarily
diverse in the required sense, even though the haecceities of Socrates
and Plato are more similar than the haecceities of Plato and some
white patch (Fonseca, In Met. V, c. 6, q. 5, sect. 2 [Fonseca
(1599), vol. 2, col. 185E-F]). More generally, Fonseca (rightly) holds
that exact similarity between two haecceities would entail that the
two haecceities were numerically identical (Fonseca, In
Met. V, c. 6, q. 5, sect. 2 [Fonseca (1599), vol. 2,
col. 185B]).

 Fonseca is convinced of the reality of haecceities because he accepts
the view that common natures have in themselves a certain sort of
unity prior to instantiation, although — more like Aquinas than
Scotus — he does not believe the nature as such to have any sort of
real existence other than as instantiated. Fonseca proposes that, in
order to have real existence, something needs to be added to the
nature — a haecceity (Fonseca, In Met. V, c. 28, q. 3, sect.
4 [Fonseca (1599), vol. 2, col. 966A]). Again, Fonseca's discussion is
informed by the criticisms of Cajetan, though in this case the
position that Cajetan adopts on the question of the unity of
the common nature seems closer to the broadly Thomist and Scotist
tradition than that proposed by Fonseca. In other words, Fonseca
adopts an account of the common nature that seems quite distinct from
the closely related views of Aquinas and Scotus. To this extent,
Fonseca's account represents an acceptance of haecceities in the
context of a theory of universals that is not really
Scotist. According to Cajetan, common natures in themselves have
“formal” unity: indivisibility into further more specific kinds,
compatible with division into numerically many instances or subjective
parts (Cajetan [CBE], nn. 134–155 [nn. 55–62]; see Fonseca, In
Met. V, c. 28, q. 3, sect. 4 [Fonseca (1599), vol. 2, col. 967B,
D-E]). Fonseca agrees that the nature must have this formal unity — a
unity that he identifies as Scotus's less-than-numerical unity
(Fonseca, In Met. V, c. 28, q. 3, sect. 4 [Fonseca (1599),
vol. 2, col. 968A]). But, in addition to this unity, he holds that the
nature has a proper unity of its own that cannot be communicated to
its instantiations. This unity is numerical, and belongs to the
nature absolutely (unqualifiedly) (Fonseca, In Met. V, c. 28,
q. 3, sect. 4 [Fonseca (1599), vol. 2, col. 968A]). The reason is
that, if a nature lacked such additional unity, then it would not be
possible to speak of (say) humanity as just one species. After all,
the formal unity of the nature is compatible with division into
numerically many instances; some other unity must be the basis for the
assertion that humanity is not many natures or species (Fonseca, In
Met. V, c. 28, q. 3, sect. 1 [Fonseca (1599), vol. 2,
col. 959F]). The picture is admittedly not entirely clear, but
Fonseca's distinction of instantiable from non-instantiable unity is
presumably supposed to explain how there can be some unity proper to
common natures; this unity is distinguished from instantiable unity,
and it is the existence of haecceities that explains how the
instantiable unity is in fact instantiated.
6. Rejecting haecceities

 Setting aside the complexities of a later thinker such as Fonseca,
the years immediately after Scotus saw something of a move towards a
more nominalist view on the question of universals — the view
(on the understanding of ‘nominalism’ relevant here) that
universals are just concepts. It is hard to make very firm
classifications on this point, since it seems fundamentally unclear
whether a position such as Aquinas's — which denies any
extramental reality to common natures while accepting some sort of
(extramental?)  non-numerical unity — should count as a form of
nominalism or not. Amongst opponents of Scotus, the most common
strategy was to adopt the view that substances themselves are
primarily diverse, such that their distinction is not explained by any
real feature or property of them other than merely the substance
itself. For example, according to Peter Auriol writing in the second
decade after Scotus' death,

 objects are singular by themselves, and … this singularity is a
basic fact that needs no further explanation…. Maintaining that
an object is singular or individual because it results from or is
endowed with a proper principle of individuation which is itself
singular, amounts to nothing more than duplicating what should be
explained. (Nielsen [2003], 498)
 

 Rejection of Scotus's view was not confined to such manifest
opponents of Scotus's system. Amongst the earliest students of
Scotus, various found his views on the haecceity and its formal
distinction from the nature unpalatable. William of Alnwick, the
foremost of Scotus's students working through the second decade of
the fourteenth century, holds at least two different positions,
neither the same as Scotus's. In an early disputed question on
individuation, William holds that natures are individual of themselves
(Stella [1968], 363); later, in his Ordinatio on the
Sentences, William accepts something akin to Henry of
Ghent's position that individuation is by a negation, though
adding the clarification that this negation represents nevertheless a
perfection — it is better not to have the positive feature of
divisibility (Stella [1968], 630–631). The reason for the shift in
view is an apprehension that the fact that natures can be multiplied
(i.e. exemplified many times) entails that a nature cannot be
self-individuating (Stella [1968], 628). But William cannot see how
the added feature could be anything positive, since he does not see
how an individual could be anything, necessarily, other than its
nature (Stella [1968], 631). (Being e.g. human is sufficient for being
an individual.) In both works, William objects to Scotus's view
that the common nature is somehow prior to its instantiations, on the
grounds that this priority entails that the common nature could exist
without any of its instantiations (Stella [1968], 352, 625). This in
effect amounts — in Scotist terms — to the claim that the nature is
really distinct, not just formally distinct, from any of its
instantiations. For Scotus, the mark of a formal distinction is
inseparability: no individual is separable from its nature, and there
is thus no more than a formal distinction in any individual between
nature and haecceity. Ockham puts his finger on this misinterpretation
on the part of Alnwick:

 On this question there is one theory attributed by some people [viz.
William of Alnwick] to the Subtle Doctor [i.e. Scotus] …. This
is the theory that the universal is a true being outside the soul,
really distinct from a contracting difference but really multiplied
and varied by such a contracting
difference. (Ockham, Ordinatio I, d. 2, q. 5, n. 6 (William
of Ockham [OT], 2:154, ll. 1–2, 3–7; Spade (1994), 149))
 

 As Ockham rightly implies, this is not Scotus's view. A position
not dissimilar to William's earlier, nominalist, view can be
found in another prominent early student of Scotus's — Henry of
Harclay (see Henninger [1994]; for Ockham's rejection of the way
in which Harclay develops his nominalist theory, see Ockham,
Ordinatio I, d. 2, q. 7, nn.  11–12, 63–82
(William of Ockham [OT], 2:227, l. 15–p. 228,
l. 20, p.  241, l. 21–p. 248, l. 21; Spade (1994),
191–192, 200–204); see too Adams [1982]).

 Ockham himself, writing 1321–1323, raises an array of arguments
against Scotus's position. Ockham, of course, was a thinker explicitly
influenced by Scotus in all sorts of ways, while nevertheless
rejecting the fundamental feature of Scotist metaphysics and
semantics, namely realism on the question of universals. Without
exception, the arguments target one of the following two Scotist
positions: the commonality of the nature, and the formal
distinction. As such, Ockham does not attack haecceities, though in so
far as Scotus's account of haecceities requires both his distinctive
account of the divisibility of a nature, and the formal distinction
between nature and haecceity, Ockham's attacks will harm Scotus's
haecceities too. Ockham offers no fewer than four arguments against
common natures with less than numerical unity (Ockham,
Ordinatio I, d. 2, q. 6, nn. 51, 62, 78, 82 (William of
Ockham [OT], 2:181, ll.  8–13, p. 184, ll. 11–13, p. 189,
ll. 10–14, p. 190, ll. 18–22; Spade (1994), 161, 163, 166,
167)). The key one is the second: humanity in Socrates and humanity in
Plato are numerically distinct, and essentially so. So there is
nothing in common between these humanities. Ockham's first and longest
argument against Scotus takes issue with the formal
distinction. Against the formal distinction of really identical
entities, Ockham persistently appeals to the indiscernibility of
identicals, arguing that the principle holds whatever its domain
(i.e. whether ranging over properties or over substances, or both: see
Ockham, Ordinatio I, d.  2, q. 6, nn. 25–8, 83 (William
of Ockham [OT], 2:173, l. 11–p. 174, l.  12,
p. 190, l. 23-p. 191, l. 4; Spade (1994), 118, 127)). As Marilyn Adams
has pointed out, this strategy of course begs the question against
Scotus (Adams [1982], 420).  Scotus's inclination is to restrict the
indiscernibility of identicals to the domain of individual
substances.

 Ockham's more parsimonious ontology is important in the attempt to
understand the nature of the opposition to Scotus just
outlined. Ockham is sometimes presented as though his distinctive
position on the question of individuation is simply the result of his
distinctive nominalist position on the question of universals. Thus
Armand Maurer, in a generally very helpful account of Ockham's
position:

 The problem of individuation, in the usual sense of the term, does
not arise in Ockham's philosophy. The problem occurs when a
philosopher maintains that there are natures or essences in
individuals, in some way common the individuals and yet diversified in
them…. Given the commonness of [e.g] animality, what makes the
individual animal to be the individual it is? (Maurer [1994], 373)
 

 This is not quite right. For while Ockham does not need an
explanation for indivisibility (since a tenet of Ockham's nominalism
on the question of universals is that nothing real is divisible into
subjective parts), he certainly needs an explanation for the
distinction of one substance from another, as Black's reflections on
the principle of the identity of indiscernibles forcefully show. In
fact, Ockham claims that a substance is singular through
itself (“se ipso”: Ockham, Ordinatio I,
d. 2, q. 6, n. 105–107 (William of Ockham [OT],
2:196, ll. 2–12; Spade (1994), 171)). And it seems to me that
this claim does indeed constitute an attempt at a solution to the
problem of distinction. For Ockham is a nominalist about many more
properties than Scotus is, as well as being a nominalist on the
question of universals. Thus, Ockham believes that the set of those
predicates that involve no ontological commitment (that is to say,
predicates that do not signify anything extramental other than merely
the substance itself) includes the Aristotelian genus, specific
difference, and proprium (necessary but non-defining
property) (see e.g. Moody [1935], 97-106, 145–51). Substances
themselves are primarily diverse according to Ockham — their
distinction from each other is not explained by anything other than
their own self-identity, and ipso facto not by any
qualitative or relational feature of themselves.  Self-identity is
not, however, a real feature of the substance in any sense distinct
from itself or its nature. And this is the result not of Ockham's
nominalism on the question of universals, but of his nominalism on the
question of inseparable properties. And much the same seems true of
the other opponents of Scotus mentioned above.

 Ockham's position thus turns out to be a variety of haecceitism (in a
more modern sense of the word). Maintaining that substances are
primarily diverse does not amount to having no theory of
individuation. Indeed, it presumably entails that their diversity is
not explained by, say, qualitative distinction. Thus, Ockham holds
that two things, each per se singular, can be
“precisely similar” to each other
(Ockham, Ordinatio I, d. 2, q. 6, n. 108 (William of Ockham
[OT], 2:196, l. 17; Spade (1994), 171)). And this seems to entail some
form of haecceitism. The difference between this view and that of
Scotus is that the haecceity defended by Scotus is — in some
minimal way — hypostatized.  Some modern accounts of
haecceities resemble Ockham's view more than Scotus's: the uniquely
instantiable, non-qualitative property of (say) being identical with
Socrates — Socrates's haecceity (in the modern terminology)
— does not carry the kind of ontological weight that Scotus (for
example) wants to place on haecceities as he understands them:

 It may be controversial to speak of a ‘property’ of being
identical with me. I want the word ‘property’ to carry as
light a metaphysical load here as possible. ‘Thisness’ is
intended to be a synonym or translation of the traditional term
‘haecceity’ (in Latin, ‘haecceitas’),
which so far as I know was invented by Duns Scotus. Like many medieval
philosophers, Scotus regarded properties as components of the things
that have them. He introduced haecceities (thisnesses), accordingly,
as a special sort of metaphysical component of individuals. I am not
proposing to revive this aspect of his conception of a haecceity,
because I am not committed to regarding properties as components of
individuals. To deny that thisnesses are purely qualitative is not
necessarily to postulate “bare particulars,” substrata without
qualities of their own, which would be what was left of the individual
when all its qualitative properties were subtracted. Conversely, to
hold that thisnesses are purely qualitative is not to imply that
individuals are nothing but bundles of qualities, for qualities may
not be components of individuals at all. We could probably conduct our
investigation, in somewhat different terms, without referring to
thisnesses as properties. (Adams [1979], 6–7)
 

Note, of course, that Scotus's account of the common nature also
entails something stronger than Adams is proposing: indeed, it entails
precisely the sort of minimal hypostatization that Scotus
advocates. And the reason for this, of course, is Scotus's view that
individual substances cannot themselves be primarily diverse — a
fact that is explained by his claim that common natures have some sort
of unity in their instantiations: the nature in Socrates is
(non-numerically) the same as the nature in Plato. Natures,
for Scotus, cannot be primarily diverse; substances must include more
than natures. But individual natures in Ockham's view can indeed be
primarily diverse, and this surely amounts to a form of haecceitism
— nothing other than an individual nature's own self-identity
explains its distinction from all other such natures. Maintaining that
individual natures are primarily diverse amounts not to having no
theory of individuation, but to accepting a form of haecceitism that,
like Adams's, does not involve ontological commitment to the existence
of real haecceities as distinct real constituents of things.