The philosophical debate concerning the truth-value of singular
statements about future contingents derives from Chapter 9 of
Aristotle's treatise De interpretatione (Peri
hermeneias). In Chapters 7–8, Aristotle deals with
the contradictory pairs of assertoric statements which divide truth
and falsity so that one is true and the other is false. In Chapter 9
he raises the question of whether this holds for all assertoric
statements or whether there might be an exception with respect to
statements about singular future events or states of affairs which are
neither necessary nor impossible and hence may take place, or may not.
Aristotle's famous example is tomorrow's sea battle. Is the prediction
‘There will be a sea battle tomorrow’ necessarily true, if
it is true, and does its truth entail that the sea battle is
inevitable? After a discussion of deterministic arguments and the
absurdity of fatalism (18a34–19a22), Aristotle gives his
ambiguous reply in 19a23–39. Boethius's (c. 480–524) Latin
translation of De interpretatione had a long commentary
tradition through the Middle Ages, beginning from the eleventh
century. Boethius's own two commentaries were very influential as well
and provided information about other ancient commentaries (Magee
2010). Chapter 9 was also dealt with in theological commentaries on
Peter Lombard's Sentences (I.38) and in separate treatises
(Isaac 1953; Lohr 1967–1974; Craig 1988; Marenbon 1993;
Braakhuis and Kneepkens 2003; Knuuttila 2010). Al-Farabi's
(c. 870–950) commentary on De interpretatione was
influential in medieval Arabic philosophy; Averroes (1126–1198)
wrote another Arabic commentary. (For future contingents in medieval
Arabic thought, see Marmura 1985; Adamson 2006.)
 
1. From Aristotle to Boethius


The debate about future contingents in modern philosophical logic
was revived by J. Łukasiewicz's works on three-valued logic
(1957, 1967). He thought that in order to avoid fatalistic
consequences, one should admit that the principle of bivalence (for any
proposition p, either p is true or p is
false) does not hold good for future contingent propositions. Arguing
that this was realized by Aristotle in Chapter 9 of De
interpretatione, Łukasiewicz attempted to formalize
Aristotle's position by introducing a third truth-value (neither
true nor false) for future contingent propositions and giving three-valued
truth-tables for truth-functional basic connectives. Many authors have
followed Łukasiewicz in taking Aristotle to restrict the principle
of bivalence, though they have not ascribed to Aristotle the details of
Łukasiewicz's system, which is problematic in many respects.
In arguing for the deterministic consequences of unrestricted
bivalence, Łukasiewicz himself assumed, and took Aristotle to
assume, that the truth of a proposition entails the necessity of its
truth. Logical determinism, therefore, is to be avoided by qualifying
the truth-values of future contingent propositions. The critics of this
view do not see any entailment relation between truth and necessity,
some of them maintaining that the illusion of logical determinism has
its roots in a tacit oscillation between a temporal and atemporal
predication of truth. The temporalized reading may be associated with
diachronic determination, certainty, necessity and other time-dependent
qualifications. Mixing these with non-deterministic atemporal
predications yields the wrong idea of fatalism (von Wright 1984,
52–67). It is also argued that even the temporalized predication of
truth carries no deterministic implications. (Sorabji 1980, 96–103;
Sorabji's example is that ‘even if it has already been true
that I am going to swim, I still retain the power to make it to have
been false’.)

The majority of Aristotelian scholars believe that the argument
in De interpretatione 9 aims at avoiding fatalism by
restricting bivalence with respect to future contingent predictions
(Frede 1970, 1985; Sorabji 1980; Craig 1988; Gaskin 1995; Crivelli
2004; Weidemann 2012). The second interpretation insists that
Aristotle's point is not to deny the truth-value of these statements,
but their being true in the same way as other statements are true. The
difference is that while the truth of other statements is necessary,
the truth of future contingent predictions is not yet similarly
determined. This interpretation is associated with Aristotle's remark
that not everything which is actual and therefore necessary is
necessary without qualification (19a23). This is taken to mean that
the necessity of an event at a certain time does not imply that it was
inevitable. Aristotle speaks about singular future possibilities which
may be realized or remain unrealized and which may or may not cease to
be antecedent possibilities. (See De int. 19a13–17,
EN III.5, 1114a17–19, Met. VI.3.) In the same way
predictions may begin to be necessarily true or necessarily false. (For
various versions of this approach, see Anscombe 1956; Rescher 1963;
Hintikka 1973; Fine 1984; Judson 1988.)

The former interpretation, which restricts bivalence with respect to
future contingent statements, is called the ‘traditional’
or ‘standard’ interpretation. Some Stoics read Aristotle
in this way, as Boethius reports in his second commentary on
Aristotle's De interpretatione:
Now some people – the Stoics among them – thought that
Aristotle says that future contingents are neither true nor false. For
they interpreted his saying that nothing [of that sort] is disposed
more to being than to not being as meaning that it makes no difference
whether they are thought false or true; for they considered them to be
neither true nor false [in Aristotle's view], but falsely.
(In Periherm. II, 208.1–4, trans. by N. Kretzmann.)


On the basis of a note in Simplicius's commentary on
Aristotle's Categories (407.6–13), it is argued that
some Aristotelians also qualified the principle of bivalence. (For
this and other ancient deviations from the principle, see Sorabji
1980, 92–93.) On the other hand, future contingent propositions
were treated as true or false in Stoic logic. The Stoics took the
universally valid principle of bivalence to imply the predetermination
of all future events. (See Cicero, De fato, 20–21;
Bobzien 1998, 59–86.)   

 Boethius regarded the Stoic interpretation of Aristotle's view as
mistaken, his interpretation being based on the terms
‘definitely’ true or false and ‘indefinitely’
true or false. These same terms were also used in Ammonius's
commentary (c. 435/445–517/526). Since this work was not known
to Boethius, both authors seem to have known some earlier Greek
discussions in which these qualifications were introduced.
(Ammonius's Greek commentary on De interpretatione 9 is
translated by D. Blank and Boethius's Latin commentaries by N.
Kretzmann in the same volume, with interpretative essays by
R. Sorabji, N. Kretzmann and M. Mignucci in 1998.) The contemporary
reconstructions of what Ammonius and Boethius meant can be divided
into two groups.  According to one interpretation, Ammonius and
Boethius ascribe to Aristotle the view that the predictions of future
contingent events and their denials differ from other contradictory
pairs, because truth and falsity are not definitely distributed
between them and the propositions are consequently neither definitely
true nor definitely false. In answering the Stoic criticism, Boethius
might have thought that future contingent propositions have the
disjunctive property of being true-or-false, which would mean
something other than simply lacking a truth value. (For various
interpretations of how Boethius restricted bivalence, see Frede 1985;
Craig 1988; Gaskin 1995; Kretzmann 1998.) Another interpretation holds
that Boethian future contingents are not definitely true or false,
because their truth-makers are not yet determined, but are true or
false in an indeterminate way. No qualification of the principle of
bivalence is involved. True statements are either definitely true or
simply (indefinitely) true or false (Mignucci 1988, 1998; Seel 2000;
Beets 2003 for Boethius's first commentary). According to both
interpretations, Ammonius and Boethius assumed that the definite truth
of predictions directly implies determinism and that Aristotle denied
the definite truth of all future contingent propositions; it is less
clear how they understood the indefinite truth of these (Sorabji
1998). Boethius's formulations often suggest that future contingent
propositions are true-or-false. One reason for avoiding to treat them
as simply true or false is his view of the necessity of the
present. In commenting on Aristotle's remark that ‘What is
necessarily is when it is’ (De interpretatione 19a23),
Boethius explains that even though present things are temporally or
conditionally necessary, they may be generically or antecedently
contingent (In Periherm. I, 121.20–122.4; II,
241.7–243.28). He apparently thinks that the truth of future
contingent statements implies that things cannot be otherwise, for the
assumed actuality of the relevant truth-makers means that alternative
prospectives are rendered temporally impossible. 

In his longer commentary on De interpretatione, Boethius says
of God that ‘he knows future events as happening contingently
and not necessarily so that he does not ignore the possibility that
something else might take place’ (In Periherm. II,
226.9–12). Boethius also stresses that since the truth of future
contingents is not accessible to humans, the predictions of the form
‘A sea battle will take place tomorrow’ are false in the
sense that they assert the truth of something that cannot be known
(In Periherm. II, 211.26–213.18). In his later
treatise Consolatio philosophiae Boethius states that
‘I do not think that anybody would say that those things which
are happening now were not going to happen before they happened’
(V. 4.19) In this treatise, Boethius argues that God has timeless
knowledge of everything. God's knowledge is not foreknowledge, since
it is not temporally located, but the predictions of future
contingents are true or false from the point of view of God's eternal
knowledge of the things referred to (V.6, 25–32; see also
Augustine, City of God 11.21). (See Sharples 2009; Marenbon
2013.) According to Boethius, it is necessary that if God knows that
p, then p. This ‘conditional necessity’ does not imply the
‘simple necessity’ of p (Consolatio philosophiae
V, 6.27–30). Some medieval authors read this distinction in
Boethius and Augustine as a modal placement solution to the problem of
foreknowledge and free will (Matthews 2004). Thomas Aquinas, for
example, refers to Boethius's distinction using the
terms necessitas consequentiae and necessitas
consequentis (Summa contra gentiles I.67; De
veritate I.23, ad 13). 
2. Medieval Developments from Abelard to Aquinas


In discussing statements such as ‘What is known by God
necessarily takes place’, Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109)
distinguished between the antecedent and consequent necessity of things
which are known. The latter is the necessity of a thing's
actuality which is caused by the actuality of the thing itself. The
former is the necessity by which a thing exists because of an external
cause (Cur Deus homo 2.17, 125.6–126.2). Neither antecedent
knowledge nor antecedent truth has a compelling effect on things. In
explaining Mary's believing the truth of a prophetic statement
concerning the death of Christ, Anselm writes:
Therefore, since her faith was true faith it was necessary that
things would be as she believed. But if you are once again disturbed by
my saying “It was necessary…”, then remember that
the truth of the virgin's faith was not the cause of his dying
freely but that her faith was true faith because this was going to
happen. (Cur Deus homo 2.17, 124.27–125.3)


Anselm thought that future contingent statements based on divine
revelation were true without deterministic implications. A similar
view was held by most medieval theologians when they addressed divine
omniscience and prophesy.

William of Champeaux (c. 1070–1122) dealt with an argument
against the compatibility between contingency and divine omniscience
which was discussed in Augustine's City of God
(V.9). In response to Cicero's De fato and De
divinatione, Augustine refuted the claim that if events can
happen in any way other than God has foreseen, then God can be in
error. William stated that the antecedent of the argument is true but
the consequent is false and therefore the consequence is not valid
(Lottin 1959, 195; Marenbon 1997, 226–227). Peter Abelard
(1079–1142/4), in discussing the same example, applied the
systematic division between modal statements de sensu or in
the compound sense and modal statements de re or in the
divided sense. (For Abelard's modal terminology, see Super
Perihermenias 3–47. Later authors used the
expression de dicto instead of
de sensu.) Abelard's analysis of Cicero's argument was often
repeated in medieval theology, since it was put forward in slightly
modified form in Peter Lombard's Sententiae (c.  1157), which
became the standard medieval introduction to theology.  Abelard states
that when the proposition ‘A thing can be otherwise than God
knows it to be’ is read as a modal proposition de
sensu, the antecedent is false and the possibility of God's error
as a consequent would not follow even if the consequence were
valid. When the antecedent is read de re, it is true, but the
consequent is false, since if things were otherwise, then God would
possess different knowledge of them. This shows that the consequence
is not valid. Following Peter Abelard, Peter Lombard formulated the
same view in stating that ‘Things cannot be other than as God
foreknows them’ is true in the compound sense and false in the
divided sense. The truth of the compound sense saves God's
infallibility and the falsity of the divided sense expresses God's
freedom and the metaphysical contingency of the future (Peter Lombard,
Sententiae I.38.2; Peter Abelard, Logica
‘Ingredientibus’,
429.26–430.36; Dialectica, 217.27–219.24). It is
assumed here that when a temporally definite statement is true, its
denial may be possibly true. 

Early medieval logicians could deal with singular future statements as
statement types with truth-values changing in accordance with the time
of assertion, as in Aristotle and Hellenistic philosophy. (For the
prevalence of temporally indefinite sentences in ancient philosophy,
see Hintikka 1973, Ch. 4; Bobzien 1998,
66–67, 100–101, 109–111.) In the theological
context of timeless divine omniscience, it was more natural to regard
these statements as atemporal and temporally definite. Abelard calls
statements propositions (propositio) and what is asserted by
a statement its dictum. He considered that a statement is
true or false when its dictum is true or false. In dealing
with prophesy, Abelard suggested that the dictum about a
singular event is first expressed by a future tense proposition and
then by present and past tense propositions. (For the nature of the
dictum, contrasted with the ‘facts’ and
‘propositions’ of twentieth-century philosophical jargon,
see Marenbon 1997, 202–209). The view of the atemporal
propositional content was developed further by twelfth-century authors
who were later called nominales. One of the theses of this
group was ‘What is once true is always true.’ (See Iwakuma
and Ebbesen 1992, 196, 199–201, 205–206 for the relevant
texts. For the history of the principle, see also Marenbon 1992,
58–61 and Ebbesen 1992, 73–74.) This thesis was employed
in the discussions of how the beliefs of Abraham and others who lived
before the coming of Christ and believed various things about him were
the same as the beliefs of those who live after His coming. The reason
for asking this was that the previous beliefs were formulated in
future tense statements and the latter in present or past tense
statements. According to the nominales, one could regard as
basic a temporally definite propositional content the meaning of which
is expressed by various tensed expressions depending on when they are
uttered. While tensed statements about temporally definite singular
events have a changing truth-value, the corresponding
non-tensed dicta are unchangingly true or false (Nuchelmans
1973, 177–189; for some later examples, see also Nuchelmans
1980; Lewis 1995; Goris 2001). Peter of Poitiers (c. 1130–1205),
one of the authors taking this approach, argued that while the
singular statements about contingent things are immutably true or
false because of God's eternal choice, their unchanging truth-value
could be otherwise. God does not know contingent things through tensed
statements, since their truth-value is changeable. If God's knowledge
is described by using tensed statements, analogously to the articles
of faith before and after the coming of Christ, one should read them
so that they signify the same (Peter of Poitiers, Sententiae
I.7, 133–143; I.12.199–223; I.14.328–253). This
became a well-known position, since it was also employed in Peter
Lombard's Sententiae (I.39.1; I.41.3.)

The theological formulations by Peter Abelard, Peter Lombard and Peter
of Poitiers discussed above exemplify twelfth-century deviations from
the Aristotelian thesis ‘What is necessarily is when it
is.’ This was traditionally understood as implying the principle
of the necessity of the present, which was not questioned in ancient
modal theories (Knuuttila 1993, Ch. 1). Since God's knowledge about
contingent things was regarded as unchangeable, the contingency of
this knowledge (in the sense that it could be different) also implied
the denial of the Aristotelian equation of immutability with
necessity, a denial regarded as an explicit doctrine of
the nominales (Ebbesen and Iwakuma 1992, 194). The new modal
paradigm, which is more or less consciously applied in these
discussions of God's will, power, and knowledge, could be
characterized as the model of simultaneous alternatives. There are
three main examples of it in early medieval philosophy. 

Abelard assumes that at a given instant of time, what is actual is
necessary as no longer be avoided, but he argues that unrealized
alternatives are possible at the same time in the sense that they
could have happened at that time. Some of the alternatives of a
singular being are real counterfactual alternatives. These are
unrealizable because of some previous change in the conditions of the
subject, and some are merely imaginable alternatives, such as
Socrates's being a bishop, which never had a real basis in
things. While often employing traditional ideas about necessity and
possibility, Abelard also developed ideas pertaining to simultaneous
alternatives. (See Martin 2003; Knuuttila 2008, 537–538.)

 Gilbert of Poitiers (1085/90–1154) stressed the idea
that natural regularities which are called natural necessities are not
absolute, since they are chosen by God and can be overridden by divine
power. This had become a widespread theological view in Gilbert's
time. Gilbert explained it in the light of the Augustinian view of
God's acting by divine will, which chooses between alternative
providential plans, and divine omnipotence as an executive power. There
is an interesting formulation of Plato's ‘Platonitas’
in Gilbert. This is said to include all of what Plato was, is and will
be as well as what he could be but never is. Even though Gilbert does
not explain why there is a modal element in the individual concept, it
was probably needed in order to speak about Plato in alternative
possible histories or, as in Abelard, about Socrates as a bishop.
Gilbert seems to have been the first to formulate an individual concept
in this way (Marenbon 2007, 158–159).

 A third context of the systematic interest in simultaneous
alternatives was the new twelfth-century theory that declarative
singular statements or their contents should be primarily treated as
temporally definite and as having an unchanging truth-value.  All
propositional contents pertaining to contingent things have a
truth-value on the basis of God's eternal choice. These truth-values
would be otherwise if the providential design of the world were
different in relevant respects. Robert Grosseteste
(1168/75–1253) taught that the opposites of actualized
contingent things are no longer realizable possibilities, though they
are possible alternatives in the sense that they could have been
included in God's eternal providential choice. Actual history is an
explication of one of the divine alternatives with respect to which
things are primarily called necessary, possible or
impossible. Necessities and possibilities at this basic level are
called modalities ‘from eternity and without
beginning’. Mathematical truths exemplify these
‘simple’ necessities. In addition there are necessities
and impossibilities which have a beginning and which are eternal
contingencies in the sense that they depend on God's free choice
(De libero arbitrio 168.26–170.33;
178.28–29). The contingency of the divine acts of knowledge and
will is based on an atemporal causal priority between the powers of
knowledge and the will and their acts (178.24–26). Grosseteste's
views are compared with those of Duns Scotus in Lewis (1996).

This was an innovative theory for dealing with future contingent
statements as omnitemporally true or omnitemporally false or, if these
were tensed, as antecedently true or antecedently false. The
truth-values of statements about contingent things, though temporally
immutable from the beginning of the world and also immutably known by
God, were metaphysically contingent. The consequence from knowledge or
truth to necessity, whether causal or semantic, was denied.  The
contingency of the created order was taken to be based on God's
eternal and free choice, which involved the acts of the created will
as free. Anselm formulated this traditional view, following Augustine,
as follows: ‘It is both necessary that God foreknows what will
come to be and that God foreknows that something will freely come to
be’ (De concordia praescientiae et praedestinationis et
gratiae Dei cum libero arbitrio, 1.1; cf. Augustine, On Free
Choice of the Will, 3.3.8). Anselm argued that that predictions
are true or false and their truth can be understood as the
correspondence to what will happen, although what will contingently
happen is not known to human beings without supernatural help. This
was the standard view of the possibility of prophesy. (See the above
quotation from Anselm's Cur Deus homo; Peter
Abelard, Logica ‘Ingredientibus’, 426–429;
Anonymous, Summa Duacensis, 129–130.)

 Early medieval authors were well acquainted with the conception of
God's eternal and timeless knowledge in Augustine and Boethius. This
aspect of the question of the divine knowledge and future contingents
became a central issue in Thomas Aquinas. According to Aquinas, God
grasps all combinations of things in particular times by one eternal
vision. Temporal things are timelessly present to God, who has direct
knowledge of them and their relative temporal order in their
actuality, though none of them is past or future with respect to His
cognition (Sent. I.38.1.4–5; Summa contra
gentiles I.66;
Summa theologiae I.14.9, 14). Things seen as actual are
necessary by supposition (i. e., with respect to God's knowledge and
providence), but many of them are contingent with respect to their
proximate causes (Sent. I.38.1.5, Summa contra
gentiles I.67, Summa theologiae I, 14.13, De
veritate 2.12). The ultimate source of the actuality of the
created order is the divine will (In Periherm. I.14,
197). The whole of world history is known by God's immutable vision,
which includes the knowledge of things which are future contingents in
the temporal order. Aquinas assumes, like Boethius and in contrast to
Abelard, that the idea of natural truth or falsity of all temporally
definite propositions implies that everything happens of necessity
(In Periherm. I.13, 173). While prophetic predictions of
future contingents are possible through a revelatory participation in
divine knowledge, their truth remains a supernatural matter (Summa
theologiae II-2, 171.3, 6).  Speaking about divine prescience is
a temporal projection of the divine mode of knowing. For various
interpretations of Aquinas's view, see Wippel 1985: Craig 1988,
99–126; Goris 1996; Marenbon 2005.

 Medieval critics found the allegedly Thomist idea of the presence of
each instant of time to God's non-temporal eternal vision
problematic. (See John Duns Scotus, Lectura I.39.1–5,
23, 27, 85, 87, and further references in Hoenen 1993, 169–70.)
One could also ask how Aquinas's view of God's essential simplicity
and immutability is compatible with the view that God's eternal choice
could be otherwise and the voluntary acts of created beings could be
other than what is known by God. (See Stump 2003, 100–127.)
3. Interpreting Aristotle


Mignucci's account of how Ammonius and Boethius understood the
distinction between definite and indefinite truth is roughly speaking
the same as the explanation of these terms in Peter Abelard's
interpretation of De interpretatione 9. Abelard believed that
Aristotle assumed that future contingent statements are true or false,
though not determinately true or false before the actuality of the
things to which they refer (Dialectica
213.17–20). Abelard uses the notions of
‘determinate/indeterminate’ instead of the Boethian
‘definite/indefinite’, as most medieval authors did. He
retained the principle of bivalence for all assertoric statements, but
rejected the universal application of the stronger principle that
every assertoric statement is determinately true or determinately
false. According to Abelard, the notions of ‘determinate’
or ‘indeterminate’ apply primarily to the truth-makers of
assertions and secondarily to assertions themselves:
But as the obtaining of future contingent states of
affairs is indeterminate, similarly the propositions which enunciate
these are said to be indeterminately true or false, for those which
are true are indeterminately true and those which are false are
indeterminately false, in acccordance with the indeterminate obtaining
of what is predicted. Dialectica
211.30–32)
Abelard was particularly interested in the question of whether the
present truth of statements about future contingent events are
themselves determinate; i. e., whether ‘The sentence
‘Socrates will eat tomorrow’ is true’, if true, is
determinately true. Denying this, he restricted the principle that all
past and present true propositions are determinately true. Abelard
also distinguished between determinateness and certainty. Future
contingent propositions may be certain if they are revealed by angels,
for example, but they are not knowable of themselves and not
determinately true. (See Logica ‘Ingredientibus’
420.12–422.40; Dialectica 211.32–212.23; Lewis
1987.)
The ‘traditional’ view of truth and bivalence in
Aristotle is put forward in an anonymous early twelfth-century
commentary on De interpretatione, edited by M. Dal Pra, which
is often, and probably mistakenly, attributed to Abelard. Applying
Boethius's distinction between definitely and indefinitely true
statements, the author argues that future contingent statements are
merely disjunctively true or false (tantum sub disjunctione);
100.13–19; 112.8–113.3). They are true-or-false.
While Abelard thought that the universal validity of the principle
of bivalence was an Aristotelian view, thirteenth-century commentators
argued for the traditional interpretation. Albert the Great and Thomas
Aquinas took Aristotle to be arguing in De interpretatione 9
that if every contradictory pair divides truth and falsity in a
determinate way and the members are consequently determinately true or
false, all things must determinately be or not be. He then refutes the
consequent by referring to various contingent things. It follows that
the antecedent cannot be true and future contingent propositions are
not determinately true or determinately false. They are true-or-false
under disjunction (Albert the Great, Liber Perihermeneias,
I.5.4–6, 418–422; Thomas Aquinas, In Aristotelis Peri
hermeneias expositio, I.13, 170–172; I.15, 202–203).
The same interpretation of Aristotle is found in Arabic commentators
Abū Nasr al-Fārābī and
Averroes. (See Al-Farabi's Commentary and Short Treatise
on Aristotle's De interpretatione, trans. F. Zimmermann, lxviii,
75–76, 78–79, 91–92, 244–245, and
Averroes's  Middle Commentary on Aristotle's De
interpretatione, 82va.)  Al-Fārābī's own view was that
future contingents are either true or false (94–96; Marmura
1985, Adamson 2006). Among Latin authors the traditional
interpretation of Aristotle's view was put forward by many later
commentators such as John Duns Scotus, Quaestiones in libros
Perihermenias Aristotelis, I.7–8 (179–181), trans. Buckner and Zupko; Walter
Burley, Commentarius in librum Perihermeneias Aristotelis,
92, 95–96; William Ockham, Expositio in Librum Perihermenias
Aristotelis I.6.15; Peter Auriol, Sent. I.38.3,
817–828; Gregory of Rimini,
Sent. I.38.1.1 (238–243); Peter of
Ailly, Quaestiones super Sent. I.11.1A). In
his Supercommentary on Averroes's Commentary on Aristotle's
De interpretatione, the Jewish philosopher Levi ben Gerson
(Gersonides, 1288–1344) states that positing a truth value for
future contingents leads to absurdity (83r; Rudavsky 1985, 166). John
Buridan read Aristotle in the same way as Abelard. All assertoric
statements are true or false though those about future contingents are
not determinately true or false (Questiones longe super librum
Perihermeneias I.10). Since theologians usually thought that
divine omniscience and prophecy presupposed unrestricted bivalence,
the discussion of future contingents was divided into historical
constructions of Aristotle's view, mostly in accordance with the
traditional interpretation, and the systematic discussions in theology
which usually followed the Abelardian lines. Later examples of the
traditional interpretation of Aristotle's view include George of
Brussels, Logica magistri Georgii inserto textu Bricoti,
51rv; Iodocus Trutfetter, Summulae totius logicae  II.1
(LL3v–4v); Veteris artis…Perihermeneiasque
expositio (g1r); see also Baudry (1950), 206. (For medieval
interpretations, see Weidemann 1994; Gaskin 1995; Knuuttila 2010.)
4. Later Medieval Views


The most influential late medieval approach to future contingents was
included in John Duns Scotus's theory of metaphysics as a
transcendental science in which the meaning of the univocal notion of
being (ens) was defined as ‘that to which to be is not
repugnant’. Beings in this metaphysical sense are actual things
as well as non-actual possible things, the imagined actuality of which
does not include a contradiction. In the Augustinian tradition
metaphysical possibilities were ultimately based on the divine essence
and represented the ways in which it could be imitated by created
things. According to Scotus, when God as an omniscient being knows all
possibilities, he does not know them by turning first to his
essence. Possibilities can be known in themselves; in fact, they would
be what they are even if there were no God. Scotus calls the
propositional formulations of pure possibilities logical possibilities
(possibile logicum). These express things and states of
affairs to which it is not repugnant to be.  Possibilities as such
have no kind of existence of their own, but are real in the sense that
they form the precondition for everything that is or can be. (For
Scotus's modal theory, see Vos et al. 1994; Knuuttila 1996;
Normore 2003; Honnefelder 2005.) Scotus takes it as an obvious fact
that there are contingent states of affairs which could have not been
at that very moment of time at which they are (Ord.
I.2.1.1–2, 86). This idea of simultaneous alternatives differed
from the traditional view of the necessity of the present and played
and important role in Scotus's metaphysics.

 God's omniscience involves all possibilities and, as objects of God's
knowledge, they necessarily receive intelligible or objective
being. Some of these are included in God's providential plan of
creation and will receive actual being. The description of a possible
state of affairs at a certain moment consists of compossible
possibilities. Since finite beings are contingently actual,
alternative possibilities are possible with respect to the same time,
though they are not compossible with what is actual. According to
Scotus, impossibilities are incompossibilities between possible
ingredients, such as Socrates's sitting at a certain time and
Socrates's not sitting at that same time
(Lect. I.39.1–5, 62–63; Ord. I.35, 32,
49–51;
Ord. I.36, 60–1; Ord. I.43, 5–7, 14).

 Scotus's modal metaphysics incorporates many ideas from the early
medieval model which was developed by Abelard and
the nominales, such as the denial of the necessity of the
present, the distinction between immutability and necessity and the
universal validity of bivalence. Giving up the Thomistic view of the
atemporal presence of the flux of time to God, Scotus explains God's
knowledge of the truth-value of future contingent propositions as a
knowledge of which of the possible scenarios will be actual
(Lect. I.39.1–5, 44). The definite truth-values of the
propositions about possible events do not make them necessary, many of
these being acts of the will which as a free cause chooses between
alternatives without being determined. (See Schwamm 1934; Vos et
al. 1994; Söder 1999; for some discussions of Scotus's view
of the free acts of the will, see Dumont 2001; Normore 2003,
141–145; Langston 2010.)


 William Ockham criticized Scotus's attempt to explain the contingency
of God's eternal choice by distinguishing between the instants of
nature in God which represent conceptual succession without separation
or interval, for example, the instant of the will encountering
opposite alternatives and the instant of choosing one of
these. (See Sent. I.38.1 (578, 581); Adams 1987,
1130–1136.) Ockham followed Scotus in believing that God's
choice could be other than it is, but he was dissatisfied with
Scotus's explanation without having any of his own. Ockham also
criticized the view that God knows future free acts through his own
acts of the will as their ultimate cause, which he, like many of his
contemporaries and later commentators, treated as Scotus's position
(Sent. I.38.1 (582–583). This was Henry of Ghent's view
to which Scotus first subscribed but then qualified his
acceptance. (See Hoenen 1993, 177–179; Söder 1999,
177–183; Schabel 2000, 43–46.) He thought that there are
many contingent propositions known by God differently such as those
about creaturely sins and other acts of free will. (Frost 2010.)

 Ockham believed, as Scotus did, that future contingent propositions
are true or false, that created wills are non-determined free causes
and that God knows contingent events without their being
simultaneously present to God. (For Ockham's view and the relevant
texts, see Adams and Kretzmann 1983.) While Scotus preferred to
distinguish God's eternal knowledge and choice from the temporal order
sharply (Lect. I.39.1–2, n. 28, 85; Ord. I.40,
n. 8), Ockham thought that they can be treated as temporally
past. This led him to ask how God's foreknowledge as something past
and hence seemingly necessary is compatible with the contingency of
the future things. Ockham's answer was that even though God's
foreknowledge is past, its content is future, and the past truth of
future contingent propositions does not fall under the necessity of
the past (Sent. I.38.1 (587), Tractatus de
praedestinatione 515–516). Many influential late thinkers
embraced this idea. (See Robert Holkot, Sent.  II.2
in Seeing the Future Clearly, 127, 145–146; Gregory of
Rimini, Sent. I.38.2.3 (302–303); Pierre
d'Ailly, Quaestiones super Sent. I.11.3S.) This is also the
hallmark of what is called the Ockhamist view of divine foreknowledge
in contemporary philosophical theology (Zagzebski 1991,
66–97).   For texts and studies on late medieval
controversies related to foreknowledge and freedom, see Schabel 2000,
2003, 2004, 2007, 2011, 2011a; Schabel, Friedman and Balcoyiannopoulou
2001; Rossini and Schabel 2005; Martin 2004.

Many early fourteenth-century authors were interested in the
distinctions between determinate and indeterminate truth and
falsity. Ockham characterized all prospective truths, whether
necessary or contingent, as immutable and therefore determinate, but
there were other suggestions as well (Normore 1982, 1993; Genest 1992;
Gelber 2004, 224–250). It was usually thought that while future
contingent propositions were neither true nor false in Aristotle, this
was not acceptable with respect to divine knowledge. A different view
was defended by Peter Auriol who argued that since these propositions
lack a truth value, even God is aware of the future in a way which
does not imply that future contingent propositions are true or false
(Schabel 2000, 67–123). Auriol's position inspired much
discussion until early sixteenth century. It came to be regarded as
heretical when a Papal commission made a decision about the theses of
Peter de Rivo, who defended a view similar to that of Auriol. Some of
de Rivo's statements were officially condemned in 1474 by Pope Sixtus IV
(Baudry 1950; Schabel 1995, 1996, 2000, 315–336, 2004).

A central question for those who gave up the Thomist view was how God
can eternally know the acts of the will which is a free cause? An
influential answer was offerred in the theory of middle knowledge by
Luis de Molina (1535–1600). In addition to the knowledge of all
possibilities and the possibilities which will be actualized in the
providentially chosen history, God has a third kind of knowledge
(scientia media), which comprises the hypothetical truths
about possible beings. In creating the world, God knows what possible
creatures would do in any possible situation (Freddoso 1988). Molina's
‘middle knowledge’ theory about counterfactuals of freedom
was actively debated in the sixteenth and seventeenth century and has
remained a living issue in the philosophy of religion (Dekker
2000).