Through conscience and its related notion, synderesis, human beings
discern what is right and wrong. While there are many medieval views
about the nature of conscience, most views regard human beings as
capable of knowing in general what ought to be done and applying this
knowledge through conscience to particular decisions about action. The
ability to act on the determinations of conscience is, moreover, tied
to the development of the moral virtues, which in turn refines the
functions of conscience.

 
1. Background


There are significant discussions of conscience among the Stoics if
not before. (Using a broad definition of conscience as a form of moral
self-awareness, Richard Sorabji claims that the notion of conscience
can be found in the Fifth Century BCE playwrights as well as in the
writings of Plato and Aristotle. See chapters one and two of his
Moral Conscience Throughout the Ages.) Seneca the Younger
discusses conscience in his Epistulae Morales (43, 97, 105)
and attributes several qualities to it.  St. Paul discusses conscience
in various letters (I Corinthians; Romans; Hebrews; Timothy). Whatever
the influence of Seneca and St. Paul might be on subsequent
discussions of conscience and synderesis, late medieval discussions of
conscience derive from Peter Lombard's presentation of the concepts of
conscience and synderesis in his Sentences.  Lombard cites a
passage from St. Jerome, interpreting Ezekiel's vision of four living
creatures coming out of a cloud. Each creature was shaped like a man,
but each had four faces: the front face was human; the right was that
of a lion; the left was that of an ox; and the back was that of an
eagle (Ezekiel 1.4–14).  Jerome identifies the human face as
representing the rational part of man, the lion as the emotional, the
ox as the appetitive, and the eagle as that “which the Greeks
call synteresis: that spark of conscience which was not even
extinguished in the breast of Cain after he was turned out of
paradise, and by which we discern that we sin, when we are overcome by
pleasures or frenzy and meanwhile are misled by an imitation of
reason.” Jerome's comment that synteresis (alternatively,
synderesis) is never extinguished in human beings and his remarks
elsewhere to the effect that wicked people do cease to have any
conscience led Lombard and subsequent thinkers to distinguish
synderesis from conscience. While it is unclear that Jerome meant to
distinguish the two, the distinction plays a major role in late
medieval discussions of conscience.


In these discussions, constant reference was made to certain works by
Plato and Aristotle. Neither Plato nor Aristotle explicitly mention
conscience, however. It is their discussions of the virtues, practical
wisdom, and weakness of will that form the critical backdrop to
medieval discussions of conscience. These discussions were heavily
influenced by Augustine's modification of these classical authors. For
example, Augustine championed Plato's notion of the unity of the
virtues, but he argued that love of God provided the unity to them.
Moreover, he claimed that what pagan authors regarded as virtues were
in fact vices unless they were developed for the love of God.


Two distinct views about the relationship between conscience and
synderesis emerged in the late Middle Ages. The first view, a
voluntaristic one, can be identified with Franciscan thinkers like
Bonaventure. The second, most clearly expounded by Aquinas, is an
intellectualistic view. Both seem to derive from Philip the
Chancellor's treatise on conscience. In his treatise, Philip chiefly
discusses synderesis, and at times he describes it as an unerring
intellectual dispositional potentiality that provides general truths
to conscience for specific application. At other times, he describes
synderesis as the desire for the good, and it is equated with
emotional reactions when one follows evil instead of good. This latter
description fits well with Bonaventure's views on synderesis and
conscience.
2. Bonaventure


Bonaventure discusses both in his Commentary on the
Sentences, Book II, distinction 39. He places conscience squarely
within the rational faculty, specifying that it is part of practical
reason since it is connected to the performance of actions. It is thus
also connected to the will as well as the emotions. On the other hand,
he places synderesis in the affective part of human beings, for he
regards synderesis as that which stimulates us to the good.


Conscience is divided into two general parts by Bonaventure. The first
part seems to be a power for discovering the truth of very general
practical principles like “obey God,” “honor your
parents,” and “do not harm your neighbors.” This
part of conscience is innate and unerring; it cannot be lost to any
person, no matter how morally corrupt that person may become. The
second part of conscience involves the application of the very general
principles to situations that may be either general or
particular. This second part is also innate, but it can be mistaken
since the very general principles of the first part may be misapplied
through ignorance or faulty reasoning. The misapplication explains, to
a certain extent, how conscience, oriented to good, can be involved in
the performance of evil actions. The distinction between the two parts
of conscience also opens up the possibility for developing, through
experience, practical principles of behavior not directly entailed by
the content of the synderesis. By generalizing on activities performed
in accordance with the principles of the synderesis, one can formulate
new general principles not contained in the synderesis that can guide
behavior in a number of contexts. Conscience thus appears to be a
dynamic faculty for Bonaventure.


Bonaventure calls synderesis the “spark of conscience,”
and he sees it as resting in the affective part of human beings. It is
the spark because, as the general drive to do good, synderesis
provides the movement that conscience needs to operate. In general,
Bonaventure regards conscience and synderesis as interpenetrating one
another. The formation of ethical rules by conscience is seen by him
as an implementation of a human being's desire for good (the
synderesis). He also sees the following of these principles as another
aspect of the desire for good. Because we naturally have a desire for
the good, we also desire the means to that goal. The principles of
conscience are such means, and so we are naturally disposed to carry
out the principles of conscience. Similarly, the emotional reaction to
doing evil (guilt or remorse) is a reaction to the frustration of the
desire for good caused when one fails to adhere to what the conscience
has determined will lead to good. Bonaventure, while placing
synderesis and conscience in different parts of a human being, does
not isolate them.  On the contrary, he views conscience as driven by
synderesis and at the same time directing synderesis.
3. Aquinas


Thomas Aquinas, the principal advocate of the intellectualistic view
of the relationship of conscience and synderesis, explicitly defines
‘conscience’ as the “application of knowledge to
activity” (Summa Theologiae, I-II, I) The knowledge he
has in mind here comes from the synderesis, which he regards as the
natural disposition of the human mind by which we apprehend without
inquiry the basic principles of behavior. For Aquinas, then, the
conscience applies the first principles of the synderesis to
particular situations. The principles of synderesis are rather general
in form. Examples are “Do good and avoid evil” and
“Obey God.” To be helpful in human activity, conscience
requires principles that contain much more content. One can call these
“secondary principles” and Aquinas discusses them in
several places and suggests that they are derived from experience and
instruction through the virtue of prudence. Thus, the function of
conscience for Aquinas is to apply the general principles of
synderesis and the more content-laden secondary principles developed
from prudence to particular circumstances. Prudence is involved in the
application to particular circumstances, according to Aquinas, because
it is connected to the correct perception of individual
circumstances. And this aspect of prudence connects both conscience
and prudence to the problem of weakness of will.


In Aquinas's presentation of Aristotle's discussion of weakness of
will in his Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics, the fourth
position offered in Book 7, Chapter 3 of the Nicomachean
Ethics is emphasized. According to this position, the incontinent
man knows the appropriate general principles of behavior concerning
what should be done, e.g., one should not fornicate. If the
incontinent man sees a particular action as falling under this general
principle, e.g., a man sees that having intercourse with an unmarried
woman is a case of fornication, he will not perform the
action. However, the incontinent man also holds the general rule that
pleasures should be enjoyed. If the incontinent man, driven by his
particular desire for a particular unmarried woman, sees the proposed
sexual liaison as a case of pleasure, he subsumes it under the general
rule about pursuing pleasure and pursues the relationship. The desire
he has, as it were, blinds him to the general principle about
fornication he still possesses, but only habitually. The actual
knowledge he possesses is that the proposed liaison is a case of
pleasure to be pursued. He thus has (habitually) the knowledge that he
should avoid fornication, but he fornicates nonetheless because he
actually sees the fornication as an act of pleasure to be pursued. As
a general comment on Aristotle's analysis, Aquinas remarks: “It is not
the knowledge of the universal but only the evaluation of the
sensible, which is not so excellent, that is dragged about by
passion.” (Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics, Book 7,
lecture 3, paragraph 1352) The point Aquinas is making is that the
incontinent man possesses the knowledge of what he should do, but he
is driven by the passion he has for a particular; this passion leads
him to act contrary to what the knows (habitually) should not be
done. The incontinent man so fails because he has failed to cultivate
the appropriate virtues that would enable him to size up the situation
correctly (synesis) and deliberate well about it
(eubulia). This analysis of weakness of will falls in line
with Aquinas's general view of the will as a passive potency that
always follows the judgments of the intellect.  While this view of the
will is modified by such disciples of Aquinas as Giles of Rome,
perhaps under the impetus of the Condemnations of 1277, Aquinas's
linking of conscience with prudence and the virtues in general through
his concern with weakness of will is innovative and undoubtedly
connected with his interest in the Nicomachean Ethics. Duns
Scotus and William of Ockham follow his lead in linking conscience
with issues surrounding development of the virtues.
4. Scotus and Ockham


Scotus offers very little explicit discussion of either conscience or
synderesis. Yet, from his discussion of issues chiefly concerned with
development of the virtues, it is apparent that his view of conscience
and synderesis seems to draw from both Bonaventure and Aquinas.
Following Aquinas, Scotus thinks that both synderesis and conscience
are to be placed in the intellectual order. In agreement with
Bonaventure, Scotus gives conscience much more of a dynamic role in
the human personality than a mechanical application of general
principles.  Scotus's close linking of conscience and the development
of the virtues allows him to combine the two sources.


According to the virtue tradition, in order to perform a virtuous
action, one must have the right dictates associated with the relevant
virtue. Yet, one must perform appropriate virtuous actions to develop
the habit of the virtue and to know the relevant right dictates. The
obvious circularity seems vicious enough to undermine any attempt to
cultivate virtues. Scotus regards conscience as offering a way into
the circle. Whenever a person formulates what is to be done in some
circumstance, this is an exercise of conscience, which has determined
proper action from the principles of synderesis. On the basis of the
dictates of conscience, a person can perform an action that will
provide the basis for the development of the relevant virtues. For the
performance of these acts from conscience leads to the type of habit
that Scotus thinks of as a virtue. Ideally, the moral virtues are
unified since a perfect, virtuous person should possess all
virtues. In fact, Scotus's perfect, virtuous person seems very similar
to Aristotle's man of practical wisdom. This is the person who has,
through long experience, developed the moral virtues and is able to
deliberate so well about all moral situations that in Aristotle's view
to be moral is to do what a man of practical wisdom would do. Scotus's
perfect, virtuous person, like the man of practical wisdom, is skilled
at determining what should be done in given circumstances; he takes
delight in acting in accord with his virtues, and he possesses all of
the moral virtues by developing them through experience.


Ockham's discussion of conscience, prudence, and the virtues indicates
that he follows Scotus's turn towards discussing conscience in
relation to the virtues. He agrees with Scotus that conscience can
provide the entry into the seeming circularity of performing virtuous
actions in order to develop intentions that seem to be required for
performing the virtuous actions in the first place. Nevertheless, he
criticizes Scotus for failing to make a number of necessary
distinctions about degrees of virtues and the relationship of
conscience to prudence. He never mentions synderesis in his writings
and emphasizes the fact that only internal acts have moral worth.
According to him, external acts are morally significant only by
extrinsic denomination from internal acts. Particularly in these last
two claims, Ockham exercised considerable influence on Reformation
thinkers like Luther and Calvin in their discussions of conscience. In
fact, the topics of conscience and synderesis were discussed in German
universities with great attention both before and after the
Reformation.  Some of the thinkers involved in these discussions
(Usingen and Peyligk) adhered in various ways to the views of
Bonaventure, Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockham while others (Bernhardi and
Melanchthon) blended and transformed the various views found among
these thinkers.  Many of these discussions related conscience to
issues about practical reasoning.  Interestingly, discussions of
conscience and synderesis appeared in works on natural
philosophy. After Luther, the linking of conscience with practical
knowledge found in the writings of Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockham gives
way, under the influence of Joseph Butler and Immanuel Kant, to
conceiving of conscience as a faculty.