Mental imagery (varieties of which are sometimes colloquially refered
to as “visualizing,” “seeing in the mind's 
eye,” “hearing in the head,” “imagining the 
feel of,” etc.) is quasi-perceptual experience; it 
resembles perceptual experience, but occurs in the absence of the 
appropriate external stimuli. It is also generally understood to bear
intentionality (i.e., mental images are always images 
of something or other), and thereby to function as a form of
mental representation. Traditionally, visual mental imagery,
the most discussed variety, was thought to be caused by the presence 
of picture-like representations (mental images) in the mind,
soul, or brain, but this is no longer universally accepted.


Very often, imagery experiences are understood by their subjects as 
echoes, copies, or reconstructions of actual perceptual experiences 
from their past; at other times they may seem to anticipate possible,
often desired or feared, future experiences. Thus imagery has often 
been believed to play a very large, even pivotal, role in both memory
(Yates, 1966; Paivio, 1986) and motivation (McMahon, 1973). It is 
also commonly believed to be centrally involved in visuo-spatial 
reasoning and inventive or creative thought. Indeed, according to a 
long dominant philosophical tradition, it plays a crucial role in 
all thought processes, and provides the semantic grounding 
for language. However, in the 20th century vigorous objections were 
raised against this tradition, and it was widely repudiated. More recently,
it has once again begun to find a few defenders.
 
1. Meanings and Connotations of ‘Mental Imagery’


Mental imagery is a familiar aspect of most people's everyday
experience (Galton, 1880a,b, 1883; Betts, 1909; Doob, 1972; Marks, 1972,
1999). A few people may insist that they rarely, or even never,
consciously experience imagery (Galton, 1880a, 1883; Faw, 1997, 2009;
but see Brewer & Schommer-Aikins, 2006), but for the vast majority
of us, it is a familiar and commonplace feature of our mental
lives. The English language supplies quite a range of idiomatic ways
of referring to visual mental imagery: ‘visualizing,’
‘seeing in the mind's eye,’ ‘having a picture in
one's head,’ ‘picturing,’ ‘having/seeing a
mental image/picture,’ and so on. There seem to be fewer ways to
talk about imagery in other sensory modes, but there is little doubt
that it occurs, and the experiencing of imagery in any sensory mode is
often referred to as ‘imagining’ (the appearance, feel,
smell, sound, or flavor of something). Alternatively, the
quasi-perceptual nature of an experience may be indicated
merely by putting the relevant sensory verb (‘see,’
‘hear,’ ‘taste,’ etc.) in actual or implied
“scare quotes.”


Despite the familiarity of the experience, the precise meaning of the
expression ‘mental imagery’ is remarkably hard to pin 
down, and differing understandings of it have often added 
considerably to the confusion of the already complex and fractious 
debates, amongst philosophers, psychologists, and cognitive 
scientists, concerning imagery's nature, its psychological functions 
(if any), and even its very existence. In the philosophical and 
scientific literature (and a fortiori in everyday 
discourse), the expression ‘mental imagery’ (or 
‘mental images’) may be used in any or all of at least 
three different senses, which are only occasionally explicitly 
distinguished, and all too often conflated:



{1}
quasi-perceptual conscious experience per se;


{2}
hypothetical picture-like representations in the mind and/or brain
that give rise to {1};


{3}
hypothetical inner representations of any sort (picture-like or otherwise) that
directly give rise to {1}.





Far too many discussions of visual mental imagery fail to draw a 
clear distinction between the contention that people have 
quasi-visual experiences and the contention that such experiences are
to be explained by the presence of representations, in the mind or 
brain, that are in some sense picture-like. This picture
theory (or pictorial theory) of imagery experience is 
deeply entrenched in our language and our folk psychology. The very 
word ‘image,’ after all, suggests a picture. However, 
although the majority of both laymen and experts probably continue to
accept some form of picture theory, many 20th century philosophers 
and psychologists, from a variety of theoretical traditions, have 
argued strongly against it, and, in several cases they have developed
quite detailed alternative, non-pictorial accounts of the nature and 
causes of imagery experiences (e.g., Dunlap, 1914; Washburn, 1916; 
Sartre, 1940; Ryle, 1949; Shorter, 1952; Skinner, 1953, 1974; 
Dennett, 1969; Sarbin & Juhasz, 1970; Sarbin, 1972; Pylyshyn, 
1973, 1978, 1981, 2002a, 2003a, 2005; Neisser, 1976; Hinton, 1979; 
Slezak, 1991, 1995; Thomas, 1999b, 2009). Others, it should be said, have 
developed and defended picture theory in sophisticated ways in the 
attempt to meet these critiques (e.g., Hannay, 1971; Kosslyn, 1980, 
1983,1994; von Eckardt, 1988, 1993; Tye, 1988, 1991; Cohen, 1996). 
However, despite these developments, much philosophical and 
scientific discussion about imagery and the cognitive functions it 
may or may not serve continues to be based on the often unspoken (and 
even unexamined) assumption that, if there is mental imagery at all, 
it must consist in inner pictures. 


Consider, for example, the title of the book The Case for Mental
Imagery, by Kosslyn, Thompson & Ganis (2006). In fact the
book is an extended and quite polemical defense of the much disputed
view that visual mental imagery consists in representational brain
states that are, in some significant and important ways, genuinely
picture-like (see supplement: The
Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery, and its Problems). That is to
say, the contents suggest that the title should be understood as
intending "imagery" in sense {2}. However,
it would also be very natural (and, very possibly, in accord with the
authors' intentions – compare Kosslyn, Ganis & Thompson,
2003) to understand the title as implying that the book's deeper
purpose is to refute the view that imagery, even in
sense {1}, does not really exist (or, at least, that
the concept of imagery will find no place in a properly scientific
ontology). Although this denialist view of imagery has few, if any,
supporters today, it is well known that not so very long ago, in the
era of Behaviorist psychology, it had great influence.  The book's
title thus (intentionally or otherwise) invites us to conflate the
(now) very controversial view that mental images are picture-like
entities, with what is, today, the virtual truism that people really
do have quasi-perceptual experiences, and that our science of the mind
owes us some account of them.



Another way in which the expression ‘mental imagery’
(together with many of its colloquial near-equivalents) may be
misleading, is that it tends to suggest only quasi-visual
phenomena. Despite the fact that most scholarly discussions of imagery,
in the past and today, do indeed focus mainly or exclusively upon
the visual mode, in fact, quasi-perceptual experience in other sensory
modes is just as real, and, very likely, just as common and just as
psychologically important (Newton, 1982). Contemporary cognitive
scientists generally recognize this, and interesting studies of
auditory imagery, kinaesthetic (or motor)
imagery, olfactory imagery, haptic (touch)
imagery, and so forth, can be found in the recent scientific
literature (e.g., Segal & Fusella, 1971; Reisberg, 1992; Klatzky,
Lederman, & Matula, 1991; Jeannerod, 1994; Bensafi et
al., 2003; Yoo et al., 2003;
Kobayashi et al., 2004; Djordjevic et al., 2004, 2005). Although such studies are still vastly outnumbered by
studies of visual imagery, ‘imagery’ has become the
generally accepted term amongst cognitive scientists for
quasi-perceptual experience in any sense mode (or any combination of
sense modes).
1.1 Experience or Representation?


In the introduction to this entry, in order to avoid making a 
premature commitment to the picture theory, and in accordance with 
definitions given by psychologists such as McKellar (1957), 
Richardson (1969), and Finke (1989), mental imagery was characterized
as a form of experience (i.e., as {1}). However, 
this itself is far from unproblematic. Evidence for the occurrence of
any experience is necessarily subjective and introspective, and, 
because of this, those who have doubts about the validity of 
introspection as a scientific method, may well be led to question 
whether there is any place for a concept such as imagery within a 
truly scientific world view. J.B. Watson, the influential instigator 
of the Behaviorist movement that dominated scientific psychology 
(especially in the United States) for much of the 20th century, 
questioned the very existence of imagery for just these sorts of 
reasons (Watson, 1913a, 1913b, 1928 – 
 see supplement; see also: 
Thomas, 1989, Berman & Lyons, 2007). Although few later
Behaviorist psychologists (or their philosophical allies) expressed
themselves on the matter in quite the strong and explicit terms
sometimes used by Watson, the era of Behaviorist psychology is
characterized by a marked skepticism about imagery (if not its
existence, at least its psychological importance) amongst both
psychologists and philosophers. Imagery did not become widely
discussed again among scientific psychologists (or philosophers of
psychology) until around the end of the 1960s, when Behaviorism began
to be displaced by Cognitivism as the dominant psychological
paradigm. Most informed contemporary discussions of imagery, amongst
both philosophers and psychologists, are still very much shaped by
this recent history of skepticism about imagery (or
iconophobia, as it is sometimes called), and the subsequent 
reaction against it. 


By contrast with their Behaviorist predecessors, most cognitive
psychologists today hold that imagery has an essential role to play in
our mental economy. Many may share some of the reservations of their
Behaviorist predecessors about the place of introspection and
subjectivity in science, but they take the view that imagery must be
real (and scientifically interesting) because it is explanatorily
necessary: The results of many experiments on cognitive functioning,
they hold, cannot be satisfactorily explained without making appeal to
the storage and processing of imaginal mental representations. The
belief that such mental representations are real is justified in the
same sort of way that belief in the reality of electrons, or natural
selection, or gravitational fields (or other scientifically sanctioned
“unobservables”) is justified: Imagery is known to exist
inasmuch as the explanations that rely upon imaginal representations
are known to be true. From this perspective, some theorists recommend
that the term ‘imagery’ should not be understood to refer
to a form of subjective experience, but, rather, to a certain type of
“underlying representation” (Dennett, 1978; Block, 1981a,
Introduction; Block, 1983a; Kosslyn, 1983; Wraga & Kosslyn, 2003;
Kosslyn, Thompson & Ganis, 2006). Such representations are
“mental” in the sense now commonplace in cognitive
science: i.e., they are conceived of as being embodied as brain
states, but as individuated by their functional (and computational)
role in cognition. As Block (1981a, 1983a) points out, an advantage of
defining mental imagery in this way (i.e., as an unspecified form of
representation, as
{3} rather than {2}) is that it 
does not beg the controversial question of whether the relevant 
representations are, in any interesting sense, picture-like. 


However, if it is not because they are picture-like, what is it that 
makes these mental representations mental images? Presumably
the idea is that a mental representation deserves to be called an 
image if it is of such a type that its presence to mind (i.e., its 
playing a role in some currently occurring cognitive process) can 
give rise to a quasi-perceptual experience of whatever is represented. 
But this move relies upon our already having a grasp of the 
experiential conception of imagery, which must, therefore, be more 
fundamental than the representational conception just 
outlined. Furthermore, to define imagery in the way that 
Block, Kosslyn etc. suggest, as first and foremost a form of 
representation (as explanans rather than 
explanandum), is to beg more basic and equally controversial
questions about the nature of the mind and the causes of
quasi-perceptual experiences. A number of scientists and philosophers,
coming from a diverse range of disciplinary and theoretical
perspectives, do not accept that imagery experiences are caused by the presence
to mind of representational tokens (e.g.,
Sartre, 1940; Ryle, 1949; Skinner, 1953, 1974; Sarbin, 1972; Thomas,
1999b, 2009; O'Regan & Noë, 2001; Bartolomeo, 2002; Bennett &
Hacker, 2003; Blain, 2006).


It should be admitted, however, that focusing too narrowly on the 
experiential conception of imagery has its own potential 
dangers. In particular, it may obscure the very real possibility, 
foregrounded by the representational conception, that 
importantly similar underlying representations or mechanisms may 
sometimes be operative both when we consciously experience imagery 
and sometimes when we do not. Some evidence, such as Paivio's (1971, 
1983a, 1991a) work on the differential memorability of words with 
different “imagery values” (see
 section 4.2,
 below), suggests that this is indeed the case.


In practice, both the experiential and the representational 
conceptions of imagery are frequently encountered in the literature 
of the subject. Unfortunately, it is often hard to tell which is 
intended in any particular case. Even where they are not actually 
conflated, confusion can arise when one conception is favored over 
the other without this ever being made sufficiently clear or 
explicit. Although it would be pedantic and potentially confusing to 
insist on explicitly drawing the distinction everywhere, where it 
seems important or helpful to do so this entry will refer to 
imagery experiences (or quasi-perceptual 
experiences) on the one hand, and imagery 
representations (or imagery processes) on the other.
1.2 The Relation to Perception


There are further potential problems, however, with the brief 
characterization of imagery given in our introduction. Not only does 
what is said there duck the difficult (and rarely considered) task of
specifying what dimensions and degrees of similarity to perception 
are necessary for an experience to count as imagery; it also elides 
the controversial question of whether, despite the surface 
resemblance, imagery is a sui generis phenomenon, 
conceptually quite distinct from true perceptual experience, or 
whether imagery and perception differ only in degree rather than in 
kind.


Some, such as Hume (1740), hold that percepts (impressions in
his terminology) and images (ideas) do not differ in kind,
but only in their degree of “vivacity”or vividness. This
view has frequently been criticized, however (Reid, 1764 II.5, VI.24;
Savage, 1975; Warnock, 1976; McGinn, 2004). A related view, explicitly
defended by some (e.g., Jastrow, 1899; Savage, 1975; Thomas, 1997a,
2014), and implicit in much of the other relevant literature, is that
imagery, regardless of its subjective “vividness”, lies at
one end of a continuum or spectrum stretching from veridical, highly
stimulus-driven and stimulus-constrained perception at one end, to
“pure” imagery (where the content of the experience is
generated entirely by the subject, and is quite independent of any
current stimulus input) at the other.  Several varieties of
imaginative preceptual experience may be taken to fill in the
continuum between these extremes: mistaken or illusive perceptions
(imagining, for instance, that the bush seen indistinctly in the
darkness is a bear), and various types of non-deceptive seeing
as or seeing in (such as imagining a cloud to have the
shape of a camel, weasel, or whale; seeing a Laughing Cavalier in
paint on canvas; seeing someone's sadness in their eyes; or seeing the
notorious duck-rabbit figure as a duck [or rabbit]).


Figure 1.2_1
The Duck-Rabbit


Others, however, notably Reid (1764 II.5), Sartre (1936), Wittgenstein
(1967 §621 ff.), McGinn (2004) and Ichikawa (2009), argue that
there is a sharp conceptual and phenomenological distinction to be
drawn between imagery and perception proper. After all, it is argued,
our imagination, unlike our perception, is under the control of our
will (and experienced as such). Provided I know what an elephant looks
like, I can choose to imagine one wherever and whenever I want to, but
I cannot choose to see an elephant unless one actually
happens to be present.  By contrast, if an elephant is present before
my open eyes, I cannot help but see it, whether I will or
 no.[1]
 McGinn (2004) restates
this argument with considerably more rigor and detail than his
predecessors did, and, in addition, sets out eight further arguments
that, he thinks, point to the same conclusion, viz, that
mental imagery is a phenomenon radically conceptually different in
kind from perception. If true, this would appear to imply that all
extant scientific theories about the nature and mechanisms of imagery
(see §§4.4-4.5, below), and (to the best of my knowledge)
all obsolete theories too (see §§2-3 below) must be false,
as all of them depend on the assumption that mental images and
percepts differ in degree rather than kind, and that there is a large
degree of overlap between the respective mechanisms that give rise to
each. However, although all or most of the differences between images
and percepts pointed out by McGinn (and Reid, Sartre and
Wittgenstein), are probably real enough, the claim that any of them
reflect true differences in kind, rather than degree, is on much
shakier ground. Taking on McGinn’s (and Ichikawa's) arguments in
detail, Thomas (2014), defends the notion of a spectrum or continuum
of imaginative phenomena that encompasses not only veridical
perception and mental imagery, but also such things as dreams,
hallucinations, pareidolia, and various other types of both deceptive
and non-deceptive “imaginative perceiving”.


Sartre (1940) and Wittgenstein (1967 §§627, 632) also argue
that (in sharp contrast to perception) we can derive no new
information about the world from our imagery: No image can contain
anything except what the imager put there, which must already have
been in his or her mind. However, not only observation, but also
inference can lead to knowledge, and it has been argued that mental
imagery can and does support certain types of inference that give us
genuinely new knowledge about the real world (Kosslyn, 1980, 1983;
Taylor, 1981, Georgiou, 2007; Thomas, 
2014).[2]
 McGinn, however, (2004
p. 19ff) argues that although Sartre and Wittgenstein overstate their
point, there is a genuine and important insight underlying what they
say: The information we can derive from our imagery is of a different
sort, and is derived in a different way, from that which we get from
perception.
1.3 The Intentionality of Imagery


On a more consensual note, with only rare exceptions (e.g. Wright,
1983; Martin, 2008 p. 160) nearly all serious discussions of imagery
take it for granted that it bears intentionality in the sense
of being of, about, or directed at
something (Harman, 1998): A mental image is always an image
of something or other (whether real or unreal), in the same
sense that perception (whether veridical or not) is always perception
of something (see Anscombe, 1965). It is in virtue of this
intentionality that mental imagery may be (and usually is) regarded as
a species of mental representation that can, and often does, play an
important role in our thought processes.


It is also generally accepted that imagery is, for the most part, 
subject to voluntary control. Although it is true that images often 
come into the mind unbidden, and sometimes it is hard to shake off 
unwanted imagery (for instance, a memory of some horrible sight that 
one cannot get out of one's mind), most of us, most of the time can 
quite freely and voluntarily conjure-up and manipulate imagery of 
whatever we may please (provided, of course, that we know what it 
looks like).


There are quasi-perceptual experiences, such as afterimages,
that are not subject to this sort of direct voluntary control, and
indeed, that do not seem to bear intentionality, but these are usually
(at least implicitly) understood to be phenomena of a distinctly
different type from mental imagery proper
 (see supplement).


Further discussion of phenomena akin to, or sometimes 
confused with, mental imagery: 

Supplement: Other Quasi-Perceptual Phenomena
2. Pre-Scientific Views of Imagery


It seems likely that mental imagery has been discussed for as long as
humans have been trying to understand their own cognitive processes.
It receives attention in the oldest extended writings about cognition
that have come down to us – the works of Plato and Aristotle
– and there is reason to believe it was discussed by yet earlier
Greek thinkers. Plato's and particularly Aristotle's writings have
undoubtedly had an enormous and continuing influence on how cognition
in general and imagery in particular are conceptualized within both
the Western and the Muslim cultural traditions. However, there is
reason to think that the phenomenon of imagery, if not this tradition
of theorizing about it, is not culture bound.  Children as young as
three have been found to be aware their imagery, and of its subjective
nature (Estes, 1994), and researchers have been able to gather
introspective reports and descriptions of mental imagery from members
of non-Western cultures ranging from pre-literate tribal Africa (Doob,
1972) to modern Japan (where, indeed, the empirical psychological
study of imagery seems to have been taken up with some enthusiasm
– Oyama & Ichikawa, 1990). Imagery is also said to play a
significant role in traditional Hindu and Buddhist spiritual practices
(Samuels & Samuels, 1972; Ricard, 2006), and apparent references to the
phenomenon of imagery can be found in the works of classical
Chinese thinkers such as Confucius (e.g.
Analects 9:10 & 
 15:5).[3]
 There might well be important insights to be gleaned from the study 
of these various cultures' conceptions of imagery, but the available 
literature on this is very sparse (but see Ricard, 2006,
and the discussion that is printed following it). Thus, of necessity, what follows 
will focus on the Western philosophical and scientific tradition. In 
any case, the seeds of the controversies about imagery that erupted 
in the 20th century were sown not in Africa or the Orient,
but in Greece. 
2.1 Early Greek Ideas of Imagery


The following supplements discuss Greek conceptions of 
imagery prior to the work of Aristotle:


Supplement: Ancient Imagery Mnemonics


Supplement: Plato and his Predecessors


2.2 Aristotle and Imagery


Where Plato regarded images as irremediably deceptive, Aristotle, 
although he certainly recognized their potential for leading us 
astray (De Anima 428a-b), saw them as playing an essential 
and central role in human cognition, one closely akin to that played 
by the more generic notion of mental representation in 
contemporary cognitive science. Indeed, he developed what amounts to 
the first comprehensive cognitive theory, a theory that has been 
enormously influential over the subsequent ages, and continues 
(mostly indirectly) to shape much scientific and philosophical 
thought about the mind even today. He was clearly aware of, and very 
possibly influenced by, the mnemonic imagery techniques in use in 
Greece 
 (see supplement),
 to which he alludes in at least four passages in his extant writings 
(Topica 163b28, De Anima 427b18, De 
Memoria 452a12–16, De Insomniis 458b20–22). 


Aristotle's Greek word, that is commonly and traditionally translated
as "[mental] image" is “phantasma” 
(plural: phantasmata), a term used by Plato to refer to 
reflections in mirrors or pools (or the liver), amongst other things,
but which Aristotle seems to reserve to appearances in the psyche. 
Aristotle describes phantasmata as being analogous to 
paintings or wax impressions (De Memoria  450a-b), and as 
“a residue of the actual [sense] impression” (De 
Insomniis  461b; cf. Rhetorica 137a 28) or “a 
movement resulting from an actual exercise of a power of sense”
(De Anima  429a 1–3). Some modern scholars, it should be 
noted, have questioned the translation of 
"phantasma" as "image," in part because 
Aristotle does not always seem to think of phantasmata as 
inner pictures, and also because he seems to think of them as playing
a role in perception itself (Nussbaum, 1978; Schofield, 1978; 
Birondo, 2001). As Hume distinguished impressions from 
ideas, contemporary colloquial English distinguishes between
percepts and the mental images that we experience 
when we fantasize, daydream, or recall some experience from memory. 
Aristotle's concept of phantasma seems to collapse this
distinction. It has thus been suggested that 
"phantasma" would be better translated as 
"appearance" (Lycos, 1964) or "presentation" 
(Beare, 1906) rather than as "image". However, contemporary
scientific theories of imagery (see sections
 4.4 and 4.5) 
also, for the most part, do not make a sharp distinction in kind between 
mental images and percepts, and are virtually unanimous in holding 
(as, indeed, did Hume) that both are varieties of a single species. 


In any case, it is abundantly clear that, in many even if not all
cases, Aristotle uses "phantasma" to refer to what
we now call a mental image. Phantasmata have several
functions paralleling those ascribed to imagery by modern folk
psychology (and some scientific psychology). In particular, they are
central to Aristotle's theory of memory (De Memoria et
Reminiscentia; see Sorabji, 1972) and to his theory of thought.
Not only does remembering essentially involve the recall of imagery of
past experiences, but, he tells us, "It is impossible to think
without an image [phantasma]," (De Memoria 450a
1; cf. De Anima  431a 15–20 & 432a
8–12). Phantasmata also play a key role in his account of
desire and motivation (e.g. De Anima  431a — see Nussbaum,
1978): When some desirable object is not actually present to our
senses, exerting its pull on us directly, our motivation to strive to
obtain it is driven by our awareness of its (memory or fantasy)
image. (This idea is still found in modern, scientific theories of
desire (McMahon 1973; Kavanagh et al., 2005; Andrade et
al., 2009).) Aristotle also apparently held that linguistic
meaning derives from imagery, spoken words being but the symbols of
the inner images (De Interpretatione 16a 5–9;
De Anima  420b 29–32; see Modrak, 2001). Today, few theorists
of language take this notion seriously (but see Paivio, 1986, 2007;
Prinz, 2002), but it was almost universally accepted until relatively
recent times (Wollock, 1997; and see
 section 3.3 below). 


Very arguably, Aristotle's views about imagery (phantasmata)
cannot be fully understood in isolation from his views about 
imagination (phantasia), which he defined as “(apart 
from any metaphorical sense of the word) the process by which we say 
that an image [phantasma] is presented to us” (De 
Anima  428a 1–4). Aristotle has been accredited with the very 
invention of the concept of imagination (Schofield, 1978), and 
certainly it seems fair to say that the roots of most subsequent 
discussions of the concept can be traced back to his work (even 
though, for him, it did not have the strong association with 
creativity and aesthetic insight that it has since acquired, mostly 
through the influence of the Romantic movement) (Watson, 1988; White,
1990; Thomas, 1999a). Unfortunately, however, Aristotle's remarks 
about phantasia, suggestive and influential though they are,
are scattered widely amongst the surviving texts, and the only 
extended discussion of the concept (in De Anima  III.3) is 
particularly difficult to interpret, not only because the text that 
has come down to us seems to be more than usually corrupt (Nussbaum, 
1992), but also because of the richness and density of its arguments 
and its peculiarly oblique approach to the ostensible subject matter.
After over two millennia of discussion, scholars still do not agree 
about crucial aspects of Aristotle's conception of 
phantasia, and thus about his view of the fundamental nature
of 
 imagery.[4]



Further discussion of the aftermath and influence of Aristotle's work on 
imagery: 

Supplement: From the Hellenistic to the Early Modern Era
2.3 Images as Ideas in Modern Philosophy


It can hardly be denied that the concept of the idea was 
central to much of modern philosophy. Ideas were mental 
representations, and very frequently, though not necessarily always, 
they were (explicitly or implicitly) conceived of as mental images. 
Even if some authors did not themselves take ideas to be 
images, it is likely that many of their readers would have taken them
to be doing so. Thus, claims about the nature of ideas, and the 
cognitive and epistemological roles they could or could not play, 
were often conditioned by whether or not a philosopher did 
conceive of ideas as images, and by what imagery was taken to be.
2.3.1 Descartes


The Oxford English Dictionary records a clear example of the
word 'idea' being used in the sense of mental image as far 
back as 1589, but philosophical confusion over whether or not ideas 
are images goes back at least to the “father of Modern 
Philosophy,” Descartes. Certainly the “clear and distinct
ideas” that play such a prominent role in the 
Meditations (1641), and in Descartes' epistemology more 
generally, are not conceived to be mental images. We are 
told that we can attain clear and distinct ideas of such things as 
God and the human mind (Meditation 4, 53).
Neither of these are things of which we have perceptual, let alone 
quasi-perceptual, experience. But Descartes insists that even our 
ideas of perceptible things are, inasmuch as they are clear and 
distinct, not perceptual or imaginative. His perceptual and 
imaginative grasp of the nature of a piece of wax, he tells us, can 
never match the clarity and distinctness of the idea of the wax that 
can potentially be attained by purely mental scrutiny (Meditation
2, 31). 


However, we also find in Descartes' work another conception of 
idea as something that is quasi-perceptual (and, 
indeed, pictorial) and is formed in the imagination. These 
ideas may not be capable of providing the sure epistemological 
foundation that Descartes thinks the clear and distinct ideas of the 
intellect can give us, but they are real nonetheless, and probably 
play a larger role in ordinary, non-philosophic thinking. Although 
they are alluded to in many of Descartes works, these imagistic ideas
are explained most fully in the Treatise of Man, where he 
propounds his speculative physiological theory of visual perception 
in some 
 detail.[5]
 The nervous system is described as working by a form of hydraulics, 
with the nerve fibres (including those that make up the brain) 
functioning as hollow pipes carrying a fluid called animal 
 spirit.[6]
 In the center of the brain is the pine-cone-shaped pineal gland, 
slight movements of which, Descartes believed, were somehow able 
directly to affect, and be affected by, the thoughts of the 
immaterial soul. Figure 2.3.1_1, taken from the Treatise, 
shows his model of visual perception: As a result of the formation of
optical images on the retinae of the eyes, the nerves produce another
image, isomorphic to the retinal 
 image[7]
 (but re-inverted, so as to be upright), that is picked out on the 
surface of the gland by the flow of animal spirits through its 
 pores.[8]
 Thus points a, b, and 
c on the surface of the gland correspond to points 
A, B, and C of the
arrow which is being observed. The tracing of the image on its 
surface causes the gland to move in a subtle and complex 
fashion that (in some unexplained way) causes a conscious visual 
experience of the arrow in the soul (Descartes 1664 – see 
particularly pp. 83ff. in Hall's translation). 







Figure 2.3.1_1 Diagram from Descartes' 
Treatise of Man (1664), showing the formation of inverted 
retinal images in the eyes, and the transmission of these images, via
the nerves so as to form a single, re-inverted image (an 
idea) on the surface of the pineal gland.


At the same time that the flow of animal spirits is causing visual 
experiences by moving the pineal, elsewhere in the brain it is 
causing visual memories to be laid down by its action upon the nerve 
fibres themselves. These changes to hydraulic structure of the brain 
allow for mental images of memory and imagination to arise by the 
recreation of formerly experienced flow patterns of spirits at the 
pineal surface. Descartes explicitly tells us that the surface of the
pineal gland is the “seat of imagination 
 [l'imagination]”[9]
 and that the images traced there are “ideas” 
[idées] (Descartes 1664 – p. 86 in Hall's 
translation; see also Descartes 1648 – p. 27 in Cottingham's 
translation).


At least one of Descartes' followers, de la Forge, suggested 
that the term “idée [idea]” should be 
applied only to concepts in the intellect, and coined the expression 
“espèces corporelles [corporeal species]”
to refer to the pictorial images of the imagination (Clarke, 1989). 
However, this was clearly not Descartes' own practice. Indeed, in the
Third Meditation we are told that, strictly speaking, the 
word 'idea' should only be applied to thoughts that “are as it 
were the images of things” (Meditation 3, 37). On the 
other hand, in his letter to Mersenne of July 1641 he seems to say 
just the opposite: ideas are in our minds (presumably our immaterial 
souls), and in so far as images are “in the corporeal 
imagination” they should not properly be called ideas at all 
(Cottingham et al., 1991 pp. 185; see also Meditation 
3, 40). The thought here seems to be that all ideas as such are 
in our minds, although some of them are caused or occasioned by the 
presence of an image on the pineal surface. It is beyond the scope of
this entry to determine what was truly Descartes' considered view. 
What is clear, however, is that Descartes' readers would have readily
been able to find a concept of the idea as a picture-like 
image in his writings. 


In his Optics (1637, discourses 4 & 6), Descartes likens
the images of his theory to engravings: flat, perspective projections
of visual scenes. It is notable, however, that this comparison is 
made in the course of an argument to the effect that the 
representations in the brain that cause our perceptual and 
imaginative experiences need not actually resemble their 
objects: the resemblance between an engraving and what it depicts is,
after all, very partial and imperfect. What matters, for Descartes, 
is that the conscious soul is appropriately affected by the movements
that the process of image formation causes in the pineal gland. Thus 
it is the functional role of the image, not its actual physical 
nature, that is important. In this regard, Descartes' view is very 
close (at least in terms of functional architecture) to the 
contemporary quasi-pictorial theory of Kosslyn (1980, 1994, 
2005; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 – see 
 section 4.4.2
 and 
 supplement: Quasi-Pictorial Theory ).
 In both cases, it is claimed that although the material image in the 
brain is, in fact, picture-like, what actually makes it a 
mental image (or an idea) is not its 
two-dimensional neural instantiation, but its functional role in 
conveying visuo-spatial information to “higher” cognitive
powers. 
2.3.2 Hobbes


As a materialist, Hobbes, unlike Descartes, does not distinguish 
between images formed in the brain and ideas in the mind. In fact, 
although Hobbes sometimes uses the word 'idea' as a synonym for 
'image,' it occurs rather infrequently in his writings, and he 
prefers to use 'image' (or 'imagination') or other synonyms such as 
'phantasm' or 'appearance.' 


Images, however, are undoubtedly central to his cognitive theory. 
Thought or “Mentall Discourse,” according to Hobbes, is 
nothing but a “trayne of imaginations,” an associatively 
connected succession of images passing through the mind, whether it 
be undirected (as in daydreaming or idle woolgathering) or more 
focused and purposive because it is “regulated by some
desire, and designe,” by some overarching “Passionate 
Thought” (Leviathan I.3 (Hobbes, 
 1651)).[10]



However, it is not necessarily the case that Hobbes thought of his 
images, even those of visual appearances, as being picture-like. 
Imagination, we are told, “is nothing but decaying 
sense” (Leviathan 
 I.2).[11]
 Because Hobbes regarded sensation as a sort of motion or pressure 
arising in the brain (or heart) in response to an inward pressure 
arising for external objects, the sort of decaying he has in mind 
seems unlikely to be that of a picture (or other representational 
object) crumbling to dust. Rather, it is that of a movement gradually
running out of impetus, a pendulum swing gradually decreasing in 
amplitude, or a gas under pressure gradually leaking away. 
Furthermore, Hobbes, unlike Descartes, did not think of memory as 
being the result of structural changes in the brain, but rather as 
arising from the persistence, the very slow dying away, of the 
internal motions that were originally set going by sense experience 
(Leviathan 
 I.2).[12]
 Hobbesian images, therefore, are processes rather than entities. 
Although they are undoubtedly quasi-perceptual experiences 
(presumably, in the absence of an immaterial soul, we are to suppose 
that they are experienced merely in virtue of their occurring within 
the brain) they may not be mental pictures in any very 
robust sense.
2.3.3 Empiricism and its Critics


Unlike his predecessors, Locke did not concern himself with the 
nature or underlying mechanisms of mental imagery. Henceforth, at 
least until the rise of cognitive science in the late 20th century, 
that would be seen as the concern of scientists rather than 
 philosophers[13]
 (and as it turned out, the scientists did not have much to say about 
the matter either, until, once again, the era of cognitive science). 
Furthermore, Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding 
(1690) uses the words 'image' and 'imagination' only rarely (White, 
1990; Ayers, 1991 p. 
 45).[14]
 However, he has a great deal to say about ideas, which are 
the vehicles of thought of his cognitive theory. Although what may be
the canonical definition of idea as “whatever it is 
which the mind can be employed about in thinking” 
(Essay I.i.8), seems to be deliberately noncommital about 
their nature, there are several passages in Locke's Essay 
that suggest that he thought of them, at least when they were of 
visual origin, as being picture-like. Indeed, he explicitly refers to
ideas as “the pictures drawn in our minds” 
(Essay II.x.5; see also II.x.7, II.ix.8, II.xxv.6, 
II.xxxi.6, IV.xi.1), and draws an analogy between the way that ideas 
enter the mind and the formation of optical images within a 
camera obscura (a “dark room”) (Essay 
II.xi.17). 


It is thus hardly surprising that, according to Lowe (2005 p. 38), it
remains “orthodox” to interpret Locke as holding that 
ideas are pictorial mental images. This orthodoxy is defended by 
Ayers (1986, 1991) and White (1990) amongst others, but other recent 
Locke scholars, notably Yolton (1956, 1970, 1984, 1985, 1996), 
Chappell (1994), and, more tentatively, Lowe (1995, 2005) challenge 
it, arguing that the explicit comparisons of ideas with pictures are 
all limited merely to bringing out some or other specific aspect of 
the nature of ideas, and should not be read as identifying 
them with pictures. According to Yolton, there is no 
evidence that Locke thought of ideas as entities of any sort
(Yolton 1970 p. 134), rather, “To say that we know objects by 
means of ideas is to say no more than that objects become known 
through sensory awareness” (Yolton, 1985 p. 151). Lowe 
expresses what may be much the same underlying thought by suggesting 
that Locke may perhaps be interpreted as holding an 
“adverbial” theory of ideas, whereby they are construed 
as ways (or modes) of experiencing rather than as mental entities 
(Lowe, 1995 pp. 42– 47, 2005 pp. 47–48).


It is worth noting, however, that some recent philosophers have 
argued for just such an “adverbial” account of mental 
imagery itself, construing images as modes of experiencing, rather 
than the presence to mind of inner entities (Rabb, 1975; Heil, 1982; 
Tye, 1984; Thomas, 1999b, 2009; Meijsing, 2006). Enactive theories of 
imagery (see 
 section 4.5.1)
 can be viewed as fleshed out versions of this position (Thomas, 
1999b). Thus, even if Yolton and others are right to argue that Locke 
did not think of ideas (even visual ones) as pictures (imagery in
 sense {2}), 
or even as inner entities of any sort (sense {3}),
he might still have consistently viewed 
them as images in sense {1}, as
quasi-perceptual experiences. He 
certainly held that they arise from 
 perception,[15]
 and that we are conscious of them when we employ them in our thinking
(Essay II.i.2–3, I.i.8, II.xxvii.9). 


Whatever Locke's true intentions may have been, many of his leading 
successors and critics, such as Berkeley and Reid, seem to have 
understood him as believing that ideas are inner representational 
entities, and, when visual, are like inner pictures.



Few seem to doubt that Berkeley thought of ideas as being images (but see Pitcher, 1977; 
Kasem, 1989). Indeed, his famous and influential attack (in The 
Principles of Human Knowledge (1734)) on the possibility of 
abstract or general ideas clearly derives most of its persuasiveness 
from the assumption that ideas are like pictures:

  For my self I find indeed I have a Faculty of imagining, or
  representing to myself the Ideas of those particular things I have
  perceived and of variously compounding and dividing them. I can
  imagine a Man with Two Heads or the upper parts of a Man joined to
  the Body of a Horse. I can consider the Hand, the Eye, the Nose,
  each by itself abstracted or separated from the rest of the
  Body. But then whatever Hand or Eye I imagine, it must have some
  particular Shape and Colour. Likewise the Idea of Man that I frame
  to my self, must be either of a White, or a Black, or a Tawny, a
  Straight, or a Crooked, a Tall, or a Low, or a Middle-sized Man. I
  cannot by any effort of Thought conceive the abstract Idea above
  described. And it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract
  Idea of Motion distinct from the Body moving, and which is neither
  Swift nor Slow, Curvilinear nor Rectilinear; and the like may be
  said of all other abstract general Ideas whatsoever.
  (Principles, Introduction X).



Or again, a general idea of a triangle

 
  must be neither Oblique nor Rectangle, neither Equilateral,
  Equicrural, nor Scalenon, but all and none of these at once? In
  effect, it is something imperfect that cannot exist
  (Principles, Introduction XIII).  




In effect, Berkeley is arguing that we can form ideas of things that 
we have never actually seen just inasmuch as we can form new mental 
pictures by the sort of cutting and pasting operations we could 
perform with pictures on paper – sticking the picture of a 
man's head onto a picture of the body of a horse, for example –
but that, just as there is no way of drawing or creating a picture 
that inherently depicts the general man or the general triangle, we 
can form no such general ideas in our 
 minds.[16]
If ideas are images (and if mental images are pictures), Berkeley's
argument (which continues to influence today's discussions of imagery
and mental representation (e.g., Fodor, 1975)) may very well be
sound. If they are not images at all, it makes little sense (and if
mental images are not much like pictures, it is probably invalid).


As with Locke, Yolton (1996) argues that Hume did not 
understand the ideas of his cognitive theory to be mental 
images. However, there is a great deal in Hume's writings (much more 
than in Locke's) to suggest otherwise. Indeed, A Treatise of 
Human Nature (Hume, 1740) opens by explicitly identifying ideas 
with images: ideas are defined as “the faint images of
[sensory impressions] in thinking and reasoning” 
(Treatise I.i.1). It is conceivable that 'image' might mean 
nothing more than 'copy' here, but many other passages in both the 
Treatise and the Enquiry Concerning Human 
Understanding (1748) suggest that Hume intended it in a much 
stronger sense. For example, he refers to the memory one might have 
of some site in the Holy Land, after having actually been there, as 
both a “lively image” and a “lively idea” of 
the place (Treatise I.iii.9), clearly treating the two 
expressions as equivalent. Furthermore, ideas are constantly being 
described as having their existence in, or being present to, the 
imagination or the 
 fancy,[17]
 and we are told that we need only the “slightest 
philosophy” to convince us “that nothing can ever be 
present to the mind but an image or perception, and that the senses 
are only the inlets, through which these images are conveyed” 
(Enquiry 
 XII.1).[18]



The passages just cited (and others like them) perhaps imply no more 
than that Hume thought of ideas as quasi-perceptual experiences (a 
conclusion that Yolton might be able to accept), but the fact that 
Hume approvingly repeats Berkeley's argument against general ideas 
(Treatise I.iii.1; Enquiry XII.1) suggest that he 
also thought of them as picture-like. This is also suggested by his 
choice of the word 'impression' to designate the percepts of which 
ideas are the images or copies. Clearly the word alludes to the wax 
impression model of perception and memory that we find in Plato and 
Aristotle, and although Hume, no doubt, does not intend it to be 
understood too literally, the fact that he thinks it an appropriate 
and innocuous metaphor remains telling. 


Certainly when Thomas Reid came to develop his influential critique 
of “the way of ideas,” in effect a comprehensive 
rejection of the idea as the vehicle of thought, he based 
many of his arguments upon the assumption that the philosophers he 
was criticizing understood ideas to be picture-like images (Reid, 
1764, 
 1785).[19]
 Such images, Reid thinks, are simply not capable of playing the 
cognitive and epistemological roles that his predecessors had 
assigned to them, and the assumption that they do so leads to many 
absurdities. Reid is not saying that we do not have quasi-perceptual 
experiences, but he wants to deny that these are caused by 
representational mental entities that we experience in lieu of some 
actually present physical object or scene.


When we come to Kant (1781/1787), we find that ideas have 
been displaced, as the vehicles of thought, by concepts. 
However, images still have a significant role to play in his account 
of how our concepts connect to empirical reality. The imagination 
(einbildungskraft) must synthesize the inchoate deliverances
of the senses, the sensory manifold, into a coherent, meaningful 
image, a true representation that the understanding can grasp and 
bring under some concept. Unfortunately, Kant was unable to give a 
satisfactory account of how the imagination, even in concert with the
understanding, can achieve this. We are told that it involves what he
calls a schema, a “representation of a universal procedure of 
imagination in providing an image for a concept” (1781/1787 
B180). We are told that it is only “through” and 
“in accordance with” a schema that images become possible
(1781/1787 A 142). Unfortunately, however, 


  This schematism of our understanding, in its application to
  appearances and their mere form, is an art concealed in the depths
  of the human soul, whose real modes of activity nature is hardly
  likely ever to allow us to discover, and to have open to our gaze.
  (1781/1787 B181).




Thus Kant, in attempting to grapple with problems about the nature of
mental representation that the Empiricists had failed to solve, left 
the process of image formation, and the nature of the image itself, 
deeply mysterious.
3. Imagery in the Age of Scientific Psychology


When psychology first began to emerge as an experimental science, in 
the philosophy departments of the German universities in the late 
19th century, and soon after in the United States, the central role 
of imagery in mental life was not in question. For these pioneering 
experimentalists, such as Wilhelm Wundt in Germany and William James 
in America, mental images (often, following the established usage of 
the Empiricist philosophical tradition, referred to as 
ideas) held just the same central place in the explanation 
of cognition that they had held for philosophical psychologists of 
earlier times. Edward B. Titchener, a student of Wundt who 
established himself as a leading figure in American psychology, was 
particularly interested in imagery, and an experiment performed by 
one of his students, C.W. Perky, has become particularly well known. 
It is often assumed that it shows that there is no 
qualitative experiential difference between mental images and 
percepts, but further experimental investigations have raised some 
doubts about this conclusion (see 
 Supplement: The Perky Experiment).
 


However, developments within psychology at the beginning of the 20th 
century began to cast doubt on this long established consensus. A 
group of psychologists working in Würzburg, Germany, lead by 
another former student of Wundt's, Oswald Külpe, claimed to have
found empirical evidence that certain conscious thought contents are 
neither imaginal nor perceptual in character. Their results were 
challenged on several grounds by Wundt, Titchener and others, and 
were certainly never definitively established. Nevertheless, the 
bitter dispute that ensued, the so called imageless thought 
controversy, had a profound effect on the development of scientific 
psychology (and, very arguably, philosophy too). Most psychologists 
became, in effect, profoundly disillusioned with the whole notion of 
mental imagery, and either avoided seriously considering the topic, 
treated it dismissively, or, in some extreme cases, denied the 
existence of the phenomenon outright. These attitudes noticeably 
influenced other disciplines, including philosophy. Although the 
psychological study of imagery revived with the rise of cognitivism 
in the 1960s and 70s, when new experimental techniques were developed
that enabled a truly experimental study of the phenomenon, current 
views about, and attitudes towards, mental imagery cannot be properly
understood without an awareness of this history, versions of which, 
of varying degrees of accuracy, have passed into the folklore of 
psychology. 
3.1 Early Experimental Psychology

The following supplements discuss ideas and research about 
imagery in early (late 19th and early 20th century) scientific 
psychology: 


Supplement: Founders of Experimental Psychology: Wilhelm Wundt and William James


Supplement: Edward B. Titchener: The Complete Iconophile


Supplement: The Perky Experiment


3.2 The Imageless Thought Controversy


Perhaps Wundt's most important German student was Oswald Külpe, 
who had for several years served as Wundt's assistant professor, but 
eventually left to set up his own laboratory in the philosophy 
department of Würzburg University. He and his students there 
developed a direct challenge to the prevalent imagery theory of 
thought. Under the influence of both Machian positivism and, later, 
the act psychology of Brentano and the phenomenology of Husserl, 
Külpe, like Titchener (whom he had helped train), rejected what 
he saw as Wundt's unnecessarily strict methodological restrictions on
the scope of empirical science, and encouraged his students to extend
the scope of the introspective method to the study of the 
“higher” processes of thought and reasoning (Danziger, 
1979, 1980; Ash, 1998). In 1901, two of these students, Mayer and 
Orth, performed a word association experiment in which subjects were 
asked to report everything that had passed through their mind between
hearing the stimulus word and giving the response. Note that it was 
normal practice, in this era of psychology, for experimental 
subjects, or observers as they were more often called, to be
drawn from among fellow researchers within the same laboratory, often
including the supervising professor. Present day psychologists would,
with good reason, suspect such subjects of being liable to produce 
results strongly biased by theoretical preconceptions (Orne, 1962; 
Intons-Peterson, 1983). Great pains are usually taken, today, to 
ensure that subjects in psychological experiments have no idea what 
hypothesis the experiment is supposed to be testing. In 1901 however,
it was thought that experienced and knowledgeable observers 
were more likely to produce consistent and meaningful results than 
the psychologically untrained. In the case of the Meyer and Orth 
experiment, two amongst the four subjects were Meyer and Orth 
themselves. Nevertheless, they professed to be surprised by some of 
their findings. In particular:
The subjects frequently reported that they experienced
certain events of consciousness which they could quite clearly
designate neither as definite images nor yet as volitions. For
example, the subject Meyer made the observation that, in reference to
the stimulus word “metre” a peculiar event of
consciousness intervened which could not be characterized more
exactly, and which was succeeded by the spoken response
“trochee”. (Meyer & Orth, as quoted and translated by
Humphrey, 1951)



The jargon term bewusstseinslagen (“states of 
consciousness” — Humphrey, 1951) was coined to designate 
these indescribable non-sensorial states, and they soon began to turn
up in more and more profusion in the introspective reports generated 
in the Würzburg laboratory, taking on an increasing theoretical 
significance as time went by. In 1905 another Würzburg 
researcher, Ach, also introduced the largely overlapping, but more 
explicitly intentionalistic concept of bewusstheit or 
“awareness”, an unanalysable “impalpably given 
‘knowing’” (Ach, quoted and translated by Humphrey,
1951), and by 1907, Karl Bühler, perhaps the most radical of 
Külpe's students, was simply referring to gedanken 
(“thoughts”). Bühler's experiments might, for 
example, involve giving a subject (often professor Külpe 
himself) a somewhat gnomic sentence to interpret (e.g., 
“Thinking is so extraordinarily difficult that many prefer to 
judge”) and then collecting introspective reports of the 
conscious, but allegedly non-imaginal, gedanken that had 
occurred between the hearing of the sentence and the giving of the 
interpretation. Although the Würzburg school never denied that 
imagery does occur, by this time the greater part of the conscious 
contents of minds examined in Würzburg seemed to be 
non-imaginal. 


Unsurprisingly, Wundt, and others, refused to accept these new 
methods and conclusions, and a heated debate, the so called 
imageless thought controversy, ensued. Though Wundt was 
surely skeptical of the existence of imageless thoughts, his primary 
criticisms were methodological. He was very much concerned with the 
fact that the experiments were necessarily constructed so that the 
introspective reports were given after the completion of the
experimental task (word association, sentence interpretation, or 
whatever). The Würzburg research thus involved discursive 
recollection (or was it reconstruction?) of conscious contents that 
were no longer present to the mind. Such experiments, Wundt argued, 
were open invitations to suggestion, and, indeed, were
not experiments at all in the sense of scientific
methodology: they are counterfeit experiments that seem methodical
simply because they are ordinarily performed in a psychological
laboratory and involve the coöperation of two persons, who purport
to be experimenter and observer. In reality, they are as unmethodical
as possible; they possess none of the special features by which we
distinguish the introspections of experimental psychology from the
casual introspections of everyday life. (Wundt, quoted and translated
by Titchener, 1909. Original German, 1907.)


Titchener (see 
 supplement)
 also strongly objected to the alleged demonstrations of imageless 
thought, but for different reasons. He did not object to the aims or 
the introspective methodology of the Würzburg school, but to 
their purported results, and, for him, the experiments were not so 
much misconceived as incompetently executed: In particular, he felt, 
the observers (experimental subjects) in Würzburg had 
been inadequately trained in the art of introspection. According to 
Titchener, the main pitfall of introspection was what he called the 
“stimulus error,” the strong tendency to confound the 
conscious experience itself with whatever it might represent. Thus, 
to report, when looking at a rectangular table top, that one 
experiences a rectangle, would be to commit the stimulus error: The 
“real” conscious content would (on Titchener's view) have
the trapezoidal shape that the table top projects upon the retina. 
For Titchener, the intentionality generally ascribed to imageless
thoughts was clear evidence that the Würzburg introspectors
were committing the stimulus error systematically: They were not 
reporting the intrinsic nature of their conscious contents, but what 
those contents signified. Titchener suggested that the purported 
bewusstseinslagen etc. were, in fact, faint and fleeting 
kinaesthetic sensations, feelings of muscular tension and the like 
(Tweney, 1987). In Titchener's own laboratory, experiments quite 
similar to those done in Würzburg, but carried out using 
introspective observers well trained in avoiding the 
stimulus error (Titchener himself, or his own graduate students), 
produced no reports of imageless thoughts. Instead, they found the 
fleeting imagery or the subtle bodily sensations that Professor 
Titchener's theory predicted (Titchener, 1909; Humphrey, 1951). 


This work of Titchener's (like other responses to the imageless 
thought controversy from America, Britain, and elsewhere) had 
relatively little impact in Germany, which, with some justification 
at that time, still regarded itself as very much preeminent in 
psychological science. Nevertheless, on both sides of the Atlantic 
the controversy was recognized as touching on deep foundational 
issues in the science of mind. Although largely forgotten today, it 
seems to have had a lasting impact on the development not only of 
psychology, but philosophy as well. The Würzburg school's 
claims, despite their shaky basis, undoubtedly contributed to a sense
that imagery could not be so psychologically important as had 
traditionally been assumed, and that an alternative way of thinking 
about cognitive content was needed. Many psychologists and 
philosophers of this era came, partly for this reason, to feel that 
thought should be understood in terms of language per se, 
and that it was a serious mistake ever to have believed that the 
representational power of language derives from some more fundamental
form of representation, such as mental 
 imagery.[20]



But the imageless thought controversy was never satisfactorily
resolved, at least in the terms in which it was originally posed.
Indeed, philosophers are still arguing over the issues involved (e.g.,
Lormand, 1996; Mangan, 2001; Pitt, 2004; Robinson, 2005).  Although
the Würzburg school has been lauded for drawing psychology's
attention to the intentionality of mental contents, and for the
introduction of once important concepts such as “mental
set” into the science, it would certainly be grossly misleading
to suggest that their work provides evidence for the existence of
non-sensorial conscious mental contents (i.e. imageless thoughts) that
comes anywhere close to meeting present day scientific
standards. Indeed, the fact that Külpe's and Titchener's
laboratories each produced results that fitted their directors'
contrasting preconceptions did not go unnoticed by their
contemporaries. The irresolvable dispute contributed significantly to
a growing sense of intellectual crisis within psychology, leading to a
deep loss of confidence (persisting to the present – see
Schwitzgebel (2002a,b, 2008)) in the scientific value of
introspection. It also led to a precipitous decline in scientific
interest in imagery, especially in the United States after the
Behaviorist movement took hold. On the one hand its importance in the
cognitive economy (or even its very existence) was now subject to
doubt; on the other hand it had come to seem that it was very
difficult, if not impossible, to study it experimentally and
objectively. 


Further discussion of the consequences of the imageless 
thought controversy:


Supplement: European Responses: Jaensch, Freud, and Gestalt Psychology


Supplement: The American Response: Behaviorist Iconophobia and Motor Theories of Imagery


3.3 Imagery in Twentieth Century Philosophy


By the early 20th century, particularly in the United States, where 
it most flourished, psychology had progressively established a 
disciplinary identity distinct from the parent discipline of 
philosophy. However, interest in and attitudes towards imagery 
amongst philosophers followed a very similar trajectory to that seen 
in psychology. Early in the century, philosophers as otherwise 
diverse as Russell (1919, 1921) and Bergson (1907) still gave imagery
a key role in their theories of meaning and cognition (although it 
may be significant that Bergson seems to regard what he called the 
“cinematic” imagery-based thought of 
“ordinary” and “intellectual” cognition as 
distinctly inferior to the non-imaginal philosophical 
intuition that also played a large role in his epistemology). 
However, before long, and especially in the wake of the imageless 
thought controversy, doubts were beginning to emerge, in the work of 
philosophers such as Schlick (1918), Sartre (1936, 1940), Ryle 
(1949), and especially the later Wittgenstein, both about imagery's 
importance in cognition, and about whether the whole notion of 
“pictures in the mind” really made sense.


Indeed, even in the late 19th century Frege (1884 §§59–60) 
had already argued against the traditional view that the 
meaningfulness of language derives from the mental images that we 
associate with words. Images, he pointed out, are subjective and 
idiosyncratic, whereas word meanings are objective and universal. 
However, the almost unanimous scorn with which the imagery theory of 
meaning was regarded by late 20th century analytic philosophers seems
mainly to be due to the influence and arguments of the later 
Wittgenstein (Candlish, 2001; Nyíri, 2001). Today, it is 
largely thanks to Wittgenstein's efforts that,
an imagistic account of thinking such as is outlined in
Russell's Analysis of Mind (Lecture X) [Russell, 1921] or
elaborated in H.H. Price's Thinking and Experience [Price,
1953] is usually no more felt to deserve critical attention than is,
say, a geocentric account of the universe. (Candlish, 2001
§2).


In fact, Wittgenstein implicitly rejected the imagery theory of 
meaning even in his early work – the so called “picture 
theory of meaning” of the Tractatus (Wittgenstein, 
1922) is not a version of the imagery theory – but an 
explicit critique appears only in his posthumously published later 
writings (although the arguments were already influential during his 
lifetime, long before they saw print). Perhaps the most sustained 
critique of the imagery theory of meaning occurs in the opening pages
of The Blue and Brown Books (Wittgenstein,1958), although 
the pithier remarks in the Philosophical Investigations 
(1953 – especially §139f) may have been more influential. 
Many other remarks and arguments scattered through Wittgenstein's 
other posthumously published writings, particularly in 
Zettel (1967), the Remarks on the Philosophy of 
Psychology (1980a, 1980b), and the Last Writings on the 
Philosophy of Psychology (1990), demonstrate that he was 
fascinated by imagery, but deeply skeptical not only about the large 
cognitive role traditionally assigned to it, but also about the 
traditional understanding of the image as a sort of inner picture 
(see, e.g. 1953 I §301, II pp. 196e & 213e). 


No-one could seriously doubt that Wittgenstein himself recognized the
experiential reality and philosophical importance of imagery: he 
expends so much effort wrestling with the concept. Nevertheless, as 
Nyíri (2001) remarks, “Wittgenstein's untiring endeavor 
[is] to relegate mental images to a merely secondary place.” He
determinedly rejected the traditional empiricist view that thinking 
is primarily a play of images, that language is semantically grounded
in imagery, and that the principal role of language is to communicate
the results of our inner, imaginal thought processes to others. 
Instead, Wittgenstein regarded language itself as the preeminent 
vehicle of thought, and he held that the meanings of linguistic 
expressions arise from the various uses to which they are 
put. He thus saw no need (and no room) for language to be 
semantically grounded in any other form of representation. In support
of this position, he strove to show that imagery (the only real 
candidate for the job) could not possibly be the semantic ground of 
language, and he is very widely believed to have succeeded.


The two themes of the cognitive unimportance of imagery and its 
non-pictorial nature were taken up, and argued more fully, by 
numerous post-Wittgensteinian philosophers in the latter half of the 
twentieth century. Although there may be some tension between the 
themes (most arguments against the imagery theory of thought and 
meaning seem to turn upon mental images being, in some sense, 
picture-like) in practice they have rarely, if ever, come into 
conflict; rather, both have played their part in setting the 
iconophobic tone of the era.


Even in the wake of the revival of scientific interest in the
cognitive roles of imagery in the 1960s and 70s, the handful of
post-Wittgensteinian philosophers who have attempted to defend
imagery-based theories of thought and meaning (Price, 1953; Lowe,
1995, 1996; Ellis, 1995; Nyíri, 2001) still find themselves
swimming very much against the tide. Philosophers such as Harrison
(1962–3), Goodman (1968), and Fodor (1975) have reinforced, restated
and extended Wittgenstein's arguments for the irrelevance of imagery
to semantics, and have made a powerful and influential case. One point
that is often made is that there seems to be no natural way of
representing certain linguistically expressible concepts in an image.
Logical relations are often mentioned in this context. It is hard to
see, for example, how it might be possible to form a mental image of
not (is any image in which John
does not appear an image of John is not here?), or
or (how would an image of A or B
differ from one of A and B?), or
if…then (see Barsalou (1999) for some tentative suggestions in rebuttal).


The image theory of linguistic meaning might seem to be on its 
strongest ground when it is applied to nouns (or, at least, concrete 
nouns). On the face of things, it is plausible to think that one 
understands the meaning of the word 'dog' if and only if as the word 
is able to arouse an image of a dog in one's mind. Berkeley's 
argument against general ideas had long brought this simple picture 
into question, however (see 
 section 2.3.3).
 Can my mental picture of a dog represent any dog, or dogs in general,
or is it, at best, just a representation of Rover? 


Twentieth century philosophers, however, would soon point to an even 
deeper problem. They assumed, probably often correctly, that the 
traditional image theory of meaning was based upon the assumption 
that images themselves get their meaning through resembling 
their objects: an image of a dog represents a dog because it 
resembles or looks like a dog, in the same way that a 
painting of Queen Elizabeth represents Queen Elizabeth because it 
looks like her. This resemblance theory of 
representation is not always explicitly stated by image 
theorists of thought and language (perhaps it is thought to be too 
obvious to be worth saying, or perhaps not all of them are really 
committed to it), but Russell (1919,1921), for one, explicitly takes 
the view that words represent because they are associated with mental
images, and that the images themselves represent because they 
resemble their objects. 


This resemblance theory became the main focus of 
attack. Consider a photograph of Leo the lion. It would certainly be 
reasonable to say both that it resembles and that it represents him. 
But now suppose we have two such photographs. Each photo resembles 
the other more than either resemble Leo (both photos are small, 
rectangular pieces of card, with a white border around a gray or 
vari-colored rectangle, and neither is carnivorous or furry), yet we 
would normally want to say that they each represent Leo, and not that
they represent each other. Of course, a photograph of Leo does 
resemble him, when the right aspects of resemblance are considered, 
but in this regard Leo equally resembles the photograph. We are 
unlikely, however, to want to say that he represents the 
photo. Resemblance is a symmetrical relationship, and representation 
is not. None of this necessarily means that resemblance never plays 
any role in representation, but in order for it to do so, the 
relevant aspects of resemblance have to be recognized, and 
the resembling object has to be used (or, at least, 
taken) as a representation. But surely, before a cognitive 
system can recognize or use the relevant aspects of resemblance 
between a photograph (or an inner quasi-picture) and an object (or a 
percept), it must already be able to represent the picture and its 
object, and their various features, to itself. The mind's power to 
recognize resemblance seemingly depends on its power to represent 
things, rather than vice-versa. On grounds such as this, Goodman 
(1968) argued that even physical pictures – paintings drawings,
photographs, etc. – do not represent their subjects 
because they resemble them. Indeed, he held that what a 
picture represents is just as much a matter of interpretation and 
convention as is what a word or sentence represents, the implication 
being that pictorial representation is no more “natural” 
or fundamental, no more a “ground” for meaning, than 
linguistic representation itself. Clearly the argument applies to 
mental pictures quite as much as to physical ones. 


Fodor (1975), borrowing liberally from the Wittgenstein of the 
Philosophical Investigations (1953 §139 f.), made a 
compelling case that mental pictures cannot be the foundational 
bearers of intentionality because what they resemble is too 
indeterminate (cf. Goodman, 1970). A mental image of John, who is a 
tall fat man, might mean John, it might mean fat 
man (or John is a fat man), or tall man, or 
just man, human being, or even physical 
object. On the other hand it might mean John in just the 
particular pose and situation in which he is imagined. After 
all, it resembles all those things (and indefinitely many more). What
an image means, according to Fodor, what it is an image of, 
will necessarily remain radically indeterminate unless it is pinned 
down by an associated linguistic description. Fodor himself holds 
that what our mental images represent is determined by an associated 
description couched in mentalese, an innate, unconscious, 
computational “language of thought” (Fodor, 1975) (see: 
 language of thought hypothesis);
 others, such as Kaufmann (1980), apparently think that the necessary 
descriptions may be couched in the natural language that the imager 
speaks. On either view, though, the traditional semantic dependency 
is inverted. Instead of the meaningfulness of language being grounded
in imagery, the meaningfulness of imagery seems to need grounding in 
some sort of language. 


Arguments against the pictorial nature of imagery, which are scarcely
more than hinted at in Wittgenstein's published works, were developed
much more explicitly by Ryle (1949). As part of a broader (and very
influential) attack on what he called “Descartes' myth”
(i.e., Cartesian dualism), Ryle argued that the notion of private,
non-physical, mental pictures is an absurdity, and proposed instead
that “imagining”, “seeing in the mind's eye”,
and so forth, is better understood as akin to pretending (to
ourselves) to experience ordinary, external things. Other philosophers
influenced by both Wittgenstein and Ryle soon carried forward this
critique of the inner picture: Shorter (1952) and Dennett (1969) (in
some respects anticipating the work of Pylyshyn (1973) – see
section
 4.4.1
 below, and especially
 note 31)
 suggested that imagery might be more akin to describing or depicting
something to oneself, rather than to pretending to see it; and, from a
detailed exegesis of Ryle's arguments, Ishiguro (1966, 1967) developed
a theory of mental images as intentional objects (in the
sense of Anscombe (1965)) having a merely “grammatical”
existence: Although the grammar of our language may sometimes make it
very awkward to refer to our imagery experiences without seeming to
imply that they are caused by certain entities (mental images), it
does not follow that such entities actually exist.


Although expressed in very different terms, Ishiguro's position on 
imagery is not altogether unlike the view developed earlier in the 
century by Sartre (1940). (See Ryle (1971) for an interesting 
comparison of his own views about the mental, including mental 
imagery, to views in the phenomenological tradition, to which Sartre 
belonged.) Under the influence of Husserl rather than Wittgenstein, 
Sartre also stressed the intentionality of imagery and denied that 
mental images (conceived as entities) exist:
The fact of the matter is that the expression ‘mental
image’ is confusing. … But since the word image is of long
standing we cannot reject it completely. However, in order to avoid all
ambiguity, we must repeat at this point that an image is nothing else
than a relationship. The imaginative consciousness I have of Peter is
not a consciousness of an image of Peter: Peter is directly reached, my
attention is not directed on an image but on an object (Sartre, 1940 p.
8).


It is important to be clear that just because Sartre (and Ryle, 
Shorter, Ishiguro, and others) hold that mental images are not inner 
pictures, nor even, indeed, any sort of entity, they are not thereby 
denying that people have quasi-perceptual experiences, or even that 
these may sometimes be very vivid. Unfortunately, perhaps because the
notion that such experiences are caused by inner pictures is so 
entrenched in our folk psychology, this point does not always seem to
have been clear to critics of such views, and it has even been 
occasionally suggested that they could not possibly be held by anyone
personally familiar with the experience of 
 imagery.[21]
 However, a careful reading of these apparently iconophobic authors 
soon reveals that they in no way intend to deny the experiential 
reality of imagery, and most of them make their personal familiarity 
with it quite 
 clear.[22]
 They deny only that such experience, however vivid it might be, is 
caused by (or embodied as) inner pictures.


By contrast, in his Mental Images – A Defence, Hannay 
(1971) vigorously championed the reality of inner pictures (see also 
Hannay, 1973, and for a counterargument see Candlish, 1975). But, 
despite the fact that he had no thought of reinstating imagery to its
traditional importance in cognitive and semantic theory, Hannay 
clearly saw himself (in 1971) as a lonely dissenter, a voice crying 
in the wilderness against philosophy's virtually monolithic 
iconophobic consensus. In the subsequent decades that consensus has 
been fractured, but by no means shattered, by developments in 
cognitive psychology and cognitive science (discussed below). In 
particular, in the wake of Kosslyn's (1980, 1994) seminal work on the
cognitive psychology of imagery, a growing number of philosophers are
now ready to defend the reality of mental pictures, and show no sign 
whatsoever of feeling embattled (e.g., von Eckardt, 1988, 1993; Tye, 
1988, 1991; Mortensen, 1989; Brann, 1991; Cohen, 1996; Rollins, 
2001). Many other philosophers, even if not entirely convinced about 
pictures, now take a serious interest in the cognitive science of 
imagery. 


Nonetheless, the post-Wittgensteinian consensus that imagery cannot 
be as important as it once seemed to be, that it cannot be the ground
of linguistic meaning or the prime vehicle of thought, remains 
strong. Furthermore, Bennett & Hacker (2003) have recently made a
powerful restatement of the Wittgensteinian case against mental 
entities in general and mental pictures in particular. Despite all 
that has happened in cognitive science, imagery has by no means 
regained its former prominence in philosophy. 
4. Imagery in Cognitive Science


A revival of interest in imagery was an important component of the so
called cognitive revolution in psychology during the 1960s 
and early 1970s, a period when the Behaviorist intellectual hegemony 
over the field was broken and the concept of mental 
representation was established as central and vital to 
psychological theorizing (Baars, 1986; Gardner, 1987; but see also 
Leahey, 1992). The first (and formative) textbook of the emerging 
cognitive approach to psychology (Neisser, 1967) devoted substantial 
space to mental imagery, and the end of the 1960s brought the 
publication of a spate of books reviewing and reporting new findings 
on the psychology of imagery: Richardson (1969), Horowitz (1970), 
Paivio (1971), Piaget & Inhelder (1971), Segal (1971a), Sheehan 
(1972).


Although the emergence of computational models of mental processes 
probably played the leading role in the rise of cognitive psychology 
and cognitive science, the new interest in imagery was independently 
motivated, and contributed significantly to the growing feeling, 
amongst psychologists, that both the ontology and methodology of 
Behaviorism were excessively restrictive, and that inner mental 
processes and representations could, after all, be useful, or even 
indispensible, scientific concepts. Quite apart from the broader talk
of revolution in psychology in this era (e.g., Hebb, 1960), there 
seems to have been a real sense, at the time, that the revival of 
interest in imagery was, in itself, an insurgent movement liberating 
psychologists from entrenched but outworn Behaviorist dogmas. The 
imagery revival was depicted in dramatic terms as “the return 
of the ostracized” (Holt, 1964; cf. Haber, 1970), as “a 
dimension of mind rediscovered” (Kessell, 1972), and as marking
“a paradigm shift in psychology” (Neisser, 1972b).
4.1 The Imagery Revival


Holt (1964) indicates a number of developments that began to lead some 
psychologists, in the 1950s, to begin to pay significant attention to
imagery again. These include research on hallucinogenic drugs, 
developments in electroencephalography, the discovery of REM sleep 
and its correlation with dreaming, and Penfield's (1958) finding that
direct electrical stimulation of certain brain areas can give rise to
vivid memory (or pseudo-memory) imagery. More significant, however, 
(according to Holt) was a line of psychological research that was 
originally inspired by practical, rather than theoretical, concerns: 
by the perceptual problems experienced by people such as radar 
operators, long-distance truck drivers, and jet pilots, whose work 
requires them to remain perceptually alert whilst watching 
monotonous, impoverished, and barely changing visual stimuli over 
extended periods of time. In the laboratory, subjects experiencing 
such sensory deprivation often spontaneously reported vivid, 
intrusive, and sometimes bizarre mental imagery, “like having a
dream while awake” (Bexton, Heron, & Scott, 1954; but see Suedfeld & Coren, 1989). Despite 
the introspective nature of the evidence, the practical implications 
of these findings (for such things as road and air safety) made them 
hard to dismiss.


Beginning in the 1960s, and perhaps stimulated by some of the research
mentioned by Holt, there was also a growing interest in the
application of imagery based techniques in psychotherapy and
psychosomatic medicine (see, e.g., Assagioli, 1965; Horowitz, 1970,
1983; Korn & Johnson, 1983; Sheikh, 2003). By the 1970s, something
of a self conscious imagery movement had taken hold, in which
discoveries and theoretical developments coming out of experimental
psychology and cognitive science helped to fuel and legitimate an
enthusiasm for the application of imagery to psychotherapy, and even
to “personal growth,” “consciousness
expansion,” and the like.  More recently, imagery based
techniques, including, but not limited to, so called “mental
practice” (Richardson, 1967; Ryan & Simons, 1982;
Nordin et al., 2006), have come to be extensively applied in
sports psychology, where they are widely believed to have the
potential to boost athletic performance to a significant degree
(Paivio, 1985; Sheikh & Korn, 1994; Driskell
et al., 1994; Morris et al., 2005; Short et
al., 2006; Weinberg, 2008).  A journal dedicated to the subject,
the Journal of Imagery Research in Sport and Physical
Activity commenced online publication in 2006.  Great claims are
also made, by some, for the healing powers of
guided imagery, whereby clients (or patients) are encouraged
to visualize particular scenes or scenarios thought to have
therapeutic value (e.g., Rossman, 2000). Guided imagery techniques
have been claimed to be effective for purposes ranging from chronic
pain relief and the preparation of patients for surgery (Fontaine,
2000; Tusek et al., 1997), to breast enlargement and global
spiritual renewal (Willard, 1977; Ekstein, 2001)!


It is sometimes claimed or implied that these sorts of techniques are
based upon ancient oriental, and particularly Indian, spiritual 
practices (e.g., Samuels & Samuels, 1975; Gawain, 1982), and it 
thus may not be coincidental that a prominent figure in the 
psychotherapeutic imagery movement is a Pakistani born psychologist, 
Akhter Ahsen, known not only for his clinical and theoretical 
work (e.g., Ahsen, 1965, 1977, 1984, 1985, 1993, 1999), but also 
because he was instrumental, in the later 1970s, in the foundation of
the International Imagery Association, and the peer reviewed
Journal of Mental Imagery (which began publication in 1977).
The Association's mission, stated on their web site, is “to 
further the understanding of mental imagery and advance its potential
in the development of human consciousness” (see 
 Other Internet Resources).
The journal publishes articles on imagery from a wide range of
psychological perspectives, including the cognitive. An American
Association for the Study of Mental Imagery was also founded in
1978, with a mission to promote “the study of mental imagery as
a part of human science and the application of scientific knowledge
about mental imagery in the relief of human suffering and the
enhancement of personal development”.  Its
journal, Imagination, Cognition and Personality, commenced
publication in the early 1980s. (The Association may now be defunct
— its web site has disappeared — but the journal continues
to be published.)
4.2 Mnemonic Effects of Imagery


Despite the developments outlined above, interest in imagery amongst 
experimental psychologists remained at a fairly low level until the 
mid to late 1960s. It was the recognition, in that period, of the 
powerful mnemonic effects of imagery that changed the situation, 
leading to a thriving tradition of experimental research, and 
securing imagery a firm place in cognitive theory. These mnemonic 
effects, it turned out, could be clearly demonstrated in readily 
repeatable experiments that did not rely in any way upon 
introspective reports.


According to Bugelski (1977, 1984), an important stimulus to the 
flowering of experimental research on imagery and 
 memory[23]
 was the 1966 publication of Frances Yates' celebrated and widely read
historical study, The Art of Memory. Yates details how 
imagery based mnemonic techniques, particularly versions of the 
so-called method of loci, were in widespread use amongst 
European intellectuals, educators, and orators from classical Greek 
through to early modern times, and she argues that the knowledge and 
use of these techniques may have had quite significant effects on the
development of Western philosophical, theological, and early 
scientific thought. (see
Supplement: Ancient Imagery Mnemonics).



Around the same time, Soviet psychologist Alexander Luria's (1960, 
1968) extensive case study of the “mnemonist” 
Shereshevskii first became available in English, and well known 
amongst English-speaking psychologists. Shereshevskii's truly 
prodigious feats of memory were apparently made possible by an 
abnormally vivid visual imagination, often harnessed to his own 
version of the method of loci. Experiment soon confirmed 
that the imagery method of loci, as described by Yates and 
Luria, was extremely effective in enhancing memory performance in 
ordinary people (Ross & Lawrence, 1968).


Actually, a revival of scientific interest in imagery mnemonics seems
to have been nascent in North America, even before Yates’ work
appeared, or Luria’s was translated into English.  According to
Hoffman & Senter (1978) the stimulus came from the tradition of
“magic shows”, and, particularly, the performances of
“memory men” (or sometimes “memory women”),
who would use traditional mnemonic systems to perform impressive feats
of memory for entertainment purposes. Some of these “memory
men” (or people who had learned from them) also promoted
mnemonic systems as useful in business, or wrote popularizing books
that explained how to use mnemonic techniques, mostly imagery based.
Books of this type by Lorayne (1957), Roth (1961), and, especially,
Furst (1954, 1957) seem to have been amongst those that influenced
psychologists to take in interest (Hoffman & Senter, 1978; Morris
& Hampson, 1983).  According to Hoffman & Senter (1978) the
first real scientific study of imagery mnemonics was carried out at
the University of Pennsylvania in the late 1950s, by Wallace, Turner,
& Perkins, who were attempting to explore “the limits of
human information storage”. Turner had formerly worked as a
stage magician and memory man, and suggested that the subjects be
taught an imagery mnemonic technique to help them to realize the full
potential of their memories. As a result, however, the experiment was
deemed a failure; when the subjects used the mnemonic technique, there
seemed to be no practicably measurable limits to their
information-storage capacity! Because of this, the study was never
published, but word of the findings does seem to have got out,
particularly via Eugene Galanter, who had also been at the University
of Pennsylvania at the time. The enormously influential book that he
co-authored, Plans and the Structure of Behavior includes a
brief account of the findings of Wallace, Turner, & Perkins, and
of the imagery mnemonic they used (Miller, Galanter, & Pribram,
1960 pp. 136f). This book is considered one of the key, foundational
works of the cognitive revolution in psychology, and was enormously
influential in the field (although it is better known for its
introduction of concepts from computing and Artificial Intelligence
research into psychology, rather than for its account of imagery
mnemonics) (Gardner, 1987; Hirst, 1988; Galanter, 1988; Neisser, 1988
p. 85). 


But, almost certainly, the most important figure in the study of the
mnemonic effects of imagery was the Canadian psychologist Allan
Paivio, whose interest in the subject seems to have originated quite
independently of any of the influences mentioned so far, going right
back to 1950, when he witnessed an impressive demonstration of the
power of an imagery mnemonic, and was taught how to use it, as part of
a course on public speaking that he attended (Paivio, 1991c, 2007
pp. 22-24; Marks, 1997). (The connection between imagery mnemonics and
public speaking goes right back to their origins in ancient times: see
 Supplement: Ancient Imagery Mnemonics.) 
Despite this, perhaps because of the still generally iconophobic
character of North American psychology through the 1950s (see
 Supplement: The American Response: Behaviorist Iconophobia and Motor Theories of Imagery), 
his first publication to (very tentatively) suggest a role for imagery
in memory did not appear until 1963 (Paivio, 1963). However, bolder
claims and much further experimental work soon followed, and, by the
end of the decade (by then, no doubt, abetted by awareness of the more
eye-catching historical and anecdotal studies of Yates and Luria)
Paivio’s theoretical speculations about the central role of
imagery in memory, and painstaking quantitative experiments with which
he supported them, were attracting a great deal of attention. By the
later 1960s, and in the 1970s, many other psychologists had taken up
research in this area, but Paivio was well established as the
field’s leading figure, and discussion centered largely upon the
implications and merits, or otherwise, of the Dual Coding (imagery
code and verbal code) theory of mental representation that he proposed
to explain his results (Paivio, 1971, 1986, 1991a, 1991b, 1995,
2007). Note, however, that, although they inevitably became entangled,
the ensuing controversy between the Dual Coding and the rival Common
Coding theories of memory (see
 Supplement: Dual Coding and Common Coding Theories of Memory)
 should not be confused with the better known debate
between analog (pictorial) and propositional
(descriptive) theories of imagery (see
 §4.4). The former debate is about the
function of imagery in cognition, the latter is about the
nature and mechanism of imagery itself. 


The findings of this extensive experimental research program on the 
mnemonic effects of imagery, can be crudely summarized as the 
discovery of two principal effects. First of all, it was 
demonstrated quite incontrovertibly that subjects who follow explicit
instructions to use simple imagery based mnemonic techniques to 
memorize verbal material (typically lists of apparently random words,
or word pairs) remember it very much better than subjects who do not 
use such techniques (Bower, 1970, 1972; Bugelski, 1970; Paivio, 1971;
Neisser & Kerr, 1973). Secondly, and somewhat more 
controversially, Paivio and others claim to have shown that imagery 
plays a large role in verbal memory even when the experimental 
subjects are not given explicit instructions to form imagery, and 
make no deliberate effort to do so. To demonstrate this, Paivio and 
his associates initially determined quantitative imagery 
values for each of a long list of nouns: that is to say, the 
relative ease with which subjects could generate a mental image 
appropriate to the word, or the likelihood that an image would 
spontaneously be evoked by the word in question (Paivio, Yuille, 
& Madigan, 
 1968).[24]
 (On the whole, concrete nouns such as ‘cat’ have high 
imagery values, and abstract nouns such as ‘truth’ have 
low ones, although there are exceptions to this rule.) Once these 
quantitative imagery values were established, Paivio was able to 
show, in various experimental designs, that words with high imagery 
values were consistently remembered significantly better than those 
with lower ones, quite regardless of any conscious intent on the 
subjects' part to form relevant images (Paivio, 1971, 1983, 
1991a). Much controversy ensued, however, as to whether the
“imagability” of the referents of the words in question is
the truly causally relevant factor, or whether it is some other
feature of the words (or their referents) that happens to be well
correlated with this imagery
value.[25]



Further discussion of theories of the mnemonic properties of 
imagery:


Supplement: Dual Coding and Common Coding Theories of Memory


Supplement: Conceptual Issues in Dual Coding Theory


4.3 The Spatial Properties of Imagery


By the end of the 1960s, the work of Paivio and others on the 
mnemonic properties of imagery had established a strong empirical 
case for the functional importance of imagery in cognition. The 
phenomenon could no longer be ignored by psychologists, or treated as
a mere subjective epiphenomenon of no scientific interest, as it had 
been in the Behaviorist era. However, this work had done very little 
to illuminate the nature of imagery itself, or of the cognitive 
mechanisms that generate it. 


This began to change in the early 1970s when Roger Shepard and his
students began to publish experimental demonstrations of the
“mental rotation” of images (e.g., Shepard & Metzler,
1971; Shepard & Cooper et al., 1982). Soon after, Stephen
Kosslyn and his collaborators produced experimental evidence for the
“mental scanning” of visual images, showing that it took
longer for subjects to consciously scan between image features that
were relatively further apart than between those that appeared close
together (Kosslyn, 1973, 1980; Kosslyn, Ball, & Reiser, 1978;
Pinker & Kosslyn, 1978; Pinker, 1980; Finke & Pinker, 1982,
1983; Pinker, Choate, & Finke, 1984; Borst et al., 2006;
Borst & Kosslyn, 2008).


Kosslyn also demonstrated that the subjective sizes of visual mental 
images (and the relative sizes of their sub-parts) measurably affect 
the times it takes to inspect and report on particular details of 
imagined objects. The presence of larger features of an object could 
be reported more quickly (from an image of the object) than smaller 
features. As this size-time relation, did not appear unless 
the subjects used imagery to do the task (i.e., to confirm that some 
named object type has some particular feature or sub-part), these 
experiments provided further evidence for the notion that imagery is 
a sui generis form of mental representation, with distinct 
properties from linguistic or purely conceptual representations 
(Kosslyn, 1975, 1976a, 1976b, 1980). 


Kosslyn and his associates also claim to have experimentally measured
the “visual angle of the mind’s eye”, and to have
mapped differences in acuity across the “visual field” of
imagery, just as one can for the real visual field (Kosslyn, 1978a;
Finke & Kosslyn, 1980; Finke & Kurtzman, 1981a,b; Farah et
al., 1992).


It should be noted that the methodology of many of these experiments
leaves them vulnerable to the charge, pressed by several critics, that
the results reflect not so much the normal workings of cognition, and
the properties of the representational structures (such as mental
images) that enable them, but, rather, what psychologists call the
demand characteristics of the experimental situation (Orne,
1962; Rosnow, 2002)
 (see supplement).
  This is a well-known pitfall of psychological
experimentation with human subjects, and experimenters are, for the
most part, well aware of it, and take what precautions they can to
rule out the possibility that demand characteristics might
significantly influence their findings.  Nevertheless, certain types
of imagery experiment, including most of those discussed in this
section, appear to be particularly susceptible to such influence
(Intons-Peterson, 1983), and it may sometimes be effectively
impossible to rule out the possibility that demand characteristics
have played a large, or even predominant, role in determining the
results. Thus, some of the results obtained in this area of research
remain open to question. This is particularly true of the claims to
have mapped the “visual angle of the mind’s eye” and
the “visual field” of imagery. The demand characteristics
of these experiments, whose results are not supported by any other,
converging, experimental evidence, seem particularly strong, and the
work has thus been the target of particularly severe methodological
criticism (Intons-Peterson & White, 1981; Banks, 1981; Thomas,
2014 p. 153). The work has been defended by Finke & Kurtzman
(1981c; Finke, 1989 ch. 2), and the claims about “visual
angle” continue to be presented as established fact by Kosslyn
(1994; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006), but not everyone may be
convinced. On the other hand, converging evidence from several
different types of experiment seems to have been enough to establish a
consensus amongst most cognitive scientists that the processes of
mental scanning, mental rotation, and the size effects in image
inspection are real and significant components of cognition. 
 Shepard, Kosslyn, and others argued that these results show that
visual mental imagery has inherently spatial properties, and
represents in an “analog” fashion that is quite different
from the way in which language and other symbolic systems represent
(Shepard & Chipman, 1970; Shepard, 1975, 1978b, 1981; 1984;
Kosslyn, 1975, 1980, 1981, 1983, 1994; Kosslyn, Pinker, Smith, &
Shwartz, 1979; Kosslyn, Thompson & Ganis, 2006). However, others,
particularly among those who were strongly committed to a (digital)
computational view of the mind, firmly rejected this conception of
imagery (Simon, 1972; Anderson & Bower, 1973; Baylor, 1973; Moran,
1973; Pylyshyn, 1973, 1978, 1981, 1984, 2001, 2002a,b, 2003a,b,c,
2004, 2007; Hinton, 1979; Slezak, 1995). A lively and high-profile
theoretical debate ensued, about the nature of mental imagery and of
mental representation in general. 


Further discussion of experiments on the spatial properties 
of imagery: 


Supplement: Mental Rotation


Supplement: The Problem of Demand Characteristics in Imagery Experiments


4.4 The Analog-Propositional Debate


The analog-propositional debate, occasionally also called 
the picture-description debate, or sometimes just the 
imagery debate (as if there were no other debatable or hotly
debated issues about imagery) is an ongoing and notoriously
irreconcilable dispute within cognitive science about the
representational format of visual mental imagery.  The huge impact it
had on the early development of the field appears to have resulted in
a widespread belief, amongst both philosophers and cognitive
scientists, that analog and propositional theories (those terms being
understood in the rather special senses that they have acquired in
this context), together, perhaps, with hybrid theories that claim to incorporate
elements of both (e.g., Tye, 1991; Chambers, 1993), completely exhaust the space
of possible or empirically plausible scientific accounts of imagery
(Thomas, 2002). That is not the case, as we shall see
in section 4.5.


To a first approximation, the analog side of the debate holds
that the mental representations that we experience as imagery are, in
some important sense, like pictures, with intrinsically spatial
representational properties of the sort that pictures have (i.e.,
pictures do not just represent spatial relationships between the
objects they depict, but represent those relationships, at least in
part, via actual spatial relationships on the picture surface). The
propositional side, by contrast, holds the relevant mental
representations to be more like linguistic descriptions (of visual
scenes), without inherently spatial properties of their own. Although
it began as a dispute amongst scientists, the debate clearly touches
on fundamental issues about the nature of mind and thought, and
perhaps the nature of science too, so it soon attracted a good deal of
interest from philosophers as well. 


It is good to be aware that the terms analog and 
propositional, although they have become entrenched usage in
this context, are both potentially misleading. On the one hand the 
propositions which are supposed by some to constitute the 
descriptions that constitute imagery, are not really propositions at 
all in the established philosophical sense of the word: rather they 
are a sort of sentence (albeit not sentences natural language, but of
 mentalese).[26]
 On the other hand, the “quasi-pictorial” theory of 
Kosslyn (1980, 1983, 1994, 2005), which has become very much the 
dominant theory on the other side of the debate, in fact models 
mental images as digitized pictures generated within a 
simulation program running on a digital computer (Kosslyn 
& Shwartz, 1977; Kosslyn, 
 1980).[27]



Although the debate began, and was at its fiercest, during the
formative years of the discipline of cognitive science in the 1970s,
it has yet to reach a generally accepted resolution. Despite Kosslyn's
(1994) unilateral declaration of victory for the analog side, the
controversy has flared up anew, and continues in the 21st century
(Slezak, 1995, 2002; Thomas, 1999b, 2002, 2003, 2009; Pylyshyn,
2002a,b, 2003a,b,c, 2004; Kosslyn, Ganis & Thompson, 2003, 2004;
Kosslyn, 2005; Grueter, 2006; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006;
Dulin et al., 2008; Lewis et al., 2011). The
Behavioral and Brain Sciences target article by Kosslyn,
Pinker, Smith, & Shwartz (1979), together with the appended
commentaries, provides a good sense of the debate at its height, and
many of the most important philosophically oriented contributions to
its early stages can be found in two collections edited by Block
(1981a,b).  However, it may be difficult to understand the scientific
and philosophical issues at stake unless one has a sense of the
historical and intellectual context in which the dispute
originated. 


Matters became so hotly contested during the 1970s that some 
participants, most notably Anderson (1978) and Palmer (1975b, 1978), 
came to the conclusion that the disagreement was quite impossible to 
resolve by the methods of scientific psychology, or perhaps at all. 
Indeed, Anderson (1978) offered a formal proof purporting to show 
that the two main contending theories are empirically equivalent. 
Anderson's arguments in particular aroused much interest at the time,
and were themselves vigorously disputed (Hayes-Roth, 1979; Pylyshyn, 
1979b; Cohen, 1996) and defended (Anderson, 1979). However, the main 
debate continued, and it is probably fair to say that most observers 
have come to the conclusion that the empirical equivalence claimed by
Anderson is ultimately not particularly interesting or important. It 
can probably be regarded as just a special case of the well known 
Duhem-Quine underdetermination of theory by evidence: many 
philosophers of science hold that any theory can be made to 
fit any evidence provided one is allowed freely to 
supplement the theory with arbitrary (and perhaps ad hoc, 
complex, and implausible) auxiliary hypotheses, which is essentially 
what Anderson was doing. Nevertheless, the fact that such claims 
could be seriously proposed and discussed is testament to just how 
acrimonious and intractable this debate about imagery had come to 
seem at the time, and how important it was to those involved. The 
very possibility of a science of cognition seemed to be under threat.



Despite this, the debate's focus has, in practice, been quite narrow.
Although it is often understood to be a debate about the nature of
imagery per se, it may more truly be seen as about what
theory of imagery will best account for the facts within the
parameters of a computational functionalist theory of the mind,
i.e., a theory that holds that mental states in general are to be
identified with states of the brain as individuated in terms of their
computational/functional role in cognition. Although
this computational functionalism still has many adherents, it
no longer dominates the philosophy of mind and cognition to the extent
that it once did. However, in the early 1970s it was new and exciting, and
the computational approach to cognitive theory that it sanctioned was
being taken up with great enthusiasm by many psychologists (Baars,
1986; Gardner, 1987). Both the cognitive psychologists and the
functionalist philosophers drew much of their inspiration from
Artificial Intelligence research in the "physical symbol
systems" tradition of what Haugeland has called GOFAI (Good Old
Fashioned AI) (Newell, 1981; Haugeland, 1985).


Initially, the concurrent rises of imagery research and computational
psychology, through the 1960s and into the 1970s, played mutually
reinforcing roles within the cognitivist revolution against
Behaviorism, because they both implied that the concept of mental
representation should play a central role in the science of the
mind. However, a tension soon became apparent between the symbolic and
syntactic concept of mental representation that came from Artificial
Intelligence and the, on the face of it, very different concept of
representation implicit in the work of the imagery researchers. The
analog-propositional debate, and much of the passion and partisanship
it aroused, grew out of that tension, and, more particularly, the
desire to bring imagery within the fold of computational
functionalism. 
4.4.1 Pylyshyn's Critique, and Description Theory


The analog-propositional debate may be said to have begun when this 
tension found its first clear expression, in a very influential 
article by Zenon Pylyshyn 
 (1973).[28]
 Since then, Pylyshyn has continued to extend and defend his critique 
of pictorial (or analog) theories of imagery in many subsequent 
publications (e.g., Pylyshyn, 1978, 1981,1984, 2002a,b,2003a,b, 
2005). Although a number of other cognitive scientists and 
philosophers have taken positions, and made empirical and theoretical
arguments, similar to and supportive of those of Pylyshyn (e.g., 
Anderson & Bower, 1973; Reed, 1974; Palmer, 1975a, 1977; Kieras, 
1978; Hinton, 1979; Lang, 1979; Slezak, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1995, 
2002), and others continue to reject picture theories for different 
reasons (e.g., Neisser, 1979; Heil, 1982; White, 1990; Thomas, 1999b, 2009;
O'Regan & Noë, 2001; Bartolomeo, 2002; Bennett & Hacker,
2003; Bartolomeo et al., 2013), Pylyshyn remains,
indisputably, the best known and most influential critic of pictorial
theories of imagery.


Clearly Pylyshyn objects, as many philosophers have before him, to 
the notion of inner mental pictures that are somehow called to mind 
and reperceived by the “mind's eye”. In his 1973 article 
he raised a number of objections to this notion, some of which have 
withstood criticism better than others, but the underlying worry was 
clearly that the inner-picture theory of imagery inevitably commits 
the homunculus fallacy: it implicitly relies on the assumption that 
there is a little man (or rather, something that is the functional 
equivalent of a full-fledged visual system, including eyes), or, at 
the very least, something with inexplicable mental powers, 
inside the head to reperceive, experience, and interpret the image. 
The broad functional architecture of Kosslyn's theory, in fact, 
closely parallels that of Descartes' account of imagery (see 
 section 2.3.1, and
 Supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery), 
 and, of course, Descartes notoriously relied upon a
conscious homunculus, the immaterial soul, that is placed forever
beyond the reach of natural science. Modern defenders of the
pictorial/analog theory protest that they cannot have committed the
homunculus fallacy (let alone committed themselves to Cartesian
dualism) because a computer model of the theory has been implemented,
and they have outlined an account of how picture-like
representations, formed at an early stage of visual processing in the
brain, are subject to several more stages of neural processing before
they give rise to visual knowledge and experience (Kosslyn, 1980,
1994; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2002, 2006). 


However, their critics remain unconvinced that they have truly even
recognized this pitfall, let alone successfully avoided it (Slezak,
1993, 1995; Thomas, 1999b, 2002, 2003, 2009; Pylyshyn, 2002a,b,
2003a,b,c, 2004, 2007). For instance, the computer simulation just
mentioned (Kosslyn & Shwartz, 1977, 1978; see also Kosslyn, Flynn,
et al., 1990) can do without a homunculus only because the
role of the homunculus is filled for it by the full-sized humans who
program and operate the computer, and who see, and so consciously
experience, the “images” that it outputs to its VDU
screen. What the program actually does is construct and display a
picture on the computer's screen, on the basis of a stored file,
and then move it about on the screen in various ways, in order to
model some of the ways in which people can supposedly manipulate their
mental images (such as in mental rotation and mental scanning). These
“images” are conscious only if, and inasmuch as, a
conscious person sees then on the screen. (The pictures, of which only
two examples were actually programmed into the system, were, in fact,
quite crude “ASCII art”: for an example of one of the
pictures, and a more detailed account of the program and its
capabilities, see Supplement: The
Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery, and its Problems, particularly
figure 2 and its accompanying explanation.) At the time when the
program was written, when computer graphics were in their infancy, and
when few people had ever even seen a computer, it may not have been an
entirely unimpressive achievement. However, nothing in the program
(nor, so far as I am aware, in any computer simulation of a pictorial
theory of imagery written since) implements, or even attempts in any
way to simulate or model, a conscious awareness of the
pictures. Kosslyn & Shwartz (1977) mention that they hope, one
day, to add a “mind’s eye” function to their
simulation, to “look at” the image within the computer, as
it were, but, unsurprisingly (given how difficult an AI problem
naturalistic computer vision turned out to be (Brooks, 1992, 1999)),
this was never done. Arguably, given their assumptions about the
essentially passive nature of the earliest stages of vision, it never
could be (Thomas, 2009, 2014 §5).


As consciousness, nothing in the Kosslyn & Shwartz simulation even
pretends to correspond to a grasp of what it is that the pictures that
it produces represent (or even that they are supposed to be
representations). Only the human onlooker consciously experiences the
pictures, knows that they are pictures, and can tell what
they might be pictures of (Thomas, 2009). If quasi-pictorial theory
were capable of accounting for the representational and conscious
nature of imagery without appealing to a homunculus, then the
Kosslyn-Shwartz program might constitute a heuristically useful (if
crude and preliminary) model of how images might be built up and
transformed. However, despite vehement claims to the contrary (e.g.,
Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 p. 41), the existence of the
program in no way shows that the theory can avoid making the appeal to
a homunculus.


In a subsequent paper, Pylyshyn (1978) introduced an important new
argument against pictorialism, based on the concepts (which he
introduced) of cognitive penetrability
and impenetrability. The distinction between cognitively
impenetrable and cognitively penetrable processes closely parallels
Fodor's later distinction between modularized and unmodularized,
“central” cognitive systems (Fodor, 1983).  Cognitive
processes are said to be cognitively penetrable if their workings can
be affected by the beliefs and goals of the person, and cognitively
impenetrable if they cannot be. Pylyshyn argues (and Fodor (1983)
concurs) that there are good reasons to believe that
“early” visual processing, i.e., the processes by which
visual inputs give rise to beliefs about our surroundings, is
cognitively impenetrable. For example, he points out that
well known visual illusions, such as the Ponzo and Müller-Lyer
illusions, continue to deceive us even when we know perfectly well
that they are illusions (figure 4.4.1_1). The two horizontal
lines in both the Ponzo and the Müller-Lyer figures continue to
look as though they are of different lengths even when we 
have measured them and are quite convinced that they are, in fact, 
the same.







Figure 4.4.1_1 The Ponzo Illusion (left) and 
the Müller-Lyer Illusion (right).  In both cases, the two 
horizontal lines are the same length, but appear to be different 
lengths. 


As Pylyshyn sees it, the view that he rejects, the view that visual 
mental imagery involves a representational format that is peculiarly 
visual and is distinct from the format in which beliefs and 
propositional attitudes in general are represented, amounts to the 
claim that images are generated within this cognitively impenetrable,
“early visual processing” module. If that were the case, 
imagery should be a cognitively impenetrable phenomenon, but it is 
 not.[29]
 The way we experience our mental imagery is clearly affected by our 
beliefs and goals. Not only do we have a large degree of voluntary 
control over the content of our imagery experiences, but it has also 
been experimentally demonstrated that extra-visual beliefs can 
influence the course of supposed imagery processes. For example, the 
times taken to “mentally scan” between different 
landmarks on a mental image of a map (see section 4.3 above) are 
affected not only by the actual relative distances between the points
on the map, but also by information that is verbally given about 
those distances. Subjects tend to take longer to “mentally 
scan” over a distance marked as representing 80 miles than over
a distance marked as 20 miles, even though the actual distances 
depicted on the map (which they have learned and are supposedly 
imagining) are the same (Richman, Mitchell, & Reznick, 1979a,b; 
see also Mitchell & Richman, 1980; Goldston et al., 
1985; Reed, Hock & Lockhead, 1983).


Pylyshyn's views about the cognitive impenetrability of “early 
vision”, the relevance of this to our understanding of imagery,
and the concept of cognitive penetrability/impenetrability itself, 
all remain controversial (see, for example, the commentaries 
published with Pylyshyn (1999)), but he has continued to develop and 
refine the concept (which also has applications outside the imagery 
debate), as well as the associated argument, over many years (e.g., 
Pylyshyn, 1984, 1999, 2002a, 2002b, 2003b).


Pylyshyn also argues (1981, 2002a) that most if not all of the 
experimental evidence that is supposed to show that imagery has 
inherently spatial properties (such as Kosslyn's work on mental 
scanning (Kosslyn, Ball, & Reiser, 1978; Kosslyn, 1980)) can be 
explained away as the result of the interaction of the experimental 
subject's tacit knowledge of the properties of visual 
experience and the experimental instructions. For instance, he holds 
that if subjects are asked to scan their mental gaze from one point to
another on a mental image of a map, what they interpret these 
instructions to be asking them to do is to behave as if they were 
actually looking at the relevant map and scanning their gaze between 
the points. Because they know from their history of ordinary visual 
experience that it takes longer to scan between points that are 
further apart, this will be reflected in their performance. Thus, the
fact that people instructed to scan across their images take longer 
to scan longer distances is not evidence of the existence of some 
inner, mental, image-space. Rather, it is a reflection of people's 
implicit understanding (which they may not necessarily always be able
to articulate) of the visual properties of the actual space around 
them (cf, Morgan, 1979).


Pylyshyn's critics have often been inclined to conflate his tacit
knowledge theory with the view that the results of imagery 
experiments may be fatally contaminated by the effects of 
experimental demand characteristics (see
 supplement).
  However, although he clearly does think experimental demand plays a
large role in determining many of the results on imagery, he resists
this interpretation of his position. He is not saying (as is sometimes
implied) that experimental subjects are, as it were, consciously
faking their performances in order to please the experimenter. Rather
they are doing their best to comply with experimental instructions
that turn upon the slippery concept of mental imagery. The fact that
the subjects and the experimenter may share similar assumptions about
the causes of quasi-visual experience (the “folk theory”
of images as inner pictures), so that both interpret the experiment in
terms of operations on inner pictures in an inner space, is not
evidence that those assumptions are correct. It is generally assumed
that problems caused by demand characteristics can be avoided or
minimized by careful and ingenious experimental design, or by such
tactics as post-experimental questioning of subjects to see if they
have guessed the experimental hypothesis (Kosslyn, for one, routinely
throws out data from subjects who guess this correctly). However,
Pylyshyn is not saying that what might otherwise be meaningful
experimental results are “contaminated” by the effects of
demand characteristics, so such “decontamination” tactics
are not very relevant. Rather, the problem lies with the basic
conceptualization of the phenomena and the experimental tasks (by
experimenter and subject alike).


Of course, Pylyshyn was far from the first person to raise objections
to the idea of inner pictures, or to criticize the standard 
interpretations of imagery experiments. What made his critique 
particularly effective was that he began, both in his 1973 article 
and in subsequent writings (e.g., Pylyshyn, 1978, 1981, 1984, 2003b),
to sketch out an alternative, non-pictorial account of the nature of 
mental imagery. Instead of being like pictorial representations of a 
visual scene, he suggested, images might better be thought of as 
being a sort of description (sometimes referred to as a 
“structural description”) of that scene. At last, there seemed to be a viable
alternative to the pictorial conception of imagery that had dominated
folk, philosophical, and psychological thinking about imagery since 
ancient 
 times.[30]
 Philosophers such as Shorter (1952) and Dennett (1969) (who both base
their position on the oft repeated, but almost certainly unsound,
argument from image indeterminacy, or “tiger's stripes” argument) had
anticipated Pylyshyn in suggesting that mental images might be more
like descriptions than
 pictures.[31]
  However, Pylyshyn was able to make the idea much more concrete and
plausible by linking it with concepts of the nature of mental
representation that were emerging from Artificial Intelligence
research.  Particularly important for Pylyshyn was the work of Simon
(1972) and Newell (1972), and their students Baylor (1973) and Moran
(1973), who had already made some progress in devising symbol systems
suitable for the computational representation of the spatial structure
of simple layouts or objects (such as rectangular blocks). They
explicitly presented these representations as models of the image
representations that people use in doing certain visuo-spatial
cognitive
 tasks.[32]
 By presenting these ideas as the germ of
an alternative to the venerable but highly problematic conception of
images as inner pictures, Pylyshyn was able to make a powerful
case.


In his original (1973) article, Pylyshyn alludes to a number of 
disparate schemes developed by various computer scientists, for the 
computational representation of visual information, and it is perhaps
not altogether clear what these have in common as alternatives to a 
pictorial conception of imagery. This was very much clarified, 
however, when Fodor (1975) introduced the hypothesis of 
mentalese, the “language of thought” (see 
 Language of Thought Hypothesis),
 a syntactically structured representational system innate to the 
human brain, which Fodor argued, was, in some form, implicitly 
required by all coherent computational functionalist theories of 
cognition. The vocabulary and syntax of mentalese (if it exists) 
remain unknown, but they are likely to be very different from those 
of English or any other natural (actually spoken) language. 
Nevertheless, Fodor holds that any cognitive theory capable of 
accounting for the full range of human mental capacities is bound to 
make appeal to some such inner language. Pylyshyn has embraced this 
hypothesis (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988), and, in the light of that, 
we can say that his view of the nature of imagery is that it consists
of descriptions, in mentalese, of visual objects or scenes. (This 
means, of course, that Pylyshyn's positive view of imagery – 
description theory – is viable only if the controversial 
language of thought hypothesis is true. However, many of 
Pylyshyn's objections to pictorial theories of imagery might still 
stand even if this were not the case.) 


Fodor did not, however, embrace Pylyshyn's objections to 
pictorial mental imagery. Although he holds that pictorial 
representations are not sufficient to support cognition on 
their own, and are probably dependent on associated mentalese 
representations for playing any cognitive roles that they do play, he
nevertheless argues against some philosophical objections to mental 
 pictures,[33]
 and thinks that the empirical evidence (from psychologists such as 
Paivio and Shepard) suggests that images do in fact play a real role 
in our cognitive processes (Fodor, 1975 pp.174–194).


It is sometimes objected that a description theory, like Pylyshyn's, 
is incompatible with the phenomenology of imagery (e.g., Fodor, 1975 
p. 188). After all, having a mental image of a cat does not seem 
anything like reciting a description of a cat to oneself. However, 
this seems to be based on having drawn too close an analogy between 
the mentalese descriptions intended by the theory and descriptions in
English (or other natural languages). In the first place, although we
can be conscious of English sentences as such, we are (pretty much 
ex hypothesis) never conscious of our mentalese 
representations as such, but only (at most) of what they represent. 
Thus there is no reason to expect that entertaining a mentalese 
description would subjectively seem anything at all like reciting, or
reading, or otherwise thinking of a description in English. In the 
second place, Pylyshyn presumably holds (quite consistently with mainstream 
“information processing” theories of perception (e.g., 
Marr, 1982)) that percepts, the end products of visual processing in 
the brain, are also mentalese descriptions. Thus his theory readily 
accounts for the phenomenological similarity between imagery and 
perceptual experience. (If, as seems likely, the perceptual 
descriptions are typically more detailed than those of imagery, this 
might also account for any phenomenological 
differences between imagery and perception.)


This introspectively based argument against description theory, weak
though it is, is often prelude to the even stronger claim that the
phenomenology of imagery directly supports the view that mental images
are inner pictures. After all, it is said, in contrast to
reciting a description to oneself, having a mental image of (say) a
cat does seem very much like seeing a picture of a
cat. Although some people seem to find this argument tempting (e.g.,
Sterelny, 1986; Lewis et al., 2011), it does not stand up to
much examination (Block,1983a; Tye, 1991; Thompson, 2007). There is
little or nothing to the alleged similarity between the experience of
having a mental image of a cat and that of seeing a picture of a cat,
apart from the fact that both these experiences in some ways resemble
the experience of actually seeing a cat, and both differ from
it in that no cat need actually be present. Pictures and mental images
also differ in important ways. It is generally possible, for instance,
to turn over a picture and look at its blank backside, to examine its
surface for marks (such as scratches or dirt) that do not have a
depictive role, or to look at its flat surface from an oblique angle
so that what it depicts appears distorted. You cannot do such things
with a mental image. (You can of course, imagine looking at a picture
in those ways, but then you are not turning over your mental image in
your mind, or looking at its surface, rather, you are forming an image
of a picture being turned over, of the back of the picture, or an
image of a picture’s surface as seen in a certain way.)  It is true
that pictures (paintings, drawings, photographs, videos, etc.) provide
a familiar and relatively well understood example of how we can have
an experience as of seeing something that is not actually
present. Indeed, pictures (and sculptures) may be our only familiar
example of this, apart from mental imagery itself. However, it does
not follow that mental images must therefore be a species of
picture. The easy analogy may be a false one. Mental images, after
all, are not similar to pictures in many other respects: you
cannot turn them over and look at the back of them; they do not need
to be in front of your eyes for you to see them; they do not normally
seem to be located on a surface; and there is little reason to think
that they are normally flat (and, indeed, good reason, experimental as
well as introspective, to think otherwise (Shepard & Metzler,
1971; Pinker & Kosslyn, 1978; Pinker, 1980; Pinker &
Finke,1980; Kerr, 1987)). 
4.4.2 The Defense of Analog Imagery


In fact, neither Paivio nor Shepard, who were undoubtedly the best 
known imagery researchers at the time Pylyshyn published his initial 
(1973) critique, were committed to the straightforward picture theory
of imagery that he seemed to be criticizing. Paivio, in response to 
Pylyshyn, quite explicitly rejected the picture metaphor (and related
ones, such as the photograph and the wax impression), and suggested, 
instead, that imagery is “a dynamic process more like 
active perception than a passive recorder of 
experience” (Paivio, 
 1977).[34]
 (Unfortunately, however, that is about as explicit as he ever gets 
about his positive view of the nature of imagery.) Shepard, although 
he continued to write about the “analog” nature of image 
representations, and to insist on the “second order 
isomorphism” between objects and the brain processes that 
constitute mental images of them (Shepard, 1975, 1978b, 1981, 1984), 
was also very wary of the picture metaphor, suggesting instead that 
imagery was related to perceptual anticipation or readiness to 
recognize (Shepard, 1978b; cf. Cooper, 1976).


Two other important early critics of Pylyshyn's position were Ulric 
Neisser and Ronald Finke. Neisser developed the notion of imagery as 
perceptual readiness or anticipation into a theory of imagery 
explicitly opposed to both the picture and description theories 
(Neisser, 1976, 1978a, b; 1979 – see section 4.5 below). 
Finke's experimental work on visual illusions and aftereffects 
induced by imagery (Finke, 1979, 1989 ch. 2; Finke & Schmidt, 
1977, 1978) suggested that Pylyshyn was wrong to argue that imagery 
does not make use of the “cognitively impenetrable” 
mechanisms of “early” visual 
 processing,[35]
 and he argued that there is evidence for functional equivalences 
between imagery and perception (i.e., shared mechanisms) at multiple 
levels or stages of perceptual processing (Finke, 1980, 1985, 1986, 
1989).


Neither Paivio nor Shepard, nor, indeed, Neisser, shared the 
assumptions of the computational functionalist framework from within 
which Pylyshyn was arguing: Paivio developed a metatheoretical 
framework that remained rooted in Behaviorist empiricism, and which 
he called “neomentalism” or “behavioral 
mentalism” (1975c, 1986); Shepard speculated about the neural 
basis of imagery in a style reminiscent of the speculative 
neuroscience of Gestalt field 
 theory[36]
 (Shepard, 1981, 1984); and Neisser aligned himself with the 
ecological psychology of J.J. Gibson (1966, 
 1979).[37]
 In this regard, Pylyshyn was much more in step than they were with 
the direction in which cognitive science was going at the time. 
However, Stephen Kosslyn soon intervened in the debate, proposing a 
theory of visual imagery that was both explicitly computational and 
overtly pictorialist (or, as he prefers, quasi-pictorial), 
based on an analogy with computer graphics programs (which were a 
fairly new thing back then) (Kosslyn, 
 1975).[38]
 Before long, a flood of theoretical and empirical publications from 
Kosslyn and his collaborators, including several books (Kosslyn, 
1980, 1983, 1994; Kosslyn & Koenig, 1992), had established him as
clearly the pre-eminent figure of the debate, alongside Pylyshyn. As 
the leading figures on each side were now both firmly wedded to the 
theoretical framework of computational 
 functionalism,[39]
 the debate's scope was, in practice, greatly narrowed by this 
development, even as its intensity and contentiousness (and 
notoriety) grew. It developed not into an open ended inquiry into the
nature and causes of imagery, but a manichean struggle between the 
computational pictorialism championed by Kosslyn and his supporters, 
and the computational description theory still most ably and 
enthusiastically represented by Pylyshyn. 


In what remains one of the most effective critiques of Pylyshyn's
position, Kosslyn & Pomerantz (1977; see also Kosslyn, 1980 ch.
1), besides going point-by-point through Pylyshyn's original (1973)
arguments, and answering many of them very persuasively, go on to
compare how a description theory and a quasi-pictorial theory like
that proposed by Kosslyn (1975) might respectively explain various
alleged “imagery effects” such as mental rotation,
selective interference, and the mental scanning and size/inspection
time effects discovered by Kosslyn himself. (It ought to be noted,
however, that this discussion largely depends on the speculative
ascription of straw-man accounts of these, at the time newly
discovered, effects to Pylyshyn, or to description theorists in
general. In fact, Pylyshyn’s actual, subsequently published, account
of mental scanning, for example (Pylyshyn, 1981, 2002a), does not
resemble the straw-man set up by Kosslyn & Pomerantz in the least;
neither, so far as I am aware, has any other theorist ever seriously
defended anything remotely resembling it. Despite this, Kosslyn has
continued to set up and knock down this same straw-man, as a
centerpiece of his critique of “propositional theory”, in
subsequent writings (e.g., Kosslyn, 1994 pp. 8 & 12; Kosslyn,
Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 p. 28)). The general conclusion reached by
Kosslyn & Pomerantz was that description (propositional) theories
could only explain these effects by making ad hoc auxiliary
assumptions about how the propositional (mentalese) code is organized
and processed, whereas the explanations of quasi-pictorial theory flow
naturally from the core theory itself.  Indeed, they pointed out, it
was pictorial conceptions of imagery, not “propositional”
ones, that had suggested to psychologists that these effects might
exist, and that it would be worthwhile devising experiments to confirm
them. Pictorial theories had shown themselves to be scientifically
fruitful in a way that description theories had not.


On the face of things, description theory predicts that imagery 
should depend upon the mechanisms and brain structures that subserve 
conceptual, non-imaginal thought, and not those that subserve 
perception. Indeed, one of Pylyshyn's favorite arguments against 
pictorial images turns on his view that perception (but not imagery) 
depends upon a “cognitively impenetrable,” highly 
modularized cognitive system (see
 section 4.4.1).
  Thus it can be (and has been) argued that it is difficult, or at the
least very awkward, for the description theorist to account for a
wealth of empirical findings from neuroscience research that indicate
that there is a good deal of overlap between the neural structures and
cognitive mechanisms involved in imagery and those involved in
perception (Kosslyn, 1994, 2005; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006;
Kosslyn & Thompson, 2003; Bartolomeo, 2002; Kosslyn, Ganis, &
Thompson, 2001; Kreiman, Koch, & Freid, 2000; Bisiach & Berti,
1990; Farah, 1988). Although a strong case can be made that (despite
superficial appearances) these neuroscientific findings
do not provide strong evidence in favor of the
quasi-pictorial (or any other pictorial) theory of imagery (Thomas, 1999b; Abell &
Currie, 1999; Pylyshyn, 2002a,b, 2003a,b; Bartolomeo, 2002), it does not
follow that description theory can readily assimilate them. 


(Incidentally, although it was once widely believed that visual 
imagery in humans was primarily a function of the right 
hemisphere of the brain (e.g., Ley, 1983), more recent research 
contradicts this. It now appears that imagery involves structures on 
both sides of the brain, with, if anything, the left 
hemisphere playing a slightly more extensive role (Ehrlichman & 
Barrett, 1983; Farah, 1984, 1995; Sergent, 1990; Tippett, 1992; 
Trojano & Grossi, 1994; Loverock & Modigliani, 1995; 
Michimata, 1997).)


As well as having continued to duel with Pylyshyn and other critics,
Kosslyn has continued to develop his quasi-pictorial theory of
imagery, initially as a computational model (Kosslyn & Shwartz,
1977, 1978; Kosslyn, Pinker, Smith, & Shwartz, 1979: Kosslyn,
1980, 1981), and latterly as a neurological one (Kosslyn, 1988, 1994,
2005; Kosslyn, Ganis, & Thompson, 2001; Kosslyn, Thompson, &
Ganis, 2006). He calls the theory
quasi-pictorial, to avoid the implication that he thinks 
images are pictures in too literal and implausible a sense. 
Quasi-pictures are not the sort of thing that can be hung on a wall 
(Kosslyn, 1978b), and you do not need actual eyes inside the head 
looking at them in order to experience them. Nevertheless, they 
remain like pictures in many important respects. It remains 
controversial whether there can be a coherent notion of a 
quasi-picture that both retains the explanatorily useful properties of
true pictures (such as their inherent spatiality, and their capacity 
to cause visual experiences as of what they represent) and, at the 
same time, lacks those properties that make it impossible for true 
pictures to be mental, or even neural, representations (such as 
needing to be illuminated and before our eyes in order to be 
experienced).


It is clearly Pylyshyn's opinion that there is no such notion, and 
that much of the superficial plausibility of quasi-pictorial theory 
depends upon an equivocation between the relatively well understood 
concept of a picture in the everyday sense, and the essentially 
non-pictorial notion of an array data structure (Pylyshyn, 1981, 
2002a, 2003b). The literal picture in the head theory appeals to our 
folk-theoretical intuitions, makes interesting predictions, and has 
the resources to be genuinely explanatory, but it is demonstrably 
false. On the other hand, the data-structure theory (to which 
quasi-pictorialists retreat when literal pictorialism is challenged) 
is really just a version of Pylyshyn's own description theory, and, 
properly understood, has none of the special intuitive, explanatory, 
or predictive advantages that picture theorists claim for their 
views. Any apparent similarity between pictures and two-dimensional 
array data structures is, according to Pylyshyn, no more than an 
artifact of the way we customarily present such arrays on paper (or 
screen) for the benefit of human eyes. It has nothing to do with 
their actual mathematical properties, or with how they might function
in cognition.


Despite Pylyshyn's criticisms, however, many philosophers have 
clearly been impressed by Kosslyn's work. Some have directly defended
the quasi-pictorial theory of imagery, attempting to clarify the 
notion of a quasi-picture, and to show that it has real content (von 
Eckardt, 1984, 1988, 1993; Tye, 1988, 1991; Cohen, 1996). Others are 
more circumspect, or less committed to the specifics of Kosslyn's 
theory, but are now persuaded to countenance the possibility of 
picture-like mental representations of some sort (e.g. Sober, 1976; 
Block, 1981a, 1981b, 1983a, 1983b; Bower, 1984; Sterelny, 1986; 
Rollins, 1989, 2001; Mortensen, 1989; Dennett, 1991; Brann, 1991). 
Yet others, however, for reasons discussed in the previous section 
(and the following supplement), remain entirely unpersuaded (e.g., 
Heil, 1982, 1998; White, 1990; Slezak, 1993, 1995, 2002; Thomas, 
1997a, 1999b, 2002, 2003, 2009; Bennett & Hacker, 2003). 


Further discussion of the analog-propositional debate:  

Supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery, and its Problems

4.5 Beyond Pictures and Propositions


Reading most of the recent philosophical literature on imagery (and, 
it must be admitted, most of the broader cognitive science 
literature, especially textbooks) one might easily form the 
impression that quasi-pictures and "propositional" 
descriptions are the only possible theoretical models for imagery, 
or, at least, the only ones ever seriously proposed or considered. 
This is not the case, however.The analog-propositional debate arose, 
and was at its height, in the 1970s, when cognitive theories based 
upon symbolic computation seemed to many to be “the only game 
in town” in cognitive science (Fodor, 1975; Haugeland, 1978), 
and the quasi-pictorial and propositional models are both products of
this mileu. Even in the 70s, however, a number of alternative, 
non-computational accounts of imagery were being put forward. On the 
one hand, Taylor (1973) and Skinner (1974) looked for ways to 
assimilate imagery into Behaviorism. On the other, several cognitive 
psychologists suggested versions of what may be called 
enactive (or sensorimotor, or perceptual 
 activity)[40]
 imagery theories (Hochberg, 1968; Hebb, 1968, 1969; Gibson, 1970, 
1979; Juhasz 1969, 1972; Sarbin & Juhasz, 1970; Sarbin, 1972; 
Neisser, 1976, 1978a, 
 b).[41]
 Although this work had little impact at the time, more recently, 
spurred by related developments in perceptual theory, there has been 
some revival of interest in theories of this type. 
4.5.1 Enactive Theories of Perception and Imagery


Enactive theories of imagery may be seen as modern successors to the 
motor theories of the early twentieth century (see 
 Supplement: The American Response: Behaviorist Iconophobia and Motor Theories of Imagery).
They depend the idea that perception is not mere passive
receptivity (or even receptivity plus inner processing), but a form of
action, something done by the organism (Thomas 1999b, 2014
§5; O’Regan & Noë, 2001; Findlay & Gilchrist,
2003; Noë 2004, 2009; Land & Tatler, 2009; O’Regan,
2011). The perceiving organism is not merely registering but exploring
and asking questions of its environment (Ellis, 1995),
actively and intentionally (though not necessarily with conscious
volition) seeking out the answers in the sensory stimuli that surround
it.[42] Imagery is
then experienced when someone persists in acting out the seeking of
some particular information even though they cannot reasonably expect
it to be there. We have imagery of, say, a cat, when we go through
(some of) the motions of looking at something and determining that it
is a cat, even though there is no cat (and perhaps nothing relevant at
all) there to be seen. Visually imagining a cat is seeing
nothing-in-particular as a cat (Thomas, 1999b, 2003, 2009;
cf. Ishiguro, 1967).


Farley (1974, 1976) developed a computer simulation inspired by 
Hochberg's version of enactive theory, and Hampson & Morris 
(1978, 1979; Morris & Hampson, 1983) discussed and critiqued 
Neisser's version (which was undoubtedly the most detailed). However,
with those exceptions, in the 1970s and 80s the enactive approach to 
imagery attracted very little attention. It was not just that these 
non-computational theories seemed irrelevant to psychologists and 
philosophers whose focus was on integrating imagery into the 
prevalent (symbolic, GOFAI (Haugeland, 1985)) computational model of 
the mind. More specifically, the enactive theories do not fit 
comfortably, if at all, into the framework of computational 
information processing theory that shaped most scientists' 
thinking about perception and perceptual experience. Information 
processing theories come in many varieties, but they all, broadly 
speaking, depict the sense organs as passive transducers of stimulus 
energies (light, sound, etc.), whose outputs are then computationally
processed and enriched, in the brain, into meaningful mental 
representations (Lindsay & Norman, 1972; Haber, 1974; Frisby, 
1979; Marr, 1982; Pylyshyn, 
 2003b; Boothe, 2002).[43]
 Kosslyn's quasi-pictorial theory and Pylyshyn's description theory of
imagery were both designed to fit this framework. They differ merely 
in that Kosslyn holds that the representations comprising imagery are
formed at an early stage of visual processing, whereas Pylyshyn holds
that they are formed at a late stage. This difference, however, gave 
rise to the impassioned analog-propositional debate, whose sound and 
fury only served to further distract attention from theoretical 
alternatives that did not fit the information processing 
 paradigm.[44]



But it is well known that GOFAI style symbolic computationalism did 
not remain the “only game in town” in cognitive science 
for long. Since the mid 1980s its hegemony has been repeatedly 
challenged, first by connectionism (e.g., Rumelhart, McClelland et 
al., 1986; Clarke, 1989), then by various versions of situated or 
embodied approaches to cognition (e.g., Varela et al., 1991;
Smith, 1991; Clancey, 1997; Clark, 1997), by dynamical systems theory
(e.g., Freeman & Skarda, 1990; Port & van Gelder, 1995; van 
Gelder, 1995; Garson, 1996), and by cognitive neuroscience (e.g., 
Kosslyn & Koenig, 1992; Gazzaniga, 2004).


Connectionism did not challenge the information processing view of
perception, however, and thus proved of little significance for
imagery theory, inspiring little more than a handful of variants of
quasi-pictorial array theory (Julstrom & Baron, 1985; Mel, 1986,
1990; Stucki & Pollack, 1992). The robotic system Murphy,
designed by Mel (1990), has some interesting features in that it
combines such a connectionist model of visual imagery with a model of
trial-and-error learning of motor control, wherein information in the
putative image is used to control the reaching behavior of a robotic
arm (although it is not obvious that imagery, as distinct from visual
perception, plays any such role in human reaching). Grush (2004)
adopts this model as the basis of his own account of visual mental
imagery, within the wider context of his “emulation”
theory of cognition. Nevertheless, Mel and Grush continue to conceive
of the image itself as being a two dimensional array of elements, just
as the quasi-pictorial theory of Kosslyn does, and, indeed, in support
of their models both Mel and Grush follow Kosslyn in appealing to
evidence about the spatial properties of imagery and about the
involvement of visual areas of the brain in imagery. Thus, despite the
fact that Mel and Grush situate their accounts of imagery in the
context of motor control rather than of visual cognition, they remain
quasi-pictorial accounts, and are, in most respects, considerably less
developed than (though perhaps consistent with) the version of
quasi-pictorial theory developed by Kosslyn. As such, they share most
of the virtues of Kosslyn's version, and are subject to the same
objections (see supplement: The
Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery, and its Problems).


Dynamical systems theory has also had relatively little to say about imagery,
although Freeman (1983) has sketched an account of olfactory imagery
in terms of neural dynamics. He explicitly distances himself from both sides
of the analog-propositional debate, and makes appeal instead to the concept
of search
image as
used in the science of Behavioral Ecology. A search image is (to a
first approximation) a specific, learned recognitional capacity, or a form
of selective attention, that leads a predator species to recognize
and preferentially prey upon members of the more abundant prey species in its
environment, whilst largely failing to notice less abundant types of potential
prey (Tinbergen, 1960; Atema et
al., 1980;
Lawrence & Allen, 1983; Langley, 1996; Blough, 2002). However, it is less
than clear that Freeman is justified in conflating this concept of search
image with that of
mental image, as used in folk psychology and cognitive science.


It is mainly the rise of situated and embodied approaches to cognition
that has challenged the information processing approach to perception,
and enabled the re-emergence and further development of enactive
imagery theory. During the 1980s, robotics researchers interested in
creating robots to operate in real wold environments were finding that
getting a machine to process information from sensory transducers into
an internal representation of its surroundings that would provide a
suitable basis for action planning was a very difficult computational
problem. Indeed, some became convinced that, even if it could be done
in principle, in practice the process would be unacceptably slow,
unreliable, and computationally expensive (by the time the robot knew
what was going on, things would have changed). Thus, there was a turn
toward “active” (or “animate”) techniques in
robotic perception. Instead of attempting to build up detailed
internal representations of their environment, robots began to be
designed to deploy their sensors purposively, to actively seek out
just the specific information needed at that particular moment for
making an impending behavioral decision (e.g., Bajcsy, 1988; Ballard,
1991; Blake & Yuille, 1992; Aloimonos, 1993; Swain & Stricker,
1993; Nolfi & Marocco, 2002; Lungarella & Sporns, 2006; Suzuki
& Floreano, 2008; Rasolzadeh et al., 2010; Seekircher
et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2011; Aydemir et
al., 2013). 


At around the same time, a number of neuroscientists, perceptual
psychologists, and philosophers began, for diverse reasons, to
converge on a similar view of human vision (Ramachandran, 1990;
O'Regan, 1992; Churchland et al., 1994; Akins, 1996;
Cotterill, 1997; Thomas, 1999b, 2009; Hayhoe, 2000; O'Regan &
Noë, 2001; Noë, 2002, 2004, 2009). Studies of (amongst other
things) exploratory perceptual behaviors such as eye movements
(Yarbus, 1967; Noton & Stark, 1971a,b; Landy et al.,
1996; Hayhoe & Ballard, 2005), and recently recognized perceptual
effects such as change blindness (Grimes, 1996; Simons &
Levin, 1997; O'Regan, 2003) and inattentional blindness
(Neisser & Becklen, 1975; Mack & Rock, 1998, 1999; Simons
& Chabris, 1999; Eitam et al., 2013; Hyman et
al., 2014), cast doubt on the traditional idea that a rich and
detailed inner representation of the visual scene mediates our visual
consciousness.  Instead, some now argue that perception depends on a
multitude of special purpose neural and behavioral structures and/or
routines (Ullman, 1984; Ramachandran, 1990; Thomas, 1999b, 2009;
Roelfsema et al., 2000; Hayhoe, 2000; Roelfsema, 2005), each
of which actively utilizes the sensory transducers (eyes, ears, etc.)
in a different way in order to obtain specific types of information as
and when needed. We do not have our sense of the immediate perceptual
presence of the world because we have a representation of it in our
heads, but rather because these routines operate (for the most part)
so quickly and effortlessly that virtually as soon as we want to know
some perceptually available fact, we are able to discover it.[45]



Although this way of thinking about perception remains a minority
view, and certainly does not dominate perceptual theory in the way
that information processing theory once did, it has nevertheless
created a theoretical space in which an enactive/motor theory of
imagery can be more plausibly entertained, and various versions of
such theory have indeed been broached again, by thinkers from a
diverse range of disciplines (Thomas, 1987, 1997b, 1999b, 2009, 2014;
Newton, 1993, 1996; Ellis, 1995; Ramachandran & Hirstein, 1997 p.
442; Marks, 1990, 1999; Bartolomeo, 2002; Bartolomeo & Chokron,
2002; Blain, 2006; Sima, 2011, 2013, 2014; Sima & Freksa, 2012; De
Preester, 2012; Agnati et al., 2013; Troscianko, 2010, 2013,
2014a,b; Bartolomeo et al., 2013).  Thomas (1999b) argues
that enactive theory can explain experimental cognitive psychology's
findings about imagery (see sections 4.2 and 4.3 above) at least as
well as the better-known quasi-pictorial and
propositional/description theories, and, indeed, that it
handles the facts about imagery in the blind and image reconstrual
(see
 Supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery)
 in a more principled and plausible way than
they do. It has also been argued that enactive theory can provide a
more satisfactory explanation of the neurological evidence about
imagery (i.e., the ways imagery experience and abilities may be
impacted by various forms of brain damage), and, in particular, the
syndrome of representational neglect (see
 Supplement: Representational Neglect)
 than other theories can (Bartolomeo, 2002; Bartolomeo
& Chokron, 2002; Dulin et al., 2008). 


Other relevant evidence comes from studies of eye movements during
imagery. Saccades are quick, mostly unconscious, flicks of the eyes,
which are now known to play an important role not only in vision, but
in visual imagery as well. In normal human vision they occur, on
average, three or more times every second (Richardson & Spivey,
2004; Holmqvist et al., 2011), and play a vital role in our
visual system's exploration of the visual world, and the extraction of
information from it. The pattern of our saccadic movements is
purposeful, under cognitive control, and depends both on what we are
looking at, and on what visual information we hope to obtain, on the
purpose behind our looking (Yarbus, 1967; Noton & Stark, 1971a,b;
Stark & Ellis, 1981; Findlay & Gilchrist, 2003; Hayhoe &
Ballard, 2005; Rucci et al., 2007; Rothkopf et al.,
2007; Martinez-Conde & Macknik, 2007; Trommershäuser et
al., 2009). Although the scientific study of saccades began well
over a century ago, in recent years technological advances in
eye-tracking technology have led to a rapid growth in understanding
and appreciation of the large role that they play in human vision
(Richardson & Spivey, 2004; Wade & Tatler, 2005; Holmqvist
et al., 2011; Thomas, 2014 §5). It has also become
apparent that saccades (and perhaps other types of eye movement too)
play a significant role in visual mental imagery. Numerous recent
experimental studies have shown that, when people hold a visual image
in mind, they spontaneously and unconsciously make saccadic eye
movements that (at least partially) enact the stimulus-specific
pattern of such movements that they would make if actually looking at
the equivalent visual stimulus (Brandt & Stark, 1997; Demarais
& Cohen, 1998; Spivey et al., 2000; Spivey & Geng,
2001; Gbadamosi & Zangemeister, 2001; Laeng & Teodorescu,
2002; de’Sperati, 2003; Johansson et al., 2005, 2006,
2010, 2012; Humphrey & Underwood, 2008;
Holšánová, 2010; Holšánová
et al., 2010; Sima et al., 2010; Bourlon et
al., 2011; Fourtassi et al., 2011, 2013; Johansson,
2013; Johansson & Johansson, 2014; Laeng et al., 2014;
see also Clark, 1916; Jacobson, 1932; Totten, 1935; Altmann, 2004;
Martarelli & Mast, 2011).



Furthermore, imagery is disrupted (to a greater or lesser degree) if
someone who is holding an image in their mind either restrains
themselves (to the limited degree that this is possible) from making
eye movements, or else deliberately moves their eyes in an
image-irrelevant way, thus disrupting the spontaneous saccadic pattern
(Antrobus et al., 1964; Singer & Antrobus, 1965; Sharpley
et al., 1996; Andrade et al., 1997; Ruggieri, 1999;
van den Hout et al., 2001, 2011; Kavanagh et al.,
2001; Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002; Barrowcliff et al., 2004;
Postle et al., 2006; Kemps & Tiggemann, 2007; Maxfield
et al., 2008; Lee & Drummond, 2008; Gunter & Bodner,
2008; Lilley et al., 2009; Jonikaitis et al., 2009;
Engelhard et al., 2010, 2011; Laeng et al.,
2014). This issue has been much researched lately, not so much because
of its significance for our understanding of imagery, but because of
its possible relevance to the understanding of the psychotherapeutic
technique known as EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitization and
Reprocessing), which is widely used in the treatment of Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD), and which may perhaps owe its effectiveness
largely to the fact that deliberate eye movements tend to disrupt any
concurrent imagery. In EMDR treatment, patients are induced to
deliberately move their eyes back and forth whilst visually recalling
the events that have traumatized them; it is claimed that this leads
to a significant reduction in the vividness of their memories of those
events, and of the distress, and consequent symptoms, that those
memories cause (Shapiro, 1989a, 1989b, 2001; Shapiro & Forrest,
1997; Mollon, 2005). Studies of therapeutic outcomes seem to bear out
claims for EMDR’s effectiveness (Carlson et al., 1998;
Van Etten & Taylor, 1998; Shepherd et al., 2000; Power
et al., 2002; Ironson et al., 2002; Bradley et
al., 2005; APA, 2006; Bisson et al., 2007; Högberg
et al., 2007, 2008; van der Kolk et al., 2007;
Rodenburg et al., 2009; Kemp et al., 2010).



Although the mechanisms and real therapeutic effectiveness of EMDR
remain controversial (for negative opinions, see: Lohr et
al., 1998, 1999; McNally, 1999; Herbert et al., 2000;
Davidson & Parker, 2001; Taylor et al., 2003; Justman,
2011; – for defenses and more positive assessments see: Perkins
& Rouanzoin, 2002; Schubert & Lee, 2009; Gunter & Bodner,
2009; Cukor et al., 2010), the disruptive effect of
deliberate eye movement upon visual imagery appears to be well
established, and it implies that the eye movements that spontaneously
occur when people visualize things (or, at the least, the brain
processes that initiate and control these movements) are not mere
accompaniments or epiphenomena of the imagery, but are (as enactive
theory would lead one to expect) a true, functionally significant part
of the physiological process that embodies
 it.[46] (However, Mast &
Kosslyn (2002b) argue that the eye-movement evidence can also be
accommodated to quasi-pictorial 
theory.[47])



Kosslyn, Thompson, Sukel, & Alpert (2005; see also Kosslyn,
Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 pp. 90–92) report an experiment in
which subjects were asked to recall mental images of simple
geometrical arrangements while PET scans of their brains were
taken. Although all subjects formed images of the same figures, some
originally formed them on the basis of verbal descriptions, whereas
others were shown separate segments of the entire structure to be
visualized, and asked to assemble them mentally into the complete
figure. The PET scan was not taken at the time the images were
originally formed in one or other of these ways, but when they were
later recalled. According to the experimenters, enactive theory holds
that when someone recalls a mental image they re-enact what they did
at the time of its original formation, and since the two subject
groups originally formed their images in very different ways, the
theory predicts that the two groups should display radically different
patterns of brain activation at the time of recall.  In fact, however,
no marked differences were seen.



This is claimed to constitute a refutation of the enactive theory. It
rests, however, on a demonstrable misunderstanding of the theory. No
version of enactive imagery theory holds (either explicitly or
implicitly) what these experimenters claim it holds: that recall of
mental imagery is constituted by re-enactment of whatever was the
original act of image formation. What enactive theory in fact holds is
that imagery (recalled or otherwise) is constituted by (partial)
enactment of the perceptual acts that would be carried out
if one were actually perceiving whatever is being imagined
(Johansson et al., 2010, 2012; Laeng et al.,
2014). It is true that in the most straightforward and paradigmatic
case of mental image formation – the direct recall of an earlier
perceptual experience of something – enactment of what one
would be doing if actually perceiving that thing is
equivalent to re-enactment of what one did during the
original perceptual episode. However, this equivalence clearly breaks
down in most other circumstances, including those of the experiment in
question.  Since both groups of subjects in the experiment under
discussion were supposed to be recalling an image of the same
geometrical pattern when their brains were scanned, enactive theory
actually predicts that the neural activity due to the recalled image
should be much the same in each group, just as was found.



Quite apart from empirical evidence, certain distinctively
philosophical advantages have been claimed for enactive theory. It has
been suggested that it is better able than its rivals to explain
imaginal consciousness (Ellis, 1995; Thomas, 1999b, 2001, 2009;
Bartolomeo, 2002), and Thomas (1987, 1997a, 1999b, 2014) argues that
enactive theory can provide the basis for an understanding of the
concept of imagination, whereas quasi-pictorial theory and
description theory cannot (see also: Blain, 2006; Agnati et
al., 2013; Thomas,
 2014).[48] 
Troscianko (2010, 2013, 2014a,b) appears to
agree, and, rejecting picture theory, uses the enactive theory of
imagery as a framework for her investigation into how literary texts
can imaginatively affect their readers. Traditionally, both
philosophers and the folk have thought of the imagination as a mental
faculty responsible both for mental imagery, and for the most admired
forms of artistic (and other)
 creativity.[49] 
Unfortunately, neither picture nor
description theories of imagery seem capable of providing a
satisfactory account of how one mental faculty could be responsible
for both these things (which may go some way toward explaining why
many recent philosophers doubt whether there is any such
faculty[50]).
However, Thomas (1997a; 1999b, 2014) argues that enactive theory
depicts both imagery and creative thinking as manifestations of the
more basic imaginative capacity of intentionalistic perception (or
“seeing as”). Implicit in the argument is the notion that
certain types of creative insights should be associated with changes
in the ways that relevant perceptions are enacted; experimental
findings by Thomas & Lleras (2007, 2009; Thomas, 2011) (no
relation) lend this idea some support.


It has also been suggested (Newton, 1993, 1996; Thomas, 1999b, 2003, 2009; 
see also Heil, 1998 ch. 6) that, because it regards imagery not as a 
form of representational inscription (whether pictorial or 
descriptive), but as a form of action, enactive theory may 
be able to account for the intentionality of imagery without making 
appeal either to the controversial 
 language of thought hypothesis,
 or to the widely discredited (see 
 section 3.3)
 resemblance theory of 
 representation.[51]



However, if mental images are (as just about everybody believes) a 
species of mental representation, these latter claims are at odds 
with the idea that mental representations are token identical to 
brain states. The majority of cognitive scientists (and sympathetic 
philosophers) remain firmly committed to that idea, and perhaps it is
largely for that reason that enactive theory remains a minority 
viewpoint. Certainly it has yet to receive anything like the amount 
of attention (either supportive or critical) that experimenters and 
theorists have devoted to quasi-pictorial and description theories.

Further discussion:

Supplement: Representational Neglect

4.6 The Return of the Imagery Theory of Cognition?


The analog-propositional debate and the enactive theory of imagery concern 
themselves primarily 
with the nature and underlying mechanisms of the phenomenon, and have thus had
relatively little direct impact on views about the
function of imagery in cognition. In fact, both of the best known
cognitive theories of imagery, the quasi-pictorial theory of Kosslyn
(1980, 1994, 2005; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006) (especially
as philosophically glossed by Tye (1991)), and the description theory
of Pylyshyn (1973, 1978, 2003b), portray imagery as embedded within
and dependent upon a more fundamental, language-like mental
representational system, mentalese, from which it derives much or all
of its semantic content. Thus neither of these theories did much to
challenge the post-Wittgensteinian consensus (see
 section 3.3)
 that continues to give imagery, at most, a minor, auxiliary role in 
cognition, with most of the burden being carried by either natural 
language or the more basic and more flexible representations of 
the hypothetical mentalese. 


Some neuroscientists and psychologists have been little moved by this
consensus. Damasio (1994), for example, takes it for granted that 
mental representations are imagistic; Bisiach & Berti (1990) and 
Edelman (1992) argue that mentalese (but not image) representations 
are neuroscientifically implausible; and Paivio (e.g., 1971, 1986, 2007; 
Paivio & Begg, 1981; Sadoski & Paivio, 2001) elaborates a 
comprehensive theory of cognition entirely in terms of image and 
natural language representations, and holds that that the 
representational power of language derives from that of imagery (see 
 Supplement: Dual Coding and Common Coding Theories of Memory).
 However, as these authors did rather little to address the arguments 
that have led most contemporary philosophers to think that imagery 
cannot be representationally basic, their views (in this 
regard) have had relatively little impact on philosophy. 


However, more recently those arguments have been challenged 
by philosophers such as Lowe (1995, 1996, 2005), Nyíri (2001),
and Ellis (1995). Ellis outlines a theory of how the meaningfulness 
of language may be grounded in imagery that appears to meet at least 
some of the stock objections (see 
 section 3.3,
 and Thomas, 1997b). The arguments are also addressed, at least in 
part, by Barsalou and his collaborators, who have proposed a theory 
of what they call “perceptual symbol systems” as an 
alternative to the language-like, “amodal” 
(mentalese) symbol systems of traditional cognitive science 
(Barsalou, 1993, 1999; Barsalou & Prinz, 1997; Barsalou et 
al., 2003; Kan et al., 2003). Although Barsalou denies 
that the perceptual symbols of his theory can be 
straightforwardly equated with mental images (mainly because he holds
that they may sometimes be active in cognitive processes without our 
being conscious of 
 them)[52]
 he clearly conceives of them in a way very close to traditional 
conceptions of imagery, and certainly as being the immediate causes 
of our imagery experience when we actually do have it. 


Barsalou holds that the neural basis of his perceptual symbols is a
neural “simulation” of the brain processes that would be
involved in the actual perception of whatever it is that is being
symbolized. Others, such as Currie (1995; Currie & Ravenscroft,
1997; Abell & Currie, 1999) and Hesslow (2002), have also
suggested that imagery is best understood as a simulation of
perception. However, quasi-pictorial, enactive, and
probably even propositional/descriptional theories of imagery
can all reasonably be classed as simulative theories in the relevant
sense (see Nichols et al., 1996), so it is not clear that
this suggestion advances our understanding of the nature of imagery
very
 much.[53] 
 In any case, Barsalou's main interest is not in the nature of 
imagery, but in how perceptual symbols might function in cognition to
do the jobs that others have thought can only be done by a more 
language-like system of representations, such as representing logical
relations and propositions (as opposed to just representing 
things). His detailed suggestions about these questions have
aroused much interest.


Perhaps inspired by Barsalou's work, Prinz (2002; see also Gallese
& Lakoff, 2005) has recently made a detailed defense of something
very like the traditional Empiricist theory of concepts (usually,
although not invariably, interpreted as the view that concepts are
images (see section
 2.3.3)).
 Like Barsalou (and, indeed, Locke), he does not take any strong 
position as to the inherent nature of images or perceptual 
symbols (and thus avoids embroiling himself in the 
analog-propositional debate and its aftermath). Instead, he confines himself to trying 
to show that it is plausible that our fundamental concepts are 
perceptual in their genesis and character, a view that he is quite 
happy to acknowledge is very close to the traditional imagery theory 
of cognition. Prinz deals ingeniously with many of the standard 
philosophical objections to theories of this sort, and he sidesteps 
what has been the main philosophical objection to image theories of 
concepts by avoiding committing himself to the resemblance theory of 
representation (see 
 section 3.3
 above). Instead, he suggests that his account of perceptual 
representations can be combined with a version of the causal (or 
covariation) theory of intentional content developed by Fodor (1990, 
1994), Dretske (1995, 2000), and 
 others.[54]
 However, it remains open to question whether such a causal theory can
work (Cummins, 1997; Horst, 1996, 1999). 


Gauker (2011), by contrast, aligns himself more closely with the
mainstream of twentieth century philosophy (see
 section 3.3) in arguing that concepts (or
ideas) cannot be identified with, or directly derived from,
images, and are dependent upon a shared language, rather than being
prior to it. Nevertheless, he holds that mental imagery plays a
crucial role in human cognition and its development, because it forms
the basis of a non-conceptual type of thought (unfortunately, as he
admits (Gauker, 2011 p. 145f.), one that is scarcely acknowledged by
contemporary psychological science) that not only plays a continuing
role in human thinking, but also makes the learning of a first
language by infants, and the continuing use of language, and thus the
development and use of true concepts, possible. This enables him to
avoid extravagant hypotheses, such as the positing of an innate,
conceptual, and semantically rich, but introspectively inaccessible,
language of thought, that other philosophers, such as Fodor
(1975) have held to be necessary components of any adequate theory of
language and learning and understanding (although, of course, some
might consider Gauker’s conception of non-conceptual but
instrumentally powerful imagistic thought to be an extravagant or
ill-founded hypothesis in its own right).


Other recent work has sought to explore the relationship, or lack
thereof, between current conceptions of mental imagery and the more
resonant, but more nebulous, notion of imagination (and
related, or putatively related phenomena or concepts such as
dreams, hallucinations, insight, and creativity)
(White, 1990; Brann, 1991; Finke et al., 1992; Thomas,
1997a,b, 1999a,b, 2006, 2014; Kind, 2001; McGinn, 2004; Blain,
2006). Perhaps the most ambitious claims in this regard are those of
Arp (2005, 2008), who comes at the matter from the controversial
perspective of evolutionary psychology. Arp suggests that an
innate, evolved capacity for what he calls scenario
visualization (which is perhaps a similar notion the
“imagistic thinking” championed by Gauker) is unique to
the human species, and is the crucial factor that has made our
high-level creative problem-solving abilities possible. From this
perspective, it is in large part thanks to our capacity to form and
manipulate mental imagery that humankind has been able to out-compete
rival species, and develop our complex cultures and technologies.