Consider the following three philosophical claims made by Plato,
Russell, and Kripke, respectively: (i) an act is lovable by the
gods in virtue of its being pious, (ii) complexes
exist because simples exist, and (iii) the fact that our use
of the term ‘Aristotle’ is causally connected in the right
kind of way to how it was originally used explains why
‘Aristotle’ refers to Aristotle when we use the
term. There are at least three important observations to make about
these claims.  First, it seems that they aren't identity
claims. Russell's claim seems to be that, while a complex and the
simples that compose it are distinct, we can explain the existence of
the former in terms of the existence of the latter. Second, it seems
that these claims aren't causal in nature. Kripke's claim isn't that
causal facts themselves cause our words to refer to what they do.
Instead, the idea is that certain causal facts non-causally determine
the facts about what words refer to. Third, it seems that these claims
aren't purely modal in nature. The relations of modal entailment,
supervenience, and the like are too coarse-grained to capture what
Plato has in mind. It's necessary that if something is pious, then
it's lovable by the gods. But it's also necessary that if something is
pious, then 2+3=52+3=52+3=5. Plato, however, would presumably deny that
anything is such that 2+3=52+3=52+3=5 in virtue of the fact that it's
pious.
It seems that we make similar claims in everyday life as well as in
the context of philosophy. Suppose you claim that there is a labor
strike due to the fact that the truck drivers are refusing to
work and instead picketing outside their workplace. In making this
claim, you're not saying that for there to be a labor strike just is
for there to be truck drivers who are engaging in these particular
activities, for strikes can involve workers with different
occupations, and there are different ways of striking (e.g., workers
might go to work but carefully follow all safety regulations so as to
impede their productivity). Nor are you claiming that the activity of
the truck drivers concurrent with the strike causes there to be a
strike. A causal explanation of the strike instead would appeal to
certain antecedent events such as how their employer has allotted
payroll deductions and benefits. Finally, you aren't merely claiming
that there is a necessary connection between the concurrent activity
of the truck drivers and the existence of a labor strike. Instead,
you're claiming that the fact that they're refusing to work and
picketing outside their workplace explains why there is a strike in
some metaphysically significant sense. 
Taking such considerations as a point of departure, some suggest
that claims like those described above should be read
as grounding claims—claims about what grounds what. We
begin by addressing five foundational issues about grounding: (i)
whether grounding is unitary, (ii) whether we can analyze the concept
of grounding, (iii) the logical form of grounding statements, (iv) how
grounding is related to explanation, and (v) how it's related to
necessity. Then we turn to the application of the notion of grounding.
In particular, we address how the notion might allow us to profitably
formulate familiar philosophical theses, as well as construct novel
philosophical accounts. We conclude by discussing two further issues,
namely, whether the facts concerning what grounds what themselves have
grounds and skepticism about grounding.
 
1. Is grounding unitary?
Is grounding unitary in the sense that there is a single dependence
relation in play in claims like those discussed above? Proponents of
grounding tend to claim that grounding is unitary (Audi 2012; Rosen
2010; Schaffer 2009). They claim that, just as our default position
with respect to synchronic identity, causation, parthood, and the like
is that they're unitary, the same is true of grounding.
Grounding naysayers tend to claim that grounding isn't
unitary. Instead, they claim that grounding is variegated in the sense
that claims like those described above traffic in importantly
different relations (Daly 2012; Hofweber 2009; Koslicki forthcoming;
Wilson 2014). (For more on skepticism about
grounding, see §8.)  But some proponents
of grounding also claim that grounding is variegated. One such
pro-grounding view is this: grounding is akin to a disjunction of
special determination relations, and those who think that grounding is
unitary have merely singled out a dependence relation that is of
particular relevance to metaphysics, that of metaphysical
grounding (Fine 2012). The thought is that, in addition to
metaphysical grounding, there is, for example, the relation
of natural grounding that is of particular interest to
science and the relation of normative grounding that is of
particular interest to ethics. On this view, the topic of this entry
isn't grounding per se but metaphysical
grounding. (Henceforth, when we speak of Fine's views on grounding, we
mean his views of metaphysical grounding in particular.) 
It's also possible that there is a sense in which grounding is both
unitary and variegated. How so? It may be that there is an important
coarse-grained relation—the relation of grounding tout
court—along with various fine-grained grounding
relations. Turning to a familiar view of causation will help us get a
handle on one such approach to grounding.
Some claim that there are various distinctive physical mechanisms
or spatiotemporally contiguous processes—what we might call
fine-grained causal relations—that are responsible for events,
and causation tout court is the distinctive physical relation
that unifies the fine-grained causal relations (Salmon 1984; Dowe
2000). The idea is that we have an important coarse-grained
relation—the relation of causation tout
court—that's a genus, and there are various fine-grained
relations—fine-grained causal relations—that are species
relative to this genus.
Similarly, you might claim that there is a coarse-grained
relation—the relation of grounding tout court—and
that there are various metaphysical relations—the relations of
grounding1, grounding2, and so on—that are
species relative to this genus. In this case, the notion of
grounding1 is analyzable as ‘grounding +
differentia1’, the notion of grounding2 as
‘grounding + differentia2’, and so
on. Relations akin to (some of) what Bennett (2011a) calls
‘building’ relations and (some of) what Wilson calls
(2014) ‘small-g’ grounding relations are natural
candidates for being the relevant metaphysical relations. Consider,
for example, the relation of material constitution—the
metaphysical relation that a lump of clay bears to the statue that's
coincident with it. If grounding1 is a relation akin to
material constitution then perhaps differentia1 concerns
spatial coincidence. Or consider the realization relation—the
metaphysical relation that DNA molecules bear to genes. If
grounding2 is a relation akin to realization then perhaps
differentia2 concerns role properties (e.g., the gene role)
and their corresponding role fillers (e.g., DNA molecules).
If it turns out that we can't specify the right sort of differentia
for these relations, another proposal according to which grounding is
both unitary and variegated worth considering is this:
grounding tout court is a determinable, and the various
fine-grained grounding relations are determinates of this
determinable.  The same considerations apply, mutatis
mutandis, to causation.  (Koslicki forthcoming and 
Wilson 2014 criticize these approaches to
grounding—see §8.)  
2. Can the concept be analyzed?
General statements about a concept help us orient ourselves with
regard to that concept. Such general statements might specify
application conditions for the concept, how it relates to other
notions, and so on. If the general conception of grounding just
articulated is correct, then a substantive orienting characterization
of grounding is as follows: grounding tout court is the
coarse-grained metaphysical relation that unifies various metaphysical
relations. But can we do more than offer orienting characterizations
of grounding? In particular, can we analyze the concept?
Some proponents of grounding offer analyses of the notion. Bricker
(2006), for example, suggests the following partial analysis:
grounding is a relation between propositions, and one proposition
grounds another if the former is fundamental in nature and
the latter supervenes on the
former. (See §3 for more on the
relata of grounding, and §6.2 for more on
the notion of fundamentality).  Correia (2013) considers the prospects
of various analyses in terms of the notion of essence. The basic idea
that runs through his suggested analyses is this: there are essential
truths about the grounded connecting them to their
grounds. (See §5
and 7 for more on essential truths
and grounding.)
The more or less received view among proponents of grounding,
however, is that the concept isn't analyzable—the concept of
grounding is ultimately primitive in nature (Fine 2012;
Rodriguez-Pereyra 2005; Rosen 2010; Schaffer 2009; Witmer et
al. 2005).  Supposing that the concept is primitive, it's important to
keep in mind that this doesn't mean that talk of grounding is obscure,
or that grounding claims are confused or unjustified. It seems that
many notions central to philosophy are unitary and unanalyzable
(consider synchronic identity, for example), yet this leads few to
dismiss them as obscure, confused, or unjustified.
3. The logical form of grounding statements
Assuming that grounding is unitary (we can remain neutral on how
grounding might be related to metaphysical relations like material
constitution and realization), what is the logical form of grounding
statements? While we've been speaking of the
grounding relation, some proponents of grounding wish to stay
neutral on whether there are any properties or relations, so they,
likewise, wish to stay neutral on whether there is a grounding
relation. These philosophers prefer to regiment grounding talk with a
non-truth-functional sentential connective (Correia 2010; Fine 2001,
2012). Here we can agree, for example, that you can vote because
you're a citizen and that this is a grounding claim, but in so doing
we aren't committed to the existence of propositions or facts (e.g.,
the proposition/fact that you can vote and the proposition/fact that
you're a citizen) or relations (the grounding relation that holds
between these propositions/facts).  It's important to realize that the
connective view isn't the view that the relata of grounding are
sentences—this would be to treat grounding expressions
ultimately as predicates introducing a relation that holds between
sentences. But notice that it's open for the proponent of the
connective view to add that, non-ultimately speaking, we may well talk
about a relation of grounding, for we can define a relational
predicate in terms of the non-truth functional sentential
connective.
Some are more sanguine about relations and are happy to commit
themselves to the existence of a grounding relation. Such folks tend
to regiment grounding talk with a relational predicate. If there is a
default version of the predicate view, it's that the predicate
expresses a binary relation holding between facts (Audi 2012; Rosen
2010). It seems that there are cases in which a single fact is
grounded in a plurality of facts (e.g., [p&q][p&q][p \mathbin{\&amp;} q] (the
fact that p&qp&qp \mathbin{\&amp;} q) is grounded in [p],[q][p],[q][p], [q]), so we
can think of the logical form of grounding statements on the predicate
view as follows: [p][p][p] is grounded in ΔΔ\Delta, where ΔΔ\Delta is a
plurality of facts. (See, however, Dasgupta 2014 for an argument that
if grounding is a binary relation then it's plural in both positions.)
Notice that a plurality can have a single member, so it's fine to
speak of one fact being grounded in another fact. For the purposes of
this entry we will assume that grounding is a relation between facts,
that the logical form of grounding statements is [p][p][p] is grounded in
ΔΔ\Delta, and that [p][p][p] is grounded in ΔΔ\Delta only if [p][p][p] and the
ΔΔ\Deltas obtain (i.e., the grounding relation is factive).
It's worth noting, however, that some advocates of the predicate
view claim that the grounding predicate expresses a binary relation
that is category neutral in that its relata can come from multiple
ontological categories, and their categories needn't match (Cameron
2008; Schaffer 2009). Those who embrace the restriction to facts may
do so on the basis of the grammar of explanatory claims.  It makes no
grammatical sense to say that an apple explains anything, whereas the
fact that it's red might explain something (Sider 2012: Ch. 8). They
might also claim that their opponents, who claim that the relation is
category neutral, aren't properly distinguishing between grounding
proper and a relation of metaphysical dependence more broadly
construed. Advocates of the neutral approach may respond by pointing
out that explanatory claims have a variety of syntactic
forms. ‘In virtue of’, for example, requires a sentence as
its first argument and a sentence nominalization or a singular term
derived from a sentence as its second.
Moreover, some sympathetic with the predicate view suggest that the
grounding predicate expresses a quaternary relation. One view along
these lines is that the grounding relation includes two slots for
facts and two slots for modes of presentation of those facts
(Jenkins 2011). Suppose that you're in pain, and the fact that you
have physical property P and the fact you're in pain are one
and the same fact. You might think that this case poses the following
problem: what we've said so far seems compatible with the idea that
the fact that you have P grounds the fact you're in pain, yet
at the same time it seems wrong to say that a fact can ground
itself. (See §6.2 for more on whether
grounding is irreflexive in nature.) How might we resolve these
apparently inconsistent views? Well, notice that we can consider the
fact in question under different modes of presentation (MOPs). We can
consider it under a non-experiential MOP—as a fact concerning a
particular neural property—as well as under an experiential
MOP—as a fact concerning a particular feeling. You might claim
that when we say that the fact that you have P grounds the
fact that you're in pain, we mean that the fact that you
have P, considered under a non-experiential MOP, grounds the
fact that you have P, considered under an experiential
MOP. But to say that the fact that you have P grounds itself
is to make a different grounding claim—it's to claim that the
fact that you have P, considered under a non-experiential
MOP, grounds the fact that you have P, considered under the
very same MOP. You might claim that, while a grounding claim like the
former might be true, no grounding claim like the latter can be
true—if the same fact occupies two of the argument places of the
grounding relation then different MOPs must occupy the remaining two
argument places. (Notice that on a conceptualist view of facts,
according to which facts have modes of presentation as constituents,
this version of the quaternary view is really a special case of the
thesis that the grounding relation is binary in nature.)
 
Another quaternary view is that grounding is contrastive in nature,
so it includes two slots for facts and two slots
for contrasts of these facts (Schaffer 2012). Consider again
the claim that an act is lovable by the gods in virtue of its being
pious. The idea is that this grounding claim has implicit
contrasts. Depending on the context, the claim might be the following:
the fact that an act is pious rather than blasphemous grounds the fact
that it's lovable by the gods rather than hate-worthy. If you think
that grounding either is an explanatory relation or a non-explanatory
explanation-backing relation (see §4 for
further discussion) then one reason to take the contrastive view of
grounding seriously is the fact explanation may itself be contrastive
in nature (van Fraassen 1980: Ch. 5).
Another reason to take the contrastive approach to grounding
seriously is this: supposing that grounding is transitive
(see §6.2), the approach may allow us to
deal with apparent failures of transitivity. Let S={a,b,c}S={a,b,c}S = \{a, b, c\}.
Following Schaffer (2012), it seems that (i) the fact that c
is a member of S (partially) grounds the fact that S
has exactly three members, (ii) the fact that S has exactly
three members grounds the fact that S has finitely many
members, yet (iii) the fact that c is a member
of S doesn't ground the fact that S has
finitely many members. (See §5 for more on the
distinction between full and mere partial grounding.) Here we have an
apparent failure of transitivity. On the contrastive approach, we have
a violation of transitivity instead if the following claims are true:
(iv) the fact that c is a member of S, rather than
not a member of S, (partially) grounds the fact
that S has exactly three members, rather than exactly two
members, (v) the fact that S has exactly three members,
rather than exactly two members, grounds the fact that S is
finite rather than infinite, yet (vi) the fact that c is a
member of S, rather than not a member
of S, doesn't ground the fact that S is
finite, rather than infinite. As Schaffer points out, while (iv) and
(vi) seem true, (v) seems false—the fact that S has
three members rather than two makes no difference to
whether S is finite or not, for it would be finite in either
case. Instead, it seems that (vii) the fact that S has
exactly three members, rather than, say, as many members as there are
natural numbers, grounds the fact that S is finite, rather
than infinite. But the truth of (iv), (vi) and (vii) is compatible
with the transitivity of grounding on the contrastive conception.
4. Explanation
How might grounding and explanation be related? Proponents of
grounding claim that there is a tight connection between them. To
begin, note that a mark of explanation is hyperintensionality, and
grounding is apparently hyperintensional as well.
Suppose that two sentences are intensionally
equivalent—suppose that any metaphysically possible world in
which the first is true is a world in which the second is true
and vice versa. Notice that substituting one of these
sentences for the other can turn true explanation statements into
false ones. Consider the following sentences: (i) ‘Socrates
exists’, (ii) ‘{Socrates} exists’, and (iii)
‘{Socrates} exists because Socrates exists’. Suppose that
(iii) is true. Although (i) and (ii) are intensionally equivalent,
substituting (i) for (ii) and (ii) for (i) in (iii) yields the false
sentence ‘Socrates exists because {Socrates} exists’. And
it seems that grounding is hyperintensional in a corresponding
sense. The fact that Socrates exists and the fact that {Socrates}
exists are intensionally equivalent—any metaphysically possible
world in which the first obtains is a world in which the second
obtains and vice versa. It seems that the fact that Socrates
exists grounds the fact that {Socrates} exists.  Although the facts at
issue here are intensionally equivalent, it's not the case that the
fact that {Socrates} exists grounds the fact that Socrates
exists. 
While the notion of grounding is often introduced in explicitly
explanatory terms, there are two importantly different ways of
maintaining that there is a tight connection between grounding and
explanation. Let's suppose that an explanation is a list of facts
where some of them bear an explanatory relation to the
others, and explanation, like grounding, is factive in the sense that
if one fact explains another then both facts obtain.
The first view is that there are multiple explanatory relations,
and grounding is one of them. Fine writes,
We take ground to be an explanatory
relation: if the truth that P is grounded in other truths,
then they account for its truth; P's being the case
holds in virtue of the other truths' being the case. (2001:
15; see also Dasgupta 2014 and Litland 2013)
The relevant notion of explanation in this case
is metaphysical in character, where what this is commonly taken to
mean is that whether some facts bear an explanatory relation to others
doesn't depend on our explanatory interests or what we happen to
understand (Strevens 2008: Ch. 1).
Let a relation be a backing relation just in
case, instead of being an explanatory relation, it backs or
underwrites explanations. Backing relations are the worldly
determination relations that explanations track or correspond to (Kim
1994; Ruben 1990: Ch. 7).  The second view is that there are multiple
backing relations, and grounding is one of them. Audi writes,
If we recognize [cases of non-causal explanation]
and we agree that explanations require non-explanatory relations
underlying their correctness, then we are committed to recognizing a
non-causal relation at work in these explanations.
 (2012: 687–8)
For Audi this non-causal relation is grounding (see also
Rodriguez-Pereyra 2005 and Schaffer 2012). The relevant notion of
explanation in this case is either metaphysical or
epistemic/communicative in character. In the latter case, whether a
fact is a candidate explanans depends on our explanatory
interests and/or what we happen to understand, so whether some facts
bear an explanatory relation to others depends in part on these
factors as well (van Fraassen 1980: Ch. 5).
Another view is that grounding is neither an explanatory nor a
backing relation. According to Wilson, the idea that grounding claims
(where grounding is understood as a distinctive coarse-grained
metaphysical relation) have distinctive explanatory import doesn't
survive scrutiny:
…from the bare fact that some goings-on are
 Grounded in some others it hardly follows that the latter
 metaphysically explain the former in any interesting sense; nor does
 a bare Grounding claim itself constitute an explanation in either a
 metaphysical or epistemic sense. (2014: 553)
(This is part of Wilson's case for skepticism
 about grounding in
 general—see §8.)
5. Necessity
Now we turn to the matter of how the concept of grounding is
related to another notion of obvious philosophical interest—that
of necessity. Let ΔΔ\Delta metaphysically necessitate [p][p][p] just in
case any metaphysically possible world in which the ΔΔ\Deltas obtain is
a world in which [p][p][p] obtains. Proponents of grounding all agree that
grounding isn't a purely modal relation like metaphysical
necessitation.  Every world in which my socks exist is also a world in
which 2+3=52+3=52+3=5, and yet we don't want to say that the fact that my
socks exist grounds the fact that 2+3=52+3=52+3=5.
Still, there might be a tight connection between grounding and
necessity. Intuitively, there is a distinction between full and mere
partial grounding. One way to illustrate the distinction is by way of
the following contrast: while, for some suitable ppp and qqq, [p&q][p&q][p
\mathbin{\&amp;} q] is merely partially grounded in [p][p][p], [p∨q][p∨q][p \vee
q] is fully grounded in [p][p][p].  Let's say that full grounding carries
metaphysical necessity just in case if [p][p][p] is fully grounded in
ΔΔ\Delta then ΔΔ\Delta metaphysically necessitates [p][p][p]. We take it
that the default view among proponents of grounding is that full
grounding carries metaphysical necessity (Audi 2012; Dasgupta 2014;
deRosset 2010; Rosen 2010; Trogdon 2013).
Some, however, reject this view (Chudnoff 2011; Dancy 2004: Ch. 3;
Leuenberger 2014a; Schnieder 2006; Skiles 2014). Why think that
full grounding doesn't carry metaphysical necessity? There are various
cases discussed in the literature—here is one to
consider. Suppose you reason as follows: (i) I promised to fff,
(ii) my promise wasn't given under duress, (iii) I'm able to fff,
so, (iv) I ought to fff. You might claim that (i) gives you a
reason to commit the action, while (ii) and (iii), though not
providing reasons themselves, jointly enable (i) to do so. Moral:
while the fact that you promised to fff fully grounds the fact
that you ought to fff, the fact that your promise wasn't given
under duress, the fact that you're able to fff, and additional
relevant facts, jointly enable the promise-fact to fully ground the
obligation-fact. But the former doesn't metaphysically necessitate the
latter (Dancy 2004: Ch.  3). Proponents of the default view, however,
would presumably respond as follows: the fact that you promised
to fff does not, by itself, make it the case that you ought
to fff, or explain why you ought to fff. It's not a full
ground. It may be a sufficient practical reason for fff-ing, but that's
a separate matter. (For a discussion of the connection between
grounding and supervenience in contrast to metaphysical necessitation,
see Leuenberger 2014b.)
Another important issue concerns what, if anything, grounds
necessities. There are at least two questions to consider here. The
first is this: if [p][p][p] is a metaphysically necessary fact, what, if
anything, grounds [p][p][p]? You might think that if [p][p][p] is
metaphysically necessary then nothing grounds [p][p][p], for the
metaphysically necessary facts aren't apt for explanation in the sense
of explanation relevant to grounding (or any sense at all, according
to some).  Metaphysically contingent facts, by contrast, are apt for
this sort of explanation. While there may be such (contingent) facts
that lack grounds (e.g., facts concerning the fundamental physical
magnitudes), these are the sorts of facts that can have grounds but
simply happen not to (where ‘can’ is understood
epistemically).
There is reason to think, however, that metaphysically necessary
facts are apt for explanation in the sense of explanation relevant to
grounding. Consider, for example, the fact that 2+3=52+3=52+3=5. While this is
(we will suppose) a metaphysically necessary fact, it seems that it's
apt for explanation in terms of facts about numbers, mathematical
structures, or the like. Indeed, we seem to be possessed of the
resources to ground some amongst our necessities. Suppose that both
[p][p][p] and [q][q][q] are metaphysically necessary facts, so [p&q][p&q][p
\mathbin{\&amp;} q] is a metaphysically necessary fact as well. It
seems that any conjunctive fact is grounded in the plurality
consisting of its conjuncts, so [p&q][p&q][p \mathbin{\&amp;} q] is grounded
in [p][p][p], [q][q][q].
The second question: if [p][p][p] is a metaphysically necessary fact,
what grounds the fact that [p][p][p] is metaphysically necessary?
Reductive modal analyses—analysis of modal discourse in
non-modal terms—are naturally thought of as grounding theses in
the sense that they aim to provide grounds for such facts that don't
themselves appeal to modality. (For more on the role that grounding
might play in formulating philosophical accounts,
see §6.) For example, Fine's (1994) analysis
of metaphysical necessity in terms of essence is naturally cast as a
grounding thesis: the fact that [p][p][p] is metaphysically necessary is
grounded in essential facts—facts concerning the essences of
certain entities (Rosen 2010).
According to Fine, the essential features of an entity tell
us what the entity is, as opposed to how that entity
is.  So you might claim that the essential facts themselves aren't apt
for explanation in the sense of explanation relevant to grounding
(Dasgupta forthcoming). Matters here are complicated, though, once we
consider the notion of fundamentality.  If the fundamental facts (as
some have suggested) are just those facts that lack grounds, then if
the essential facts lack grounds then they're fundamental in
nature. Suppose that it's an essential fact that if Obama exists then
he's human. You might think, however, that, whatever the fundamental
facts turn out to be, they won't include facts about Obama. If this is
right, then either this fact about Obama isn't an essential fact, it
has grounds after all, or it's wrong to think that a fact is
fundamental just in case it lacks grounds.
One view is that the fundamental facts are contingent. Given that
the essential facts are metaphysically necessary, on this picture they
won't count as fundamental. This view, however, faces a
problem vis-à-vis metaphysical necessity. Suppose that the
fundamental facts are contingent. And suppose that (i) [p][p][p] is a
fundamental fact, and (ii) [p][p][p] grounds [[q][q][q] is metaphysically
necessary]. Since the fundamental facts could have been otherwise,
there are metaphysically possible worlds in which [p][p][p] doesn't
obtain.  Presumably some of the worlds in which [p][p][p] doesn't obtain
are worlds in which the fact that it actually grounds—[[q][q][q] is
metaphysically necessary]—doesn't obtain either. If there are
worlds in which the latter doesn't obtain, there are worlds in which
[q][q][q] doesn't obtain. But if there are worlds in which [q][q][q] doesn't
obtain, [q][q][q] isn't metaphysically necessary after
all. (See §6.2 for further discussion of
grounding and fundamentality).
6. Applications
In this section we discuss two potential applications of the notion
of grounding in some detail and briefly describe two others. 
6.1. Physicalism about the mental
How should we understand the debate between the dualist and the
non-reductive physicalist? We can start with the following intuitive
characterization of non-reductive physicalism about the mental: while
the mental and the physical are distinct, they aren't on a
par—the latter enjoys a special priority with respect to the
former. In what sense, however, might the physical be prior to the
mental—what does priority come to here? A familiar idea is that
priority in the relevant sense can be understood in terms of purely
modal notions such as metaphysical necessitation or supervenience.
Let's say that property P metaphysically necessitates
property Q just in case it's metaphysically necessary that
if P is instantiated then Q is instantiated.
Proposal: the physical is prior to the mental in the relevant sense
just in case (i) for any mental property M, if M is
instantiated, then there is some instantiated physical
property P that metaphysically necessitates M, yet
(ii) it's not the case that, for any physical property P,
if P is instantiated, then there is some instantiated mental
property M that metaphysically necessitates P.
 
Does this capture the relevant sense of priority? Well, consider a
parallel thesis, what we'll call non-reductive phenomenalism about the
mathematical. Here is an intuitive characterization of the thesis:
while the mathematical and the mental are distinct, they aren't on a
par—the latter enjoys a special priority with respect to the
former. Suppose that the notion of priority at issue here is the same
notion that is at issue in non-reductive physicalism about the
mental. In this case, it's clear that few would accept non-reductive
phenomenalism about the mathematical. But suppose that the relevant
notion of priority is to be understood in terms of metaphysical
necessitation in the way suggested above. So the mental is prior to
the mathematical in relevant sense just in case (i) for any
mathematical property P, if P is instantiated, then
there is some instantiated mental property M such
that M metaphysically necessitates P, yet (ii) it's
not the case that, for any mental property M, if M
is instantiated, then there is some instantiated mathematical
property P such that P metaphysically
necessitates M.  The right hand side of this biconditional,
however, is something that many would accept! The reason is simple:
many think that just which mathematical properties are instantiated is
a necessary matter.  (Example: it's metaphysically necessary that the
operation of addition instantiates the property of being associative.)
This suggests that the notion of priority at issue in non-reductive
physicalism about the mental isn't to be understood in terms of
metaphysical necessitation in the manner suggested above.
 
There are various ways we might refine the purely modal take on
priority described above to avoid this particular problem. We suspect,
however, that with any purely modal characterization of non-reductive
physicalism we will encounter similar problems (Horgan 1993,
2006). How else might we understand the relevant sense of priority,
then?  It's natural to turn to the notion of grounding in this case,
as it isn't a purely modal notion (see §5). A
first pass at a grounding-theoretic formulation of non-reductive
physicalism is this: the physical is prior to the mental in the sense
that (i) for any mental property M, if M is
instantiated, then there is some physical property P such
that the fact that M is instantiated is grounded in the fact
that P is instantiated, yet (ii) it's not the case that, for
any physical property P, if P is instantiated, then
there is some mental property M such that the fact
that P is instantiated is grounded in the fact
that M is instantiated.  In this case we get the sort of
asymmetry between non-reductive physicalism about the mental and
non-reductive phenomenalism about the mathematical that we want: the
mental facts are plausibly grounded in physical facts, yet the
mathematical facts aren't plausibly grounded in mental facts.
 
Wilson (forthcoming) objects to grounding formulations of
non-reductive physicalism, claiming that they leave many issues open
relevant to characterizing the dependence of the mental on the
physical, ones that any adequate formulation of the thesis must
address. She points out that, according to Fine (2001), applications
of the notion of grounding have no realist or antirealist import. So,
on his conception of grounding, in claiming that certain physical
facts ground the mental facts we remain neutral on whether there
really are any mental facts in the first place. But surely any
adequate formulation of non-reductive physicalism should take a stand
on whether there really are mental facts.
Notice, however, that the proponent of grounding, while accepting
much of what Fine says about grounding, is free to simply deny Fine's
thesis about grounding claims lacking realist import—intuitively
the relata of the grounding relation (and any relation, for that
matter) are real. Moreover, there is a way of interpreting Fine's
claim where it doesn't count against grounding formulations of
non-reductive physicalism in any case. Fine claims that grounding talk
is best regimented with a non-truth-functional sentential connective
(see §2). With such a view, one can speak of facts grounding
other facts, while ultimately staying neutral on whether there really
are any facts to begin with.  So, for Fine, in claiming that certain
physical facts ground the mental facts, we remain neutral on whether
there really are any mental facts because in making grounding claims
we remain neutral on whether there are any facts whatsoever. And to
formulate non-reductive physicalism in such a way that it remains
neutral on the issue of whether facts should go into our ontology
isn't unreasonable. (NB: Fine (2012) suggests that physicalism and
related theses are properly formulated in terms of natural grounding
rather than metaphysical grounding—see §1.) 

6.2. Metaphysical foundationalism
It's a familiar idea that the world—understood as the fusion
of all concrete entities—has an overarching layered
structure. Where a concrete fact is a fact concerning the existence
and nature of concrete entities, let metaphysical foundationalism be
the thesis that every concrete fact is either fundamental or
derivative with respect to fundamental concrete facts. According to
the grounding conception of metaphysical foundationalism, the notion
of grounding plays an essential role in this thesis. In particular, we
should interpret the thesis as follows: every concrete fact either
isn't grounded in concrete facts, or is grounded in concrete facts
that themselves aren't grounded in concrete facts. The general idea
behind this conception of metaphysical foundationalism is that
grounding is the relation by which the world is hierarchically
structured from fundamental facts to increasingly derivative facts.
Some may see this application of the notion of grounding as the
primary theoretical role it's supposed to play.
According to one version of metaphysical foundationalism on the
grounding conception—what we'll call monism—all concrete
facts that aren't grounded in such facts are global facts—facts
concerning the cosmos as a whole. According to another
version—what we'll call pluralism—all concrete facts that
aren't grounded in such facts concern proper parts of the world, say
point-sized particles or point-sized regions.  Monism and pluralism,
so characterized, are variants of what Schaffer (2010a)
calls priority monism and pluralism, respectively.
Schaffer's theses concern grounding relations between concrete
objects, while ours concern grounding relations between concrete
facts.  (See §3 for discussion of the
view that the relata of grounding include entities in addition to
facts.) Contrast the monism/pluralism debate so understood—a
debate about what grounds what—with the debate concerning
whether there is only one concrete object or many. (See Horgan and
Potrc 2008 for a defense of the claim that there is only one concrete
object.)
What else can we say about the grounding conception of metaphysical
foundationalism? Well, the thesis is associated with the claim that
grounding is well-founded. As we will use the term, grounding
is well-founded just in case any grounding chain—any chain of
facts in which [p][p][p] is grounded in [q][q][q], [q][q][q] is grounded in [r][r][r],
and so on—terminates in facts that themselves lack
grounds. Schaffer (2010a) claims that grounding is well-founded in
this sense, while others such as Bliss (2013, 2014) and Rosen (2010)
suggest that there is nothing obviously wrong with grounding being
non-well-founded.
Supposing that there are some grounding chains that fail to
terminate in ungrounded facts, we can still maintain that every member
of such a chain is grounded in facts that themselves lack grounds.
Consider Euclidean space, which is comprised of points and regions
that include those points. Suppose that every region has a region as a
proper part. And suppose that the existence facts concerning regions
are grounded in the existence facts concerning their sub-regions, the
existence facts concerning sub-regions are grounded in the existence
facts concerning their sub-sub-regions, and so on, ad
infinitum. Hence, the fact that region R exists is a
member of a grounding chain that doesn't terminate in facts that lack
grounds. But suppose that the existence facts concerning regions
are also grounded in the existence facts concerning points.
Suppose, moreover, that the existence facts concerning points lack
grounds. Hence, while the fact that R exists is a member of a
grounding chain that doesn't terminate in facts that lack grounds,
this fact nonetheless is grounded in facts that themselves lack
grounds. The same applies, mutatis mutandis, to all the other
facts that are links in the grounding chain in question.
 
Returning to the grounding conception of metaphysical
foundationalism, the thesis is compatible with the existence of
grounding chains of concrete facts that fail to terminate in concrete
facts that themselves aren't grounded in such facts. It allows for
such chains, so long as each link itself is grounded in concrete facts
that aren't grounded in such facts (Cameron 2008).
There is another important issue concerning the grounding
conception of metaphysical foundationalism. It presupposes that
grounding imposes a strict partial ordering (SPO) on the entities in
its domain: grounding is irreflexive, asymmetric, and transitive. Some
argue, however, that grounding isn't an SPO. Grounding naysayers may
conclude from this that we should look to alternative grounding-free
conceptual frameworks to explicate metaphysical foundationalism. Why
think, however, that grounding isn't, or doesn't induce, an SPO? We've
already seen one challenge to the transitivity of grounding understood
as a binary relation (see §3). So
let's turn to challenges to the idea that grounding is irreflexive and
asymmetric. 
Three challenges to irreflexivity are as follows. First, Lowe
(1998: 145) suggests that ‘self-explanatory states of
affairs’ are epistemically possible, so a characterization of
grounding shouldn't rule this out. Historically, certain influential
thinkers have thought that the fact that God exists, for example, is a
self-explanatory state of affairs. Second, Fine (2010) and Krämer
(2013) discuss various cases that seem to involve violations of
irreflexivity. Here's a simple case similar to the more complicated
ones they discuss: consider the fact that some fact or other
obtains. Call this second-order fact—the fact that some fact or
other obtains—‘FFF’. Any fact that obtains is a
fact that grounds FFF. Since FFF is itself a fact that
obtains, FFF grounds itself. Third, Paseau (2010) points out
that, on the assumption that the existence of any set is grounded in
the existence of its members, any self-membered set (e.g., g={g}g={g}g =
\{g\}) is such that the fact that it exists grounds itself. (Standard
set theory, however, does not admit self-membered sets.)
A putative counterexample to the asymmetry of grounding that we
adapt from Rodriguez-Pereyra 2005 is as follows: [this fact obtains]
is grounded in [[this fact obtains] obtains] and vice
versa. Putting the case in terms of propositions rather than
facts, such a case, in his view, is one ‘in which the truth of a
proposition depends on its subject matter and vice versa’ (2005:
22). Priest (2014: Ch. 11) presents a more humdrum challenge to the
asymmetry of grounding: the fact that the North Pole exists is
partially grounded in the fact that the South Pole exists and vice
versa. 
There are at least three points worth keeping in mind about the
grounding conception of metaphysical foundationalism. First, while
there are several objections to the idea that grounding is an SPO,
it's by no means a settled matter that it isn't an SPO.  Litland
(2013) and Raven (2013), for example, both offer various responses to
some of the challenges described above. Second, you might accept that
grounding isn't an SPO but claim that we can characterize a relation
in terms of grounding that is an SPO. Supposing that grounding is
non-transitive, we can take the transitive closure of
grounding—grounding*—as the relation by which the world is
hierarchically structured. Third, if grounding is indeed an SPO, it
may still be that the grounding conception of metaphysical
foundationalism is implausible for different reasons. See both
deRosset 2010 and Sider 2012: Ch. 8 for different sorts of objection
to the idea that theses akin to metaphysical foundationalism are
profitably formulated in terms of grounding.
6.3. Further applications
What are some further potential applications of the notion of
grounding? We will consider two. First, consider the notion of
truthmaking. Intuitively, if a proposition is true, something makes it
true. If this is right, then what is the relation between a true
proposition and that which makes it true? What, in other words, is the
truthmaking relation? Some proponents of grounding claim that we can
understand truthmaking in terms of grounding, and doing so helps us
resolve longstanding problems regarding truthmaking, such as the
problem of negative existentials (Cameron forthcoming; Liggins 2012;
Schaffer 2010b). One straightforward grounding-theoretic proposal is
this: x is a truthmaker for the proposition that p just in case
[x exists] grounds [p][p][p] (see Tahko 2013 for objections to this
view).
Second, some propose to analyze the notion of intrinsicality in
terms of the notion of grounding. Let an object that doesn't coexist
with any contingent object wholly distinct from it be a lonely object,
and let an object be accompanied just in case it isn't
lonely. Following Langton and Lewis (1998), let a property P be independent
of accompaniment just in case it's possible that there is a
lonely P, a lonely non-P, an accompanied P,
and an accompanied non-P. Putting aside indiscriminately
essential properties (e.g., being self-identical), Witmer et
al. (2005) propose the following: P is an intrinsic property
just in case P is independent of accompaniment, and it's
metaphysically necessary that, for any property Q,
if P is instantiated in virtue of Q, then Q
is independent of accompaniment as well. Witmer (2014) goes on
to propose a similar account of intrinsic properties, though one free
of modal notions. And Rosen (2010) proposes an account of intrinsic
properties in terms of grounding that is free of modal notions as
well: P is intrinsic just in case it's metaphysically
necessary that, for any x and y, (i) if the fact
that x has P is grounded in some fact
containing y as a constituent, y is a part
of x, and (ii) if the fact that x lacks P
is grounded in some fact containing y as a constituent,
again y is a part of x. (See Bader 2013 for more on
why grounding may be relevant to intrinsicality, and Marshall
forthcoming for objections to the idea that we can analyze
intrinsicality in terms of grounding.)
Further potential applications of grounding concern perceptual
knowledge (Chudnoff 2011), temporal ontology (Baron 2014), and
the nature of mental content (Trogdon forthcoming).
7. Grounding the facts about what grounds what
What, if anything, grounds the facts about what grounds what?
Suppose again that the fact that the truck drivers are refusing to
work and instead picketing outside their workplace grounds the fact
that there is a labor strike. Call the former fact
‘picket’, the latter fact
 ‘strike’, and the
fact that picket grounds
 strike
 ‘ground’. What, if
anything, grounds facts like
 ground, facts concerning what grounds
what? Assuming that every fact is either grounded or ungrounded, we
have two options with respect to
 ground: claim that there is some fact
that grounds it, or claim that it's ungrounded. Let's consider the
second option first.
Intuitively, any correct fundamental description of the world won't
mention labor strikes (or truck drivers or picketing, for that
matter). What sort of metaphysical picture would vindicate the idea
that such descriptions are strike-free? Here is a simple
grounding-theoretic proposal: all the facts concerning strikes are
grounded in facts that don't concern strikes. Call this proposal the
grounding-strike thesis. But suppose, per the second option, that
ground is ungrounded. Hence, while
 picket and strike
 may be grounded
in facts that don't concern strikes, there is a fact concerning
strikes—ground—that
 isn't grounded in facts that don't
concern strikes, because it's not grounded in any facts at all. It
follows that the grounding-strike thesis is false. So, if you're
sympathetic to something like this thesis, it seems that the second
option isn't for you (see deRosset 2013 and Sider 2012: Ch. 8 for
related discussion).
So let's turn to the first option—the thesis that
 ground is
grounded. Two sorts of proposals along these lines have been explored
so far in the literature. The first proposal is that
 ground is
grounded in a fact it contains—picket.
 Moreover, picket grounds
the fact that picket grounds
 ground, the fact that
 picket grounds the
fact that picket grounds
 ground, and so on, ad infinitum
(Bennett 2011b; deRosset 2013). So long as
 picket is grounded in facts
that don't concern strikes, this proposal is compatible with the
grounding-strike thesis. One worry for this proposal, however, is
this: where there is grounding there is a distinctive form of
explanation (see §4), and it's unclear that
there is an explanatory connection of the appropriate sort between
picket and these additional facts.
 (See deRosset 2013 for an attempt
to resolve this problem.) 
The second proposal is that ground
 is grounded in a fact that
speaks directly to the connection between
 picket and strike. Following
Fine (2012) and Rosen (2010), one version of this proposal goes like
this.  Suppose that it lies in the nature of the property of being a
strike that if workers are picketing outside their workplace instead
of working, then the fact that this is so grounds the fact that
they're on strike. Call this fact
 ‘essence’ and the
conjunctive fact consisting of
 picket and essence
‘conjunction’.
 conjunction grounds
 ground. Call the fact
that conjunction grounds
 ground ‘ground*’.
 ground* is
grounded in a similar way—there is an essential truth of the
appropriate sort—call it
 ‘essence*’—such that
the conjunctive fact consisting of
 conjunction and
 essence*—call
this fact ‘conjunction*’—grounds
 ground*. Call the
fact that conjunction* grounds
 ground* ‘ground**’
 ground**
gets the same sort of treatment, and so on, ad infinitum. So
long as picket and the various essential
 truths involved in the
proposal—essence,
 essence*, and so on—are all grounded in
facts that don't concern strikes, the proposal is compatible with the
grounding-strike thesis.  One worry for this proposal, however, is
this: while picket is
 presumably grounded in facts that don't concern
strikes, it's unclear what if anything grounds facts
 like essence
(see §5). If such facts lack grounds we must
again reject the grounding-strike thesis. 
It's worth noting that there are potential problems for the idea
that the facts about what grounds what are grounded that arise
independently of any particular account of how these facts are
grounded. One such worry, impressionistically put, is this: if the
facts about what grounds what are grounded, does this not preclude our
providing an explanation of how grounding got into the picture in the
first place? (Compare: if any candidate explanation of why there are
any contingent entities at all appeals to further contingent entities,
this shows that there is no ultimate explanation of why there are such
entities, or so the idea goes.)
8. Skepticism about grounding
Not everyone agrees that there is a place in the philosopher's
toolkit for the notion of grounding. What philosophers find
objectionable about talk of grounding varies. Some think that the very
idea of metaphysical inquiry is suspect. If this is your view, then
you're probably not going to like grounding. We obviously assume that
metaphysical inquiry is legitimate, so we set this sort of concern
about grounding to the side. 
There are philosophers, however, who think that metaphysics is
legitimate and nevertheless take issue with the notion of grounding.
Sider (2012), for example, while pro-metaphysics, is anti-grounding.
One of his main concerns is that grounding-theoretic proposals in his
view fail to vindicate the idea that any correct fundamental
description of the world will be, say, strike-free (see §7).
Hofweber (2009), while not suspicious of metaphysics per
se, is suspicious of what he calls ‘esoteric’
metaphysics—roughly, metaphysical inquiry that appeals to
non-quotidian notions that aren't analyzable in terms of quotidian
notions—and he sees the proponent of grounding as engaging in
esoteric metaphysics.  It seems, however, that the notion of grounding
may indeed figure in everyday cognition, for it seems that we often
make grounding claims in ordinary discourse (e.g., the claim that
Frank is sick in virtue of having a cold). Moreover, so long as we
clearly articulate the theoretical role that a primitive non-quotidian
concept is supposed to play—think, for example, about Lewis'
(1983a) discussion of the concept of naturalness—it's unclear
what's wrong with appealing to such concepts in doing metaphysics, so
long as they are up to playing the roles we've assigned to them. (See
Raven 2012 for further discussion.)
Daly (2012) argues that, while there is nothing wrong with
metaphysics per se, there is a problem for the notion of
grounding—it's incoherent. Part of Daly's strategy involves
rebutting arguments to the effect that we understand the notion.
Suppose the proponent of grounding claims that (i) we can analyze
various quasi-technical notions (say, the notion of fundamentality) in
terms of the concept of grounding, so (ii) pointing to how grounding
is related to such notions helps us understand what talk of grounding
comes to (§6.3). Daly claims that, in
endorsing (i), the proponent of grounding is claiming that (iii) we
have no understanding of these quasi-technical notions independent of
our understanding of grounding.  Daly claims that, if (iii) is true,
then (ii) can't be right—if the only way we have of
understanding these quasi-technical notions is through the concept of
grounding, we can't turn around and claim that pointing to how these
notions are related gives us an understanding of the notion of
grounding as well. (So it's no good appealing to the notion of
fundamentality to help us understand grounding, whilst also defining
the former in terms of the latter.) 
It's unclear, however, why we should think that the proponent of
grounding is committed to (iii). As a general matter, it's not the
case that when we set out to analyze one quasi-technical notion in
terms of another, we're committed to the idea that our understanding
of the former is parasitic on our understanding of the
latter. Returning to the concept of intrinsicality
(§6.3), it seems that there are orienting
characterizations of the notion that don't explicitly appeal to the
concept of grounding (e.g., the claim that a property is intrinsic
just in case an ascription of it to something is entirely about how
that thing and its parts are, and not at all about how things wholly
distinct from it are—see Lewis 1983b). But that there are such
characterizations of intrinsicality is compatible with the claim that
the notion is to be analyzed in terms of the notion of grounding. If
we have an independent grip on the notion of intrinsicality, and the
notion really is analyzable in terms of the notion of grounding, then
pointing to how these concepts are related does seem to enhance our
understanding of grounding.
Koslicki (forthcoming) and Wilson (2014) both provide
detailed skeptical challenges to grounding. In what follows we focus
on a common element to their skeptical cases, viz. the claim that a
certain type of pro-grounding argument fails. The argument proceeds
roughly as follows: thus-and-so metaphysical relations are importantly
unified, which gives us reason to think that there is a distinctive
coarse-grained metaphysical relation—the grounding
relation—that unifies them. In particular, grounding is either a
genus or determinable with respect to these relations (see
§1).
Koslicki challenges the idea that the relevant metaphysical
relations display the sort of unity required for us to be justified in
positing a distinctive coarse-grained metaphysical relation as a
unifying element. Consider the determinable-determinate relation and
the Aristotelian genus-species relation, two relations that are
presumably among those that the proponent of the argument thinks that
the grounding relation unifies. As Koslicki points out, these
relations are importantly different. For example, in the case of the
former less specific properties (e.g., being colored) are instantiated
in virtue of more specific properties (e.g., being red), while in the
case of the latter more specific properties (e.g., being a square) are
instantiated partly in virtue of less specific properties (e.g., being
a rectangle).
Wilson (independently) argues for this conclusion as well. Her
discussion focuses on a group of metaphysical relations—what she
calls the ‘small-g’ grounding relations—that include
token identity, realization, the classical extensional part-whole
relation, the set membership relation, the proper subset relation, and
the determinable-determinate relation. (Whereas Wilson sees such
metaphysical relations as determination relations, Koslicki
doesn't.) Wilson points out that these relations are a heterogeneous
lot—some, for example, are SPOs while others aren't (see
 §6.2 for a discussion of SPOs). This counts
against the idea there is a distinctive coarse-grained metaphysical
relation that is the unifying element with respect to these
relations—for what real unity do they display? 
Moreover, Koslicki and Wilson both claim that, even if the relevant
metaphysical relations turn out to be unified in an important way,
this on its own wouldn't license the claim that there is a distinctive
coarse-grained metaphysical relation that unifies them. As Koslicki
notes, not all objective similarities are in fact indicative of the
presence of a single covering genus or determinable. For example,
we're not justified in assigning all instances of jade to a single
kind of mineral, despite the fact that instances of jade are
objectively similar. And as Wilson notes many think that determinables
are identical to disjunctions of their possible determinates.
Proponents of this view agree that there are various things that have
important features in common—all these shades are shades
of red in particular—but they claim that it's a mistake
to think that this unifying element is distinct from that which it
unifies—to be red is just to be scarlet or maroon or crimson
or….
The Koslicki/Wilson argument brings up important and difficult
issues. One issue is this: just which metaphysical relations does the
proponent of the unification argument for grounding think are the
relevant ones—which relations is grounding supposed to unify?
Another more general issue is this: under what conditions are we
justified in positing particular metaphysical relations on the basis
of unification considerations in the first place? A direction for
future research on grounding—be it ultimately friendly or
hostile to the notion—is that of addressing these, and related,
concerns.