G.E. Moore's Principia Ethica of 1903 is often considered a
revolutionary work that set a new agenda for 20th-century
ethics. This historical view is, however, overstated. In metaethics
Moore's non-naturalist position was close to that defended by Henry
Sidgwick and other late 19th-century philosophers such as
Hastings Rashdall, Franz Brentano, and J.M.E. McTaggart; in normative
ethics his ideal consequentialism likewise echoed views of Rashdall,
Brentano, and McTaggart. But Principia Ethica presented its
views with unusual vigor and force. In particular, it made much more of
the alleged errors of metaethical naturalism than Sidgwick or Rashdall
had, saying they vitiated most previous moral philosophy. For this
reason, Moore's work had a disproportionate influence on
20th-century moral philosophy and remains the best-known
expression of a general approach to ethics also shared by later
writers such as H.A. Prichard, W.D. Ross, and C.D. Broad.
 
1. Non-naturalism and the Open-Question Argument


Moore's non-naturalism comprised two main theses. One was the realist
thesis that moral and more generally normative judgements – like
many of his contemporaries, Moore did not distinguish the two —
are objectively true or false. The other was the autonomy-of-ethics
thesis that moral judgements are sui generis, neither
reducible to nor derivable from non-moral, that is, scientific or
metaphysical judgements. Closely connected to his non-naturalism was
the epistemological view that our knowledge of moral truths is
intuitive, in the sense that it is not arrived at by inference from
non-moral truths but rests on our recognizing certain moral
propositions as self-evident.


Moore expressed the realist side of his non-naturalism by saying that
fundamental moral judgements ascribe the property of goodness to
states of affairs, though especially in Principia Ethica he
tended not to distinguish moral concepts and moral properties. Like
others of his time, he seems to have taken the realist view that moral
judgements are objectively true for granted; he certainly did not
defend it extensively against anti-realist alternatives. In this he
was doubtless influenced by the grammar of moral judgements, which
have a standard subject-predicate form. But it may also be relevant
that, at least early on, the only subjectivist view he seems to have
been aware of was the naturalist one according to which to say
“x is good” is to report some psychological fact
such as that you approve of x or that most people in your
society do. In his 1912 book Ethics he showed that this view
does not allow for moral disagreements, since, for example, my report
that I approve of x and your report that you disapprove of it
can both be true (Ethics 58–61). Late in life he
encountered the non-cognitivist emotivism of C.L. Stevenson, which
says that moral judgements express rather than report feelings and
therefore can conflict. He initially conceded that this anti-realist
view had as good a claim as his own to be true (“A Reply to
MyCritics” 544–45), but shortly after reverted to his
earlier non-naturalism, saying he could not imagine what had induced
him to consider abandoning it (Ewing, “G.E. Moore”
251).


Especially in Principia Ethica, Moore spent much more time
defending his other non-naturalist thesis, about the autonomy of
ethics, which he expressed by saying the property of goodness is
simple and unanalyzable, and in particular is unanalyzable in
non-moral terms.  This meant the property is
“non-natural,” which means that it is distinct from any of
the natural properties studied by science. Views that denied this
committed what he dubbed “the naturalistic fallacy,” which
he found in hedonists such as Jeremy Bentham, evolutionary ethicists
such as Herbert Spencer, and metaphysical ethicists such as
T.H. Green. Moore's main argument against their view was what has come
to be known as the “open-question argument,” though he
actually stated in a couple of slightly different ways. Consider a
particular naturalist claim, such as that “x is
good” is equivalent to “x is pleasure.” If
this claim were true, Moore argued, the judgement “Pleasure is
good” would be equivalent to “Pleasure is pleasure,”
yet surely someone who asserts the former means to express more than
that uninformative tautology. The same argument can be mounted against
any other naturalist proposal: even if we have determined that
something is what we desire to desire or is more evolved, the question
whether it is good remains “open,” in the sense that it is
not settled by the meaning of the word “good.” We can ask
whether what we desire to desire is good, and likewise for what is
more evolved, more unified, or whatever (Principia Ethica
62–69). Sidgwick had used one form of this argument against
Bentham and Spencer, but only in passing; Moore spent much more time
on it and made it central to his metaethics.


The open-question argument was extensively discussed in the
20th century and met with several objections. One said the
argument's persuasiveness depends on the “paradox of
analysis”: that any definition of a concept will, if successful,
appear uninformative. If an analysis does capture all its target
concept's content, the sentence linking the two will be a tautology;
but this is hardly a reason to reject all analyses. Moore could
respond that in other cases accepting a definition leads us to see
that the sentence affirming it, while seeming informative, in fact is
not. This does not happen, however, in the case of “good.”
Even if we agree that only pleasure is good, no amount of reflection
will make us think “Pleasure is good” equivalent to
“Pleasure is pleasure”; Ross took this line. Another
objection, made later in the century, said that while the argument may
show that the concept “good” is distinct from any
non-moral concept, it cannot support a similar conclusion about the
property of goodness. Science, the objection runs, uncovers many
non-analytic property-identities; for example, water is identical to
H2O even though the concepts “water” and
“H2O” are distinct. By analogy, the property of
goodness could be identical to that of pleasure even if
“good” and “pleasure” have different
meanings. Again, however, Moore could respond to this objection. The
property of being water is that of having the underlying structure,
whatever that is, of the stuff found in lakes, rivers, and so on; when
this structure turns out to be H2O, the latter property
“fills a gap” in the former and makes the two
identical. But this explanation does not extend to the case of
goodness, which is not a higher-level property with any gap needing
filling: to be good is not to have whatever other property plays some
functional role. If goodness is analytically distinct from all natural
properties, therefore it is metaphysically distinct as well. It is
worth noting, however, that Moore did not explain the open-question
argument in the way many later non-cognitivists would.  Following
Hume, they said that moral judgements are intrinsically motivating, so
sincerely accepting “x is good” requires a
commitment or at least some motivation to pursue x if that is
possible. But then no definition of “good” in purely
natural terms can succeed, since it cannot capture the term's
action-guiding force; nor can an evaluative conclusion be validly
inferred from premises none of which have such force. Whatever the
merits of this Humean explanation, Moore did not give it. On the
contrary, the question whether moral judgements are intrinsically
motivating is not one on which he expressed clear views or apparently
thought important. In Principia Ethica he remarked casually
that we “hardly ever” think something good without having
some attitude of will towards it, but he denied that this is true
universally (131, 135-6). Whether it is true universally isn't
something he thought worth considering further.
2. Metaethical Innovations

 The main elements of Moore's non-naturalism — moral realism and
the autonomy of ethics — had been defended earlier by Sidgwick
and others and were reasonably well known when Moore wrote. But Moore did add two
innovations. One was his view that the fundamental moral concept is
that of goodness, which he expressed by saying that goodness is simple
and unanalyzable, even in moral terms. This had not been Sidgwick's
view. For him the central moral concept was ought, and he defined
good in terms of ought, more specifically, as what one ought to
desire.  Principia Ethica took the exactly opposite view,
defining ought in terms of good, so “one ought to do
x” literally means “x will produce the
most good possible” (76–77, 196–98). Moore was
quickly persuaded by Bertrand Russell that this last view is
vulnerable to his own open-question argument: in saying “one
ought to do what will produce the most good” we do not mean
“what will produce the most good will produce the most
good.” In later work such as Ethics he therefore held
that ought is a distinct moral property from good, and in an
uncompleted Preface to a planned second edition of Principia
Ethica allowed that it would not affect the essence of his
non-naturalism if good were defined in moral terms, say, as what one
ought to desire. But he continued to prefer the view that good is a
simple concept, and there was vigorous debate on this topic in this
general period, with Brentano, Broad, and A.C. Ewing defending
reductive analyses similar to Sidgwick's while Ross held a
non-reductive view like Moore's. On the Moorean view judgements about
the goodness of states of affairs are not shorthand for judgements
about how we ought to respond to those states; they are independent
judgements that explain why we ought so to respond.


Moore's second innovation was his view that the intrinsic value of a
state of affairs can depend only on its intrinsic properties,
properties it has apart from any relations to other states. Earlier
writers had distinguished between goodness as an end, which they also
called intrinsic or ultimate goodness, and goodness as a means, saying
the former cannot rest just on a state's causally producing goods
outside itself. But they seemed to allow that goodness as an end can
depend on other relational properties; thus they talked as if a
belief's being true, which is necessary for its being knowledge, can
increase its value, while a pleasure's being that of a bad person can
make it worse. Moore did not explicitly state his more restrictive
view that intrinsic goodness can depend only on intrinsic properties
until “The Conception of Intrinsic Value” of 1922, but it
nonetheless guided Principia Ethica at two points. One was
the book's specific formulation of the principle of organic unities,
to be discussed below. The other was its testing for a state's
intrinsic value by the “method of isolation,” which
involves asking whether a universe containing only that state and no
other would be good (Principia Ethica 142, 145–47, 236,
256); the point of this method was precisely to insulate judgements of
intrinsic value from facts about a state's external relations. Moore's
strict view was shared by some later writers such as Ross, while
others argued that a better theory of value results if intrinsic
goodness is allowed to depend on some relational properties. But Moore
was the first to raise this issue clearly.


These two innovations, though not trivial, do not affect the core of a
non-naturalist metaethics. But some critics charge that Moore did
change that view fundamentally, and for the worse. They say that
Sidgwick's non-naturalism was comparatively modest, holding only that
there are truths about what people ought or have reason to do that we
can know by reflection. But Moore, the objection runs, supplemented
this modest view with an extravagant metaphysics of non-natural
properties inhabiting a supersensible realm and a mysterious faculty
of intuition that acquaints us with them. These additions opened
non-naturalism to entirely avoidable objections and so led, regrettably, to its
widespread rejection by philosophers.


These charges are hard to sustain, however. Principia Ethica
actually downplayed the metaphysical side of its non-naturalism,
saying that goodness has “being” but does not
“exist”, as numbers too do not exist, and in particular
does not exist in any “supersensible reality,” because
there is no such reality (161–63, 174–76). What exactly
Moore meant by these claims is unclear, but it's at least possible to
read them as suggesting a non-metaphysical moral realism like those
defended more recently by Scanlon and Parfit. Nor did his explicit
talk of properties mark a significant departure from Sidgwick. This is
partly because he did not clearly distinguish concepts and properties,
and partly because if Sidgwick thought people ought to pursue
pleasure, he would surely have to grant that pleasure has the property
of being something people ought to pursue. The question is how
ontologically robust Moore's talk of a property of goodness was, and
given his denial that such goodness exists the answer is
uncertain. The distinction between more and less metaphysical forms of
non-naturalism is not one he ever clearly addressed.


Moore was similarly modest in his moral 
epistemology, saying several times, as Sidgwick also had, that by
calling our knowledge of basic moral truths “intuitive” he
means only that it was not derived by inference from other knowledge;
he likewise denied that moral intuition was infallible, saying that in
whatever way we can cognize a true proposition, we can cognize a false
one (Principia Ethica 36, 193). Moore did sometimes make bald
assertions of self-evidence, as in his claim in Ethics that
it is self-evident that the right is always what most promotes the
good (112), and some critics have found this baldness troubling. But
the contrast with earlier non-naturalists such as Sidgwick should
again not be overdrawn. It is arguable that Sidgwick, too, gave most
weight to intuitions about abstract moral principles like those Moore
cited in Ethics, citing more concrete judgements only in
ad hominem arguments against opponents. And Moore often
argued in more complex ways. In Principia Ethica he defended
his claim that beauty on its own is good by appealing to intuitions
about a very specific beautiful world, one containing mountains,
rivers, and sunsets, and criticized the view that only pleasure is
good by arguing that it conflicts with other things we believe
(132–47). Moore likewise insisted that before we make judgements
of self-evidence we must make sure that the propositions we are
considering are clear; failure to do so, he claimed, explained much of
the disagreement about ethics. And he took note of common opinions to
the extent of trying to explain away contrary views when he found
them. Overall his approach to establishing moral truths was very close
to Sidgwick's, appealing to intuitive judgements that can be made at
different levels of generality and that must be brought into a
coherent whole, though with some preference for the most abstract
judgements. This is not to say his non-naturalism was beyond
objection. Any such view holds that there are truths independent of
natural and logical ones and knowable by some non-empirical means, and
many find this pair of claims unacceptable.  But Moore's version of
the view was arguably no more objectionable than others. If Sidgwick's
non-naturalism did not involve a problematic metaphysics and
epistemology, neither did Moore's; if Moore's was hopelessly
extravagant, so was a supposedly more modest one like Sidgwick's.


A final important feature of Moore's metaethics was its reductionism
about normative concepts. Like Sidgwick, the Moore of Principia
Ethica held that there is just one basic normative concept,
though he thought it was good rather than ought; like Ross, the later
Moore held that there are just two. But this conceptual reductionism,
which was common throughout the period from Sidgwick to Ross, Broad, and Ewing,
contrasts sharply with the multitude of concepts recognized in much
present-day ethics. First, Moore and his contemporaries took as basic
only the “thin” concepts good and ought rather than
“thick” moral concepts such as courage and generosity; the
latter, they held, combined a thin concept with some more or less
determinate descriptive content. They were also reductive about the
thin concepts. They did not distinguish between moral oughts and
prudential or rational ones, holding that there is only the single,
moral ought; this is why for them egoism was a moral view, not a
challenge to morality from outside the moral realm. Nor did they recognize
different types of value. For them goodness was a property only of
states of affairs and not, as some Kantians hold, of persons and other
objects. They likewise did not accept the late 20th-century
idea that there is a distinct concept of “well-being,” or
of what is “good for” a person; instead, they defined a
person's good as what is simply good and located in his life. Nor did
they distinguish between moral and non-moral goodness, holding that
the former is just ordinary goodness when possessed by certain
objects, such as traits of character. The result was that all
normative judgements can be expressed using the two concepts good
and ought, which are therefore the only ones one needed. To some this
conclusion will mean that Moore and his contemporaries ignored
important conceptual distinctions; to others it will mean they avoided
tedious conceptual debates. But it did free them to discuss
substantive questions about what is in fact good and right. On this
topic Moore's views, though not entirely novel, were again both striking and strikingly
stated.
3. Impersonal Consequentialism

 Moore's normative view again comprised two main theses. One was
impersonal consequentialism, the view that what is right is always
what produces the greatest total good impartially considered, or
counting all people's good equally. The other was the ideal or
perfectionist thesis that what is good is not only or primarily
pleasure or the satisfaction of desires, but certain states whose value is
independent of people's attitudes to them. Moore recognized several
such states, but in Principia Ethica said famously that
“by far the most valuable things…are certain states of
consciousness, which may roughly be described as the pleasures of
human intercourse and the enjoyment of beautiful objects”
(237). According to his ideal consequentialism, what is right is in
large part what most promotes loving personal relationships and
aesthetic appreciation for all persons everywhere.

Principia Ethica took the consequentialist part of this view
to be analytically true, since it defined the right as what most
promotes the good. But once Moore abandoned this definition, he had to
treat the consequentialist principle as synthetic and did so in
Ethics, which allowed that deontological views that say some
acts that maximize the good are wrong are perfectly coherent. But even
there he did not argue at length for consequentialism, simply
announcing that it is self-evident (112). This in part reflected
a common assumption of his time, when a majority of moral philosophers
accepted some consequentialist structure. But it may also be relevant
that the only alternative he considered in Ethics was an
absolute deontology like Kant's, according to which some acts such as
killing and lying are wrong no matter what their consequences. His
major ethical works did not consider a moderate deontology such as
would later be developed by Ross, in which deontological prohibitions
against killing and lying often outweigh considerations of good
consequences but can themselves be outweighed if enough good is at
stake. It is not clear what Moore's response to such a moderate
deontology would have been.

Principia Ethica also took the impartialism of its view to
be analytic, and in particular claimed that egoism, which says that
each person should pursue only his own good, is self-contradictory.
(Despite his interest in personal love, Moore never considered the
intermediate view that Broad would call self-referential altruism,
according to which each person should care more about the good of
those close to him, such as his family and friends.) Sidgwick had
argued that if an egoist confines himself to saying that each person's
pleasure is good from that person's point of view, he cannot be argued
out of his position. But Moore said this concept of agent-relative
goodness is unintelligible (Principia Ethica 148–53), and
that conclusion does follow from his view that goodness is simple and
unanalyzable. If goodness is a simple property, how can a state such
as person A's pleasure have this property from one point of view but not
from another?  (Compare squareness. An object cannot be square from one
point of view but not from another; it either is square or is not.) All
that can be meant by talk of the “good for” a person is
what is simply good and located in him; and simple goodness gives
everyone equally reason to pursue it. In Ethics Moore
abandoned this argument, saying that egoism cannot be proven false by
any argument, even though he thought its falsity was self-evident
(99–100). But it is not clear how he could make this concession if he
still held that goodness is a simple property. Perhaps he was tacitly
allowing, as he would in the draft Preface to Principia
Ethica, that it would not centrally damage his position if good
were analyzed in terms of ought, as it had been by Sidgwick. There is
no contradiction in saying that what each person ought to desire is
different, say, just his own pleasure. But if all oughts derive from a
simple property of goodness, as Moore always preferred to hold, then
all oughts must be impartial.


In applying this view, Moore gave it the form of what today is called
“indirect” or “two-level” consequentialism. In
deciding how to act, we should not try to assess individual acts for
their specific consequences; instead, we should follow certain general
moral rules such as “Do not kill” and “Keep
promises,” which are such that adhering to them will most
promote the good through time. This policy will sometimes lead us not
to do the act with the best individual outcome, but given our general
propensity to error its consequences will be better in the long run
than trying to assess acts one by one; however well-meaning, the
latter attempt will be counterproductive. This indirect
consequentialism had again been defended earlier, by Sidgwick and even
John Stuart Mill, but Moore gave it a very conservative form, urging
adherence to the rules even in the face of apparently compelling
evidence that breaking them now would be optimific. Principia
Ethica made the surprising claim that the relevant rules will be
the same given any commonly accepted theory of the good, for example,
given either hedonism or its own ideal theory (207).  This claim of
extensional equivalence for different consequentialist views was not
new; T.H. Green, F.H. Bradley, and McTaggart had all suggested that
hedonism and ideal consequentialism have similar practical
implications. But Moore was surely expressing the more plausible view
when in Ethics he doubted that pleasure and ideal values
always go together (145), and even when he accepted the equivalence
claim, he remained intensely interested in what he called “the
primary ethical question of what is good in itself”
(Principia Ethica 207; see also 78, 128). Like Green,
Bradley, and McTaggart, he thought the central philosophical question
was what explained why good things are good, i.e., which of
their properties made them good. That was the subject of his
most brilliant piece of ethical writing, Chapter 6 of Principia
Ethica on “The Ideal.”
4. The Ideal


One of this chapter's larger aims was to defend value-pluralism, the
view that there are many ultimate goods. Moore thought an important bar to
this view is the naturalistic fallacy. He assumed, plausibly, that
philosophers who treat goodness as identical to some natural property
will usually make this a simple property, such as just pleasure or
just evolutionary fitness, rather than a disjunctive one such as
pleasure-or-evolutionary-fitness-or-knowledge. But then any naturalist
view pushes us toward value-monism, or toward the view that only one kind of state is
good. Once we reject naturalism, however, we can see what Moore
thought is self-evident: that there are irreducibly many goods. Another
bar to value-pluralism was excessive demands for unity or system in
ethics. Sidgwick had used such demands to argue that only pleasure can
be good, since no theory with a plurality of ultimate values can
justify a determinate scheme for weighing them against each other. But
Moore, agreeing here with Rashdall, Ross, and others, said that
“to search for ‘unity’ and ‘system,’ at
the expense of truth, is not, I take it, the proper business of
philosophy” (Principia Ethica 270). If intuition reveals a
plurality of ultimate goods, then an adequate theory must recognize
that plurality.


According to a famous part of Principia Ethica, one of those
goods is the existence of beauty. Arguing against Sidgwick's view that
all goods must be states of consciousness, Moore asked readers to
imagine a beautiful world with no minds in it: is this world's
existence not better than that of a horribly ugly world (135–36)? In
answering yes, he anticipated some strands in present-day environmental ethics,
which likewise hold that there can be value in features of the
natural environment apart from any awareness of them. But he did not
insist on this view. Later in Principia Ethica he said that
beauty on its own at most has little and may have no value, and in
Ethics he denied that beauty on its own has value. There he
held, like Sidgwick, that all intrinsic goods involve some state of
consciousness (103–04, 148, 153). But in his first book he had
defended the contrary view.


Moore also gave some weight to the hedonic states of pleasure and
pain. He thought the former a very minor good, saying that pleasure on
its own at most has limited and may have no value. But he thought pain
a very great evil, which there is a serious duty to prevent
(Principia Ethica 260–61, 270–71). His view
therefore involved a value-asymmetry, with pain a much greater evil
than pleasure is a good. This had not been the traditional view; most
hedonists had held that a pleasure of a given intensity is exactly as
good as a pain of the same intensity is evil. But Moore thought it
intuitively compelling that the pain is worse; if that made the theory
of value less systematic, so much the worse for system.


While many ideal consequentialists treated knowledge as intrinsically
good, in some cases supremely so, Principia Ethica did not,
saying knowledge is a necessary component of the larger good of
appreciating existing beauty but has little or no value in itself
(247–48). Again Ethics may have reversed this view, citing
knowledge several times as one ideal good that may be added to the
hedonist's good of pleasure (34, 146–47). But Moore never saw any
intrinsic value in achievement, for example in business or politics,
or indeed in any active changing of the world. As John Maynard Keynes
said, his chief goods were states of mind that “were not
associated with action or achievement or with consequence. They
consisted in timeless, passionate states of contemplation and
communion, largely unattached to ‘before and
after’” (Keynes, “My Early Beliefs,” 83).


The first of these goods was the appreciation of beauty, which for
Moore combined the cognition of beautiful qualities with an
appropriately positive emotion toward them, such as enjoyment or
admiration. We listen to music, for example, hear beautiful qualities in it,
and are pleased by or admire those qualities. But the value here was entirely
contemplative; Moore saw no separate worth in what the romantics had
especially valued, the active creation of beauty. Moore might say
that an artist must understand and love his work's beauty if he is to
create it, perhaps even more than someone who merely enjoys it; but
the value in his work is still not distinctively creative. In
characterizing the good of aesthetic contemplation Moore gave a
further reductive analysis, this time of beauty as “that of which the
admiring contemplation is good in itself”
(Principia Ethica 249–50). Beauty too, then, was not a distinct
normative concept but analyzable in terms of goodness. He did not
notice, however, that this definition again seemed to open him to an
open-question argument, since it reduced the claim that it is good to
contemplate beauty to the near-tautology that it is good to contemplate
what it is good to contemplate.


Though Moore in Principia Ethica thought beauty good in itself, he
did not insist on this view when valuing the appreciation of beauty;
the latter might be good even if the former was not. But he still
thought the existence of beauty makes a significant difference to
value. More specifically, he thought the admiring contemplation of
beauty that actually exists and causes your contemplation is significantly better
than an otherwise similar contemplation of merely imagined beauty,
and better by more than can be attributed to the existence of the
beauty on its own. This view involved an application of his
“principle of organic unities,” which says the
value of a whole need not equal the sum of the values its parts would
have on their own (Principia Ethica 78–80). If state
x on its own has value a and state y on
its own has value b, the whole combining them need not have
value a + b; it may have more or less. This principle had
been accepted by Idealists such as Bradley, who gave it a
characteristically anti-theoretical formulation. They held that if
x and y combine to form the whole x-plus-y,
their values, like their very identities, are dissolved in that larger
whole, whose value cannot be computed from the values of its parts. It was
Moore's contribution to accept the principle in a way that rejected
this anti-theoretical stance and allowed computation, though exactly
how it did so depended on his strict view that intrinsic value can
depend only on intrinsic properties.


This view implies that when x and y enter
into the relations that constitute the whole x-plus-y, their
own values cannot be changed by those relations. Moore recognized
this, saying, “The part of a valuable whole retains exactly the
same value when it is, as when it is not, a part of that whole”
(Principia Ethica 81). Any additional value in the whole
x-plus-y must therefore be attributed to it as an entity distinct
from its parts, and with the relations between those parts
internal to it. Moore called this additional value the value of a
whole “as a whole,” and said it needed to be added to the
value in the parts to arrive at the whole's value “on the
whole” (Principia Ethica 263–64). Thus, if x
and y have values a and b on their own, and
x-plus-y has value c “as a whole,” the value of
x-plus-y “on the whole” is a + b +
c. (The value of the whole is therefore not equal to the sum
of the values of its parts, but is equal to a sum of which those
values are constituents.)  This “holistic” formulation of
the principle of organic unities is not the only possible one. We
could relax the conditions on intrinsic value so it can be affected by
external relations and say that when x and y enter
into a whole their own values change, so that, say, x's value
becomes a + c. This “variability”
formulation can always reach the same final conclusions as the
holistic one, since whatever positive or negative value the latter
finds in the whole as a whole the former can add to one or other of the
parts. But the two formulations locate the additional value in
different places, and sometimes one and sometimes the other gives the
intuitively better explanation of an organic value. Moore, however,
was forced by his strict view of intrinsic goodness to use only the
holistic formulation. In the aesthetic case, he held that the admiring
contemplation of beauty considered apart from the existence of its
object always has the same (moderate) value a, while the
existence of beauty always has the same (minimal) value
b. But when the two are combined so a person admiringly
contemplates beauty that exists and causes his contemplation, the
resulting whole has the significant additional value c as a
whole. The existence of the beauty is therefore necessary for the
significant value c, but that value is not intrinsic to it,
belonging instead to the larger whole of which it is part.


Moore made several other uses of the principle of organic unities,
including in response to an argument of Sidgwick's for hedonism.
Sidgwick had claimed that there would be no value in a world without
consciousness and, more specifically, pleasure, and had concluded that
pleasure must therefore be the only good. Given Principia
Ethica's view about the value of beauty, Moore there rejected the
premise of Sidgwick's argument, but he also argued that, even granting
that premise, Sidgwick's conclusion does not follow. It may be that
pleasure is a necessary condition for any value, but that once
pleasure is present, other states such as the awareness of beauty or
love increase the value of the resulting whole even though alone they
have no worth (Principia Ethica 144–45). And of course
this was precisely his later view. Another application of the
principle was in explicating claims about desert. Moore endorsed the
retributive view that when a person is morally vicious it is good if
he is punished, and he expressed this view by saying that although the
person's vice is bad and his suffering pain is bad, the combination of
vice and pain in the same life is good as a whole, and sufficiently so
to make the situation on the whole better than if there were vice and
no pain (Principia Ethica 263–64). This is in fact a
point where Moore's holistic formulation of the principle is
positively appealing. The alternative variability view must say that
when a person is vicious, his suffering pain switches from being
purely bad to being purely good. But this implies that the morally
appropriate response to deserved suffering is simple pleasure, which
does not seem right; the better response mixes satisfaction that
justice is being done with pain at the infliction of pain, as Moore's
holistic view implies.


Moore's other chief good of personal love also involved admiring
contemplation, but now of objects that are not just beautiful but also
intrinsically good (Principia Ethica 251). Since for Moore
the main intrinsic goods were mental qualities, such love involved
primarily the admiring contemplation of another's good states of mind.
In so characterizing love Moore was applying one of four recursive
principles he used to generate higher-level intrinsic goods and evils
from an initial base-set of goods and evils. The first principle
says that if state x is intrinsically good, admiringly
contemplating, or loving, x for itself is also intrinsically
good. Thus, if person A's admiringly contemplating beauty is
good, person B's admiringly contemplating A's
admiration is a further good, as is C's admiration of
B's admiration, and so on. A second principle says that if
x is intrinsically evil, hating x for itself is
intrinsically good; thus, B's feeling compassionate pain at
A's pain is good. And two final principles say that loving
for itself what is evil, as in sadistic pleasure in another's pain,
and hating for itself what is good, as in envious pain at his
pleasure, are evil. Though Moore stated these four principles
separately, they all make morally appropriate attitudes to intrinsic
goods and evils further goods and morally inappropriate attitudes
further evils. The principles were by no means unique to him; they
had been defended earlier by Rashdall and Brentano and would be
defended later by Ross. But Moore's formulation was in one respect
distinctive. Rashdall and Ross called the higher-level values they
generated virtues and vices, as it is indeed plausible to do; surely
benevolence and compassion are virtuous and sadism vicious. But Moore
defined the virtues instrumentally, as traits that cause goods and
prevent evils, and said that as such they lack intrinsic worth
(Principia Ethica 220–26).


The recursive principles are clearly relevant to personal love, which
centrally involves concern for another's good. But Moore's particular
application of the principles led to a curiously restricted picture of
what love is. First, as in the aesthetic case, he took the main valuable
attitude to be contemplative, involving the admiration of another's
already existing good qualities rather than any active engagement with
them. This applied even to the love of another's physical
beauty. Though he thought this a crucial part of love, he took it to
involve mere passive admiration of another's beauty, as it were from
the other side of the room. There was no desire to possess or interact
physically with her beauty, that is, no active eroticism. The same
point applied more generally: the loving attitude was one of
appreciating goods in another's life rather than acting to produce or
help her achieve them. One did not do anything for or with a loved
one; one simply admired her. Moreover, the list of admired goods was
seriously truncated. It did not include pleasure or happiness, since
that was not a significant good, nor even knowledge or
achievement. Instead, it centered on another's admiring contemplation
of beauty, as if the supreme expression of love was “What fine
taste in music you have.” Finally, Moore took the qualities one
admired in a loved one to be simply and therefore impartially
good. But this meant his account had no room for the special
attachments many take to be central to personal love. If I love a
friend for qualities x, y, and z, and a
stranger comes along with the same qualities to a slightly higher degree, then
on Moore's theory I should love the stranger more. This is not to say
that a more adequate account of love cannot be constructed
with the same basic structure as Moore's; it can. It will hold that
personal love involves a wider range of positive attitudes, including
actively promoting as well as contemplating, to a wider range of
goods, including happiness, knowledge, and achievement, where
those goods in a loved one's life have greater value from a lover's
point of view than do similar states of strangers. But Moore was
prevented from giving this account by other features of his view: his
general emphasis on contemplative forms of love, his restricted list
of initial goods, and his strict impartialism about
value.
5. Influence


Despite not containing that many major new ideas, Moore's ethical
writings, and especially Principia Ethica, were extremely
influential, both outside and within philosophy. Outside philosophy
their main influence was through the literary and artistic figures in
the Bloomsbury Group, such as Keynes, Lytton Strachey, and Leonard and
Virginia Woolf, several of whom had come under Moore's influence while
members with him of the Apostles society at Cambridge. They were most
impressed by the last chapter of Principia Ethica, whose
identification of aesthetic appreciation and personal love as the
highest goods very much fit their predilections. Many of them —
the gay men in particular — sexualized Moore's account of love,
adding an erotic element not present in his formulations. And
according to Keynes (though Leonard Woolf disagreed), they tended to
ignore the impartial consequentialism within which Moore embedded
those goods, and so concentrated on pursuing them just within their
own lives rather than encouraging their wider spread in
society. Characters representing Moorean ideas figure in some novels
of E.M. Forster, another Cambridge Apostle. Also important
for Principia Ethica's extra-philosophical appeal was its
brash iconoclasm, its claiming, however inaccurately, to sweep away
all past moral philosophy. This tone entirely fit its time, when the
death of Victoria had led many in Britain to think a new, more
progressive age was dawning.


The book's influence within philosophy was even greater. On the
normative side, views close to its ideal consequentialism remained
prominent and even dominant until the 1930s, though it is hard to know
how far this is attributable to Moore, since similar views had been
widely accepted before him. In metaethics his non-naturalism likewise
remained dominant for several decades, though here Moore played a
larger role, especially for later generations, because of the vigor
with which he presented the view. By talking explicitly of non-natural
properties he at least seemed to give a more robust metaphysical side
than predecessors such as Sidgwick had. And he defended the view more
extensively, in particular by putting more weight on the open-question
argument.  When Sidgwick noticed Bentham or Spencer equating goodness
with a natural property such as pleasure, he thought it a minor slip
that ought in charity to be ignored; Moore thought it a horrible error
that vitiated the philosopher's entire system. By so emphasizing the
two elements of non-naturalism — its realism and commitment to
the autonomy of ethics — Moore helped initiate a sequence of
developments in 20th-century metaethics.


The first reaction to non-naturalism, other than simple acceptance,
came from philosophers who accepted the autonomy of ethics but, often
under the influence of logical positivism, rejected its moral realism,
holding instead that there are no facts other than natural facts and no modes
of knowing other than the empirical and the strictly logical. They
therefore developed various versions of non-cognitivism, which hold
that moral judgements are not true or false but express attitudes
(emotivism) or issue something like imperatives
(prescriptivism). These views allow for moral disagreement, since
attitudes and imperatives can oppose each other. They also, their
proponents claimed, give a better explanation of the open-question
argument, since they find a distinctive emotive or action-guiding
force in moral concepts and judgements that is not present in
non-moral ones. Non-cognitivism can also explain why morality matters
to us as it does. Non-naturalism implies that moral judgements concern
a mysterious type of property, but why should facts about that
property be important to us or influence our behavior? If such
judgements express deep-seated attitudes, the question answers
itself.


A still later generation turned against non-cognitivism, in part for
flouting the grammar of moral judgements and our natural response to
them, both of which suggest realism, but also for a reason hostile to
non-naturalism. When Moore and the other non-naturalists made
substantive moral claims, they often said baldly that their judgements
were self-evident, so anyone who denied them was morally blind. To the
later generation this was unacceptably dogmatic, and the failing was
even more plainly present in non-cognitivism, which pictured moral
debate as a mere venting of emotions or issuing of commands. These
philosophers therefore sought an account of ethics that would better
allow for rational moral discussion. While many alternatives were
canvassed, one that became prominent in the late 1950s was a
neo-Aristotelian view according to which, if it is true that you
ought, say, to relieve others' pain, this is because doing so will
contribute to your own flourishing as a human being. Since such
flourishing was to be understood in terms of humans' biological
nature, this view at least implicitly challenged the autonomy of
ethics grounded in the open-question argument, which itself met with
criticism. Many of the view's partisans also rejected the calculating
side of Moore's consequentialism, which identified right acts by
adding up the goods and evils in their effects. Moral principles, they
said, cannot be codified or theorized in this way. And even
philosophers who did accept calculation tended to reject Moore's ideal
consequentialist values as unacceptably extravagant; if right acts
promoted goods, those had to be less contentious and more empirically
measurable ones such as preference-satisfaction. By the 1960s, it
seems fair to say, Moore's moral philosophy was not considered an
especially live option. It was still important to read Principia
Ethica, as having initiated the sequence of developments that led
to the then-current views, but from the standpoint of most of those
views Moore's approach to ethics was pretty fundamentally
misguided.


Fifty years later the situation is considerably more favorable to
Moore. A growing body of philosophers now defend non-naturalist views
in metaethics, some claiming to do so with less ontological
extravagance than Moore but all embracing some account of moral truth
that separates it sharply from scientific truth. In normative ethics,
too, there is increasing sympathy for accounts of the good with an
ideal or perfectionist content, and admiration for particular features
of Moore's view, such as his valuing of personal love and his
principle of organic unities. Even Moore's style of defending moral
claims, which so outraged philosophers of the 1950s and 1960s, is in
effect the standard style of contemporary normative theorizing, though
it tends to take a more complex and circumspect form. Whereas Moore
sometimes claimed that certain moral propositions are self-evident
when considered on their own, philosophers today are more likely to
give coherence arguments, appealing to intuitive judgements at
different levels of generality and if possible on different topics, to
arrive at an overall position with intuitive support at multiple
points. But the basis of this more complex procedure, which Moore also
sometimes used, is essentially the same appeal to intuitive moral
judgement. And it is possible to see this approach as, not arrogant,
but philosophically modest. Moore and his contemporaries from Sidgwick
in the 1870s to Ross and others in the 1930s believed that if we ask,
for example, why we should relieve others' pain, there is no answer:
we simply should. The duty to promote others' good is an underivative
one for which no deeper explanation can be given and which can only be
recognized by intuition. In taking this stance they assumed that the
more grandiose justifications sometimes offered by philosophers, such
as the neo-Aristotelian argument that benefiting others is necessary
for your own flourishing, or the Kantian argument that maxims contrary
to it cannot be universalized, can never succeed. There is no moral
philosopher's stone, or no way of escaping the need for direct moral
judgement. Their moral methodology therefore reflected a modest belief
about what philosophy can accomplish in normative ethics, as against
the intuitive reflection that is also exercised, if less
systematically, by non-philosophers. This philosophical modesty freed
them to look more closely at the details of substantive moral views
than philosophers seeking grand justifications tend to do, and to
uncover more of their underlying structure, as in the principle of
organic unities. In this respect contemporary ethics, which has spent
several decades remaking many of their discoveries, is returning to
their path. This is another way in which, however slowly, it is coming
back to Moore.