For moral sentimentalists, our emotions and desires play a leading
role in the anatomy of morality. Some believe moral thoughts are
fundamentally sentimental, others that moral facts make essential
reference to our sentimental responses, or that emotions are the
primary source of moral knowledge. Some believe all these things. The
two main attractions of sentimentalism are making sense of the
practical aspects of morality, on the one hand, and finding a place for
morality within a naturalistic worldview, on the other. The
corresponding challenges are accounting for the apparent objectivity
and normativity of morality. Recent psychological theories emphasizing
the centrality of emotion in moral thinking have prompted renewed
interest in sentimentalist ethics.
 
1. The Many Moral Sentimentalisms


Consider the following story related by Frans de Waal in a recent
book:



J. lives in a small seaside town in France, where he is known as the
handyman he is. He can build an entire house with his own hands, as he
is skilled in carpentry, plumbing, masonry, roof work, and so on. He
demonstrates this every day at his own home, and so people naturally
ask him for help. Being extremely nice, J. usually dispenses advice or
lends a helping hand. One neighbor, whom he barely knew, kept asking
about how to put a skylight in his roof. J. lent him his ladder for the
job, but since the man kept returning, he promised to come take a look
one day.


J. spent from morning until late evening with the neighbor,
basically doing the job on his own (as the neighbor could barely hold a
hammer, he said), during which time the neighbor's wife came,
cooked, and ate lunch (the main meal in France) with her husband
without offering J. anything. By the end of the day, he had
successfully put the skylight in, having provided expert labor that
normally would have cost more than six hundred euros. J. asked for
nothing, but when the same neighbor a few days later talked about a
scuba diving course, and how it would be fun to do together, he felt
this opened a perfect occasion for a return gift, since the course cost
about 150 euros. So J. said he'd love to go, but unfortunately
didn't have the money in his budget. By now you can guess: The
man went alone. (de Waal 2009: 174–175)



Assuming the story is true and leaves nothing of importance out,
we're likely to have two kinds of response to it: we have a
negative feeling of some sort towards the neighbour, and we think that
the neighbour acted wrongly towards poor J. Roughly speaking,
sentimentalists think that these two responses are intimately related,
with the feeling in the driving seat. (Since different theories in the
sentimentalist family make use of different responses, this entry will
adopt a liberal definition of a ‘sentiment’ that comprises
non-cognitive attitudes and states of all kinds—emotions,
feelings, affects, desires, besires, plans, and dispositions to have
them.)


There are many questions we could ask about this. One kind of
question is explanatory: Why do we think that the neighbour did
something wrong? Explanatory sentimentalists believe that
moral thoughts are fundamentally explained by sentiments or emotions.
The second kind of question is constitutive: What does our thought that
the neighbour did something wrong consist in? That is, what kind of
thought is it? Is it more like believing that Pluto is a planet or like
wanting to hit an uncooperative computer? Judgment
sentimentalists believe that moral judgments are constituted by
emotional or non-cognitive responses, at least in part, or
alternatively are judgments about emotional responses or the
tendency of something to give rise to them. Some judgment
sentimentalists are also expressivists, who believe that the
meanings of moral terms must be accounted for in terms of associated
non-cognitive states.


Third, assuming that we've got it right, what kind of fact if any
makes our thought about the neighbour's action true? Is the wrongness
of the action a projection of our sentiments? If it is a fact, is it
like the fact that the square of the hypotenuse is the sum of the
squares of the other two sides of a right triangle, or like the fact
that water is H2O, or perhaps more like the fact that
rotten food is disgusting? For metaphysical sentimentalists,
moral facts make reference to our sentimental responses. Finally,
we're pretty confident of our judgment. But even if we assume we know
all the pertinent empirical facts, how do we know that what the
neighbour did is wrong? What if someone disagrees? How can we justify
our verdict?
Epistemological sentimentalists believe that moral
justification bottoms out in sentimental responses of a certain
kind.


These sentimentalist views are logically independent of each other.
One indication of this is that they contrast with different views.
Epistemological and possibly explanatory sentimentalist views contrast
with rationalist and intuitionist views, according
which we can acquire moral knowledge by reasoning or intuition,
respectively. Judgment sentimentalist views, in turn, contrast with
some forms of cognitivism. Metaphysical sentimentalist views
contrast with error theory and mind-independent moral
realism in naturalist and non-naturalist variants.
2. Moral Psychology: Explanation


It is not uncommon for contemporary philosophers to see sentimentalism
as a theory of moral judgment or facts. But classical sentimentalists
clearly considered the primary question to be a moral
psychological one: What feature of human nature—reason,
sentiment, or intuition—explains why we approve of something or
blame someone? (See David Hume's Treatise of Human Nature
(T), 456 and Adam Smith's The Theory of Moral Sentiments
(TMS), 312–313.) Since it is in this context of fundamentally
explaining our moral judgments that they introduced some of their main
arguments, it is good to start with these issues, even though they lie
on the borderline of philosophy and what is now the empirical science
of psychology.
2.1  Moral Sense Theories


The roots of the modern sentimentalist tradition in ethics go back
to early 18th century debates in Britain. Anthony Ashley
Cooper, better known by his title as the Earl of Shaftesbury,
introduced the notion of a moral sense in his Inquiry
Concerning Virtue, or Merit. According to Shaftesbury,
the primary object of moral evaluation is the “affection”
or motive behind the action. Such affections can, by reflection, become
the object of a second-order affection:



In a Creature capable of forming general Notions of Things, not only
the outward Beings which offer themselves to the Sense, are the Objects
of the Affection; but the very Actions themselves, and the Affections
of Pity, Kindness, Gratitude, and their Contrarys, being brought into
the Mind by Reflection, become Objects. So that, by means of this
reflected Sense, there arises another kind of Affection towards those
very Affections themselves, which have been already felt, and are now
become the Subject of a new Liking or Dislike. (Shaftesbury
1699–1714: 16)



Moral approval is explained by (and perhaps consists in) this sort
of second-order liking, which Shaftesbury usually designates the
‘Sense of Right or Wrong’. This sense is innate or natural,
and can be displaced only by “contrary habit and custom”
(1699–1714: 25), although it may on occasion be overcome by
“rage, lust, or any other counterworking passion”
(1699–1714: 35). On Shaftesbury's view, what it approves of
are natural or public affections, which are the beautiful and
harmonious motives tending towards the good of the whole system of
rational creatures. There is also a place for subordinate
self-interested motives, since society suffers if individuals fail to
preserve or defend themselves. To be virtuous, a creature must not only
do the right things, but exercise its moral sense and act for the very
reason that something is worthy and honest (1699–1714: 18).
Shaftesbury doesn't, however, give details of how the sense of
right or wrong works, or how it can guide action.


Frances Hutcheson fills in Shaftesbury's sketch to some
extent. His argument for the existence of a moral sense draws on his
rejection of rationalism and intuitionism (see
 Supplement on Anti-Rationalist Arguments).
 Since we don't approve of actions because of
self-interest or self-evidence, something else must explain our
convictions. According to him, a sense is a
“determination of the mind, to receive any idea from the presence
of an object which occurs to us, independent on our will” (1725:
90). There are many more such senses than traditionally acknowledged.
Since moral ideas arise spontaneously, Hutcheson concludes we have a
moral sense,

a determination of our minds to receive amiable or
disagreeable ideas of Actions, when they occur to observation,
antecedent to any opinions of advantage or loss to redound to ourselves
from them. (1725: 100)

 The moral sense, though not moral ideas,
is innate, as can be seen from the sentiments of small children (1725:
145–146).


On Hutcheson's view, what the moral sense approves of is above
all “the general calm desire of the happiness of others”,
in distinction from particular benevolent passions like love and
compassion (1728: 175). On this picture, in contrast to Shaftesbury,
the motive of morally praiseworthy actions is benevolence and
not the thought that the action is obligatory or that it would
be approve of by the moral sense itself. In Hutcheson's
terminology, moral sense is the source of justifying reasons, but not
exciting reasons.


Some key features of these early sentimentalist theories are shared
by the psychologist Jonathan Haidt's (2012) contemporary model.
Haidt's starting point is an increasingly common distinction in
psychology between two kinds of cognitive process. What is known as
System 1 or the Intuitive System comprises of automatic, effortless,
fast, often associative, parallel, affective, and modular processes. We
are only conscious of their outputs, not the processes themselves.
(They are thus parallel to Hutcheson's ‘senses’.)
System 2 or the Reasoning System comprises of conscious, effortful,
slow, memory-taxing, sometimes inferential, rational, and linear
processes. As is common in psychology, Haidt uses the term
‘intuition’ for beliefs that result from the Intuitive
System.


Haidt's empirical claim is that moral judgments are for the
most part intuitions proximally caused by gut reactions, quick
and automatic flashes of affect. In support of this, manipulating
affect has been shown to make a difference to people's judgments
(Wheatley and Haidt 2005), and areas of the brain associated with such
affective responses found active when people make judgments (e.g.,
Greene and Haidt 2002; Moll, de Oliveira-Souza, and Eslinger 2003).
Further, in some studies, people are easily dumbfounded when challenged
on their moral views: they cannot (Haidt claims) give reasons for why
they disapprove of harmless sibling incest, for example (Haidt 2001).
On Haidt's somewhat pessimistic picture, the role of reason is
for the most part lawyerly rationalization of the pre-existing gut
reactions, in particular in a social context.


Where the early sentimentalists gesture towards divine providence
when it comes to explaining why we have a moral sense and why it
approves of things like benevolence, Haidt's story appeals to
evolution. He believes we are pre-programmed to respond to suffering
with compassion, arrogance by subordinates with contempt, cheating with
anger, and impurity with disgust, for example. These culturally
fine-tuned affective responses are in turn distally explained by having
been evolutionary “adaptations to long-standing threats and
opportunities in social life” (Haidt 2012) of our ancestors. But
how can it be adaptive to risk the wrath of an aggressor in order to
defend a victim that one sympathizes with, for example? Haidt's
explanation appeals to the controversial notion of group selection, the
idea that genes that program for individually fitness-decreasing
behavior can nevertheless be naturally selected for as a result of
increasing group fitness (Sober and Wilson 1998).


It's not clear whether group selection suffices to explain our
approval of actions that benefit outgroup members, however. Further, as
discussed below, contemporary sentimentalists who follow Hume rather
than Hutcheson argue that there is no need to assume that moral
reactions are innate, and some reason to assume they are not (even if
our innate dispositions do play a role in explaining them). A related
challenge to Haidt's account is that he does not distinguish
between moral and non-moral evaluations. When talking about intuitions
in his sense, he says that

the brain has a kind of gauge
(sometimes called a “like-ometer”) that is constantly
moving back and forth, and these movements, these quick judgments,
influence whatever comes next. (Haidt and Björklund 2008:
186–187) 

But we don't regard everything we dislike, or
even everything that makes us angry, as morally wrong. The story is at
least incomplete. (For more discussion, see the entry on
 Morality and Evolutionary Biology.)


Further, as a psychologist, Haidt offers no a priori
arguments against the possibility of reason yielding moral verdicts.
All he can claim is that people don't usually engage in reasoning
first. Even if that is true, it doesn't follow that
people's judgments are not shaped by reasoning (perhaps someone
else's reasoning, in the case of culturally shaped dispositions)
or that they are insensitive to reasons. Indeed, Daniel Jacobson (2012)
points out that the evidence that people lack reasons for their
judgments is in fact very thin. In Haidt's dumbfounding studies,
saying that an act is unnatural, for example, doesn't count as
giving a reason for one's judgment. But (rightly or wrongly),
that's the sort of thing that many people take as reason for
condemning certain kinds of action. Moreover, as Jacobson notes, there
are also harm-based reasons to regard Haidt's harmless incest as
wrong—after all, even if no problems actually result from
having sex with your sister or brother, you take an enormous
risk of emotional repercussions. The vibe at your
sister's wedding three years later might not be quite the same.
People might not be able to immediately articulate such reasons, but
that doesn't show they don't have them. Rather than being
mere rationalization, post hoc reasoning might be a process of trying
to articulate the considerations one's intuitive judgments were
responsive to. This is relevant to the epistemic status of judgments
based on emotion (see Section 5.3).
2.2  Sympathy/Empathy-Based Theories


What is distinctive of Hume and Smith is that although they
occasionally use the term ‘moral sense’, they do not take
it to be a primitive, innate capacity, but rather aim to explain its
workings in terms of more basic mechanisms, in particular what they
call ‘sympathy’. In contemporary use, the term is often
used for a kind of concern for another. But Hume and Smith, in
different ways, used it for sharing what another feels. The
contemporary term for this kind of mechanism is empathy (for
the distinction between sympathy and empathy, see Darwall 1998; Sober
and Wilson 1998). This section will nevertheless use the older term,
since what the classical sentimentalists talk about isn't quite
‘empathy’ either, insofar as empathy involves taking on the
actual feeling of another.


Following Hutcheson, Hume rejects reason or reasoning as the source
of moral distinctions (understood either as judgments or facts). His
motivation sceptical arguments are based on what he believes
is reason's inability to move us in the way that morality does.
Content sceptical arguments, in turn, aim to demonstrate that
recognizably moral conclusions cannot be reached by reason alone,
without sentiment-supported premises. These arguments are crucial for
the case for sentimentalism. Contemporary sentimentalists have
developed new versions of both arguments against Kantian counters. For
a more thorough discussion, see
 Supplement on Anti-Rationalist Arguments.


On Hume's positive account, moral approval is caused if not
constituted by pleasure of a special kind:

To have the sense of
virtue, is nothing but to feel a satisfaction of particular
kind from the contemplation of a character. (T 471)

 (Sometimes
he says that approval consists of a form of love towards an agent on
account of such pleasure.) What kind of pleasure? Hume's
criterion is aetiological:

 'Tis only when a character is
considered in general, without reference to our particular interest,
that it causes such a feeling or sentiment, as denominates it morally
good or evil. (T 472)

 But why does contemplation of a character
without reference to our own interest give us pleasure in the first
place? Not because we're simply equipped with a moral sense, but
because of the operation of sympathy, which, according to Hume, offers
a more parsimonious and systematic explanation of the phenomena.


How does sympathy work? For Hume, the mechanism is a kind of
analogical association:

When I see the effects of
passion in the voice and gesture of any person, my mind immediately
passes from these effects to their causes, and forms such a lively idea
of the passion, as is presently converted into the passion
itself. (T 576)

 Similar association operates on the causes of a
passion. It is by this mechanism that the pleasures and pains of others
are communicated for us, so that we are ourselves pleased in a special
way when contemplating those durable character traits that reliably
benefit and hence please others. This special kind of pleasure
‘denominates’ the trait as virtuous or vicious. (Hume
distinguishes between ‘natural’ and
‘artificial’ virtues, the latter including justice and
allegiance, which are human inventions that have beneficial
consequences on the whole, and approved of because of that.) Here is
how Hume summarizes the view:



When any quality, or character, has a tendency to the good of
mankind, we are pleased with it, and approve of it; because it presents
the lively idea of pleasure; which idea affects us by sympathy, and is
itself a kind of pleasure. (T 580)


This simple account needs refinement, however. Hume observes two
ways in which our moral approval diverges from what causes sympathetic
pleasure. First, what comes naturally to us is taking on the feelings
of the near and the dear, those who are close to or similar to us and
those we care about. Yet we regard a historical character renowned for
being just with equal moral approval as someone with the same trait
living today in our own town, for example. Second, we sometimes approve
of “virtue in rags”: an honest and generous person who due
to no fault of her own is incapacitated and in no position to benefit
others is not considered morally worse than someone with the same
traits who actually does cause pleasure for us to sympathize with.
Hume's answer to these challenges is that we correct our
initial responses for bias and the influence of moral luck, as well as
our present disposition—not because we aim for some standard
that is independent of our responses, but because of the practical
problems that result from relying on “momentary
appearances” (T 582).


When we judge others on the basis of self-interest or uncorrected
sympathy with the near and the dear, the result is “many
contradictions to our sentiments in society and conversation” (T
583). When it comes to feelings of personal liking or taste, it is no
problem if different people call different people or things
“enemy” or “delicious”. But when someone uses
moral language and calls someone “vicious”,
“odious”, or “depraved”, she “expresses
sentiments, in which, he expects, all his audience are to concur with
him” (Hume 1751: 260). It is this expectation of concurrence
characteristic of moral sentiments that pushes us towards a
“common point of view” (ibid.) in moral judging.


Hume's suggestion is that such a point of view is achieved by
setting aside our own interests, current disposition, and relation to
the agent or those affected by her, and varying position, and
sympathizing with the effects of a person's actions on those
around him:

The only point of view, in which our sentiments
concur with those of others, is, when we consider the tendency of any
passion to the advantage or harm of those, who have any immediate
connexion or intercourse with the person possess'd of it.
(T 602–3) 

(More precisely, to avoid the virtue in rags problem, we
look to the fitness of people's character traits for producing
such effects.) Hume remarks that this sort of correction for
variability and distance is common to all the senses. As Geoffrey
Sayre-McCord (1994) has argued, such a perspective is not one of an
omniscient ideal observer, but rather a point of view we all could
realistically occupy. Otherwise it couldn't be appealed to in an
explanation of how we actually come to approve of certain things.


Adam Smith presents a different theory about the nature and
mechanisms of sympathy and consequently moral and evaluative approval.
For Smith, the key mechanism of sympathy is imaginatively placing
oneself in another's position, or what would now be called
simulation (Gordon 1995), rather than mere emotional
contagion, association, or inference. In Smith's official
definition (from which he sometimes departs), sympathy consists in a
match between what one takes the other to actually feel and what one
feels oneself as a result of putting oneself in the other's
shoes. Approbation is the pleasant feeling that results from perceiving
this coincidence (TMS 56 note a). Although this account of ‘sense
of propriety’ is sometimes described as Smith's theory of
moral judgment, he regards it as a perfectly general account of
evaluation, encompassing belief, sense of humour, or business
decisions. When it comes to judgments of moral merit or demerit, or the
qualities of deserving praise or blame, what counts is our sympathy
with the gratitude and resentment of those affected
by the action, on the one hand, and with the agent's motives, on
the other. Like Hume, Smith recognizes that moral approval requires
departing from one's personal point of view:



But [resentment and gratitude], as well as all the other passions of
human nature, seem proper and are approved of, when the heart of every
impartial spectator entirely sympathizes with them, when every
indifferent by-stander entirely enters into, and goes along with them.
(TMS 81)



The figure of an impartial spectator also plays a key role in
Smith's account of self-directed moral judgment or conscience.
Smith argues that reflection on our own motives requires that we
distance ourselves from our agential standpoint and

 endeavour to view them … with the eyes of other people, or as other people
are likely to view them. (TMS 128)

 Our original motive for doing
so is our desire for the approval of those we care about. But
experience teaches us we can't please every actual spectator, so

we soon learn to set up in our own minds a judge between
ourselves and those we live with. (TMS 152n) 

We then judge
ourselves and potentially guide our action by the imagined responses of
an impartial and well-informed spectator.


Michael Slote's recent sentimentalist account picks up the
thread of empathy/sympathy-based theories. Slote's claim is that
moral approval is constituted and explained by empathizing with an
agent's motives:



[I]f agents' actions reflect empathic concern for (the well
being or wishes of) others, empathic beings will feel warmly or
tenderly toward them, and such warmth and tenderness empathically
reflect the empathic warmth or tenderness of the agents. …
[S]uch empathy with empathy … also constitutes moral approval,
and possibly admiration as well, for agents and/or their actions.
(Slote 2010: 34–35)



Some people's actions exhibit empathy toward others. This
empathy is a warm feeling. When we empathize with the agent, we come to
share this warm feeling. And this empathetic warm feeling constitutes
moral approval. In contrast, unempathetic actions manifest a coldness
towards others. Since moral approval and disapproval “enter into
the making of moral judgments”, Slote believes empathy can
explain our intuitions and judgments. More precisely,

differences in (the strength of) our empathic reactions (or
tendencies to react) to various situations correspond pretty well to
differences in the (normative) moral evaluations we tend to make about
those situations. (Slote 2010: 21)

 For example, we naturally
flinch more strongly from causing harm to someone than from allowing
the same harm to happen. This, for Slote, basically accounts for the
commonsense deontological distinction between the seriousness of the
wrong of doing harm rather than allowing it to happen.


Slote's account has been criticized from within the
sentimentalist camp. Jesse Prinz (2011) notes that the view has
difficulty with disapproval: failure to empathize is not the same thing
as disapprobation, nor does it have the same kind of motivational
effect. Julia Driver (2011) points out that people such as autists, who
are (according to some views) incapable of empathy can nevertheless
morally approve or disapprove of things. Slote's view also faces
challenges of both necessity and sufficiency, in that it seems possible
that we approve of un-empathetic actions (such as doing something out
of a sense of duty, or doing the right thing for the wrong reason), and
that there are empathetic actions we don't approve of (such as
empathy-motivated helping of one victim at the expense of many others
who are less close or similar to the agent). Nor do all agents we
disapprove of lack empathy. As Justin D'Arms (2011) observes, a
stern father may disapprove of a teenage daughter's love affair
without there being any coldness in her for him to catch.


Even if these criticisms of Slote are justified, empathetic feelings
may enter into the explanation of moral judgment more indirectly. Shaun
Nichols (2004) shares the Humean ambition of explaining moral thought
without assuming an innate moral capacity or sense. Instead, Nichols
assumes that normal people have a generic capacity to be guided by
norms or rules of various kinds, and certain non-moral emotional
dispositions, such as the disposition to have an aversive response to
suffering in others. These simple features help explain various
features of moral thought, Nichols believes. One explanandum is the
distinction that people, including very young children, make between
violations of authority-independent and universally applicable moral
rules and authority-dependent and local conventional rules.


Nichols's hypothesis is that people regard a rule-violation as
authority-independently wrong when the rule in question is
affect-backed, that is, when it prohibits actions that we
independently have a negative emotional reaction towards (Nichols 2004:
62). One important source of support for this claim is that people who
lack the relevant affective response, such as psychopaths, appear to
fail at distinguishing between the two kinds of rules, even though
their rational capacities are intact. Moral judgments, nevertheless,
are applications of rules, and do not require the presence of on-line
affect. This view was anticipated by some earlier sentimentalists. Adam
Smith noted that we make the “greater part of” our moral
judgments on the basis of general rules, which are for him based on
induction from emotional responses to particular cases (TMS 377), and
Edward Westermarck held that many judgments are “applications of
some accepted general rule”, whose acceptance is ultimately
explained by the existence of an “emotional sanction” in
the judge's mind (Westermarck 1906: 6).


Nichols believes that his sentimental rules account also offers an
explanation of universality of certain norms. We do not have to assume
that people have an innate tendency to regard causing harm to innocents
as morally wrong. Instead, it is plausible that of the various norms
that different societies have come up with, those that resonate with
our non-moral emotional dispositions enjoy a higher ‘cultural
fitness’ (Nichols 2004: 127) and thus become more prevalent over
time. Since we can account for (nearly) pan-cultural moral rules as
well as moral judgment without appeal to dedicated innate mechanisms,
Nichols (2005) concludes that morality is an evolutionary by-product
rather than an adaptation.
3. Moral Psychology and Language: The Nature of Moral Judgment


Sentimentalism is commonly understood as a thesis about moral
judgments or concepts. Moral thought involves or
refers to our sentiments. It turns out that this can mean a number of
different things. Also, moral language somehow or other
expresses or refers to sentiments.
3.1 Non-Cognitivist Sentimentalism


On non-cognitivist views, moral thoughts are constituted by
sentiments. To think that X is wrong is, at least in part, to have a
negative sentiment towards X, or perhaps to have a higher-order
positive attitude towards a negative sentiment towards X. Here is the
most famous argument in favour of non-cognitivism:



The Argument from Internalism


Moral judgments are intrinsically but
defeasibly motivating. (Weak Internalism)

Only non-cognitive psychological states
with a world-to-mind direction of fit are intrinsically motivating;
beliefs, which have a mind-to-world direction of fit, do not alone
motivate (The Humean Theory of Motivation).


So, moral judgments are (at least in
part) constituted by non-cognitive psychological states.




The argument is clearly related to arguments from practicality
against rationalism (see the
 Anti-Rationalism Supplement),
 but
the second premise and the conclusion are about moral judgments
themselves rather than about the processes that result in moral
judgment. The first premise postulates an internal connection between
(first-personal, present-directed) moral judgment and motivation. This
is now generally treated as a conceptual question about our
common concept of moral judgment. Weak Internalists believe, roughly,
that judging that I morally ought to stop downloading movies entails
that I have some motivation to stop downloading movies. Otherwise I
don't genuinely regard the action as morally wrong, although I
may pay lip service to it. My moral convictions are manifest in my
motivational tendencies, if not always in action.


Weak (unlike Strong) Internalists don't deny that the link
between judgment and action is fallible: we suffer from weakness of the
will or buckle under social pressure. But they insist that there is an
essential link between judgment and motivation, even if it is sometimes
indirect. The point of thinking in moral terms in the first place
isn't to discover some facts about the universe, but to get
ourselves to act in ways that allow us to live together and reap the
benefits of cooperation. Simon Blackburn (1988) and Allan Gibbard
(1990) point out that any evolutionary benefits moral thought might
have depend on its practicality. Community-Wide Internalists says that
even if it is conceivable that there are individuals who are
entirely indifferent to their moral judgments, internalists claim that
no member of a community could be credited with a genuine
moral stance, if no one in the community was motivated by their
judgments (Lenman 1999; Tresan 2009). Weak Internalists are committed
to the impossibility of there being amoralists (Brink 1986;
Svavarsdottir 1999), agents who make genuine first-personal moral
judgments while never having any corresponding motivation, while
Community-Wide Internalists only deny the possibility of amoralist
communities. (For a more thorough discussion, see the entry on 
 Moral Motivation.)


The second premise of the argument is a thesis in the philosophy of
mind. It says that mental states with propositional content divide into
two fundamentally different kinds that play a differential role in
guiding action. Some mental states represent how things are. Beliefs
are the paradigmatic case. They provide a partial map of the world.
Something has gone wrong if the content of the belief does not match
how things are. This idea of a mind-to-world direction of fit
of a belief that p is cashed out by Michael Smith as the
tendency to go out of existence when perceiving that not-p
(Smith 1987). If you believe that you car is working well but it
refuses to start when you try, you tend to stop believing it works
well, other things being equal. Other mental states are not
representational, though they may have the same propositional content
as beliefs. If you want your car to work well and notice that it
refuses to start, your desire does not tend to go out of existence.
Rather, it moves you to do something you believe would make the car
work, such as call a mechanic. It has a world-to-mind direction of
fit. Although particular ways of drawing the distinction remain
controversial, the key idea that representational beliefs themselves
are motivationally inert is widely accepted.


Finally, the conclusion comes in different strengths. Traditional
non-cognitivists believe that moral judgments simply are non-cognitive
states (For the ‘at least in part’ proviso, see the
discussion of hybrid views in Section 3.5). But what kind of states?
They are clearly not mere desires, since we can desire things we
don't regard as desirable. Early non-cognitivists talked about a
special ‘ethical feeling’ (Ayer 1936), identified in
phenomenological terms. But there doesn't seem to be any
common phenomenological character to all the various moral thoughts we
have. So contemporary non-cognitivists appeal to the functional
role of moral attitudes instead, to their distinctive part in our
overall psychology. Blackburn's (1998) idea is that moral
thoughts involve higher-order attitudes towards desires and
preferences. When I morally disapprove of polluting the environment, I
don't just desire not to pollute, but I also applaud others who
are averse to it and dislike those who fail to share my desire.
Here's how Blackburn describes this sort of emotional ascent:



[A]t the bottom we start with pure preferences. Rising up we come to
preferences that we prefer others to share. Rising further we come to
preferences that we ‘demand’ of others; that is, if they do
not share them we find ourselves averse or in opposition to them. Here,
according to me, we begin to enter the territory of ethics. (Blackburn
2002: 125)



When I morally disapprove of something, I also have these
higher-order attitudes towards my own attitudes: I prefer not to desire
what I disapprove of. This doesn't guarantee that I will always
have the first-order desires, so the link between judgment and
motivation is defeasible.


Gibbard (1990), in turn, identifies narrowly moral judgments with
judgments about the rationality of guilt and resentment. To think that
stealing is wrong, for example, is to think it rational to feel guilt
for stealing and resent others for stealing (in the absence of
conditions like ignorance or force that excuse the agent). To think
that something is rational or makes sense, in turn, is to accept norms
that permit it. On Gibbard's original account, norm-acceptance is
a basic kind of non-cognitive state, an evolutionary adaptation for
linguistically achieved coordination that is not analyzable in terms of
other attitudes (1990: ch. 4). It is non-cognitive, because it is
essentially a motivational tendency to act or feel in ways that we are
prepared to avow in discussion about what to do. In later work, he
considers normative thoughts as contingency plans that settle
what to do in actual and non-actual situations (Gibbard 2003). These
thoughts are defeasibly motivating, just as the Argument from
Internalism requires.
3.2 Expressivism


The above argument concerns moral judgment as a psychological state,
a kind of thought. But the term ‘judgment’ is sometimes
also used for linguistic utterance or sentence containing moral terms.
Likewise, the term ‘non-cognitivism’ is also used for a
thesis about moral language. To minimize confusion, this entry will
talk about moral terms and sentences when it comes to linguistic
entities, and reserve the term ‘expressivism’ for the
linguistic thesis. Bearing these terminological stipulations in mind,
any argument for non-cognitivism can be extended to an argument for
expressivism with the addition of some deceptively simple premises:


The meaning of a sentence is determined
by the mental state it expresses. (Metasemantic Psychologism)


Moral sentences express moral
judgments.


So, moral sentences express (at least in
part) non-cognitive psychological states.


So, the meaning of moral sentences is
determined (at least in part) by non-cognitive psychological
states.



Premise 4 is the key addition. It is not the only way to arrive at a
broadly expressivist theory in ethics—earlier forms, such as
emotivism (Ayer 1936; Stevenson 1944) and universal prescriptivism
(Hare 1952, 1963) relied on the problematic assumption that the meaning
of a sentence is to be understood on the basis of the effects it is
used to achieve or the speech act it is used to perform. Metasemantic
Psychologism doesn't make this assumption, but simply derives the
meaning of linguistic expressions from the thoughts that they express,
rather than their truth-conditions or the possible worlds they rule
out, as standard semantics does. As Allan Gibbard puts it,

A
normative sentence, the expressivist says, expresses a state of mind;
its meaning is explained not by giving its truth conditions but by
telling what state of mind it expresses. (1990: 92)


It is essential to understanding expressivism that
expressing a thought is not the same thing as
reporting a thought. Consider the following pair of non-moral
sentences, as uttered by me:


The sun is shining.


I believe that the sun is shining.

 
The first expresses the belief that the sun is shining. It
doesn't say anything about me, but rather something about the
weather. The second sentence, in contrast, reports my belief. It is
about my psychology, not about the weather. It is perfectly possible
that the second sentence is true while the first is false (maybe
I'm fooled by a very bright lamp outside my window), so they
clearly do not mean the same. Mark Schroeder (2010a) has recently
emphasized that the core expressivist claim is that the sentence
“Murder is wrong” is related to disapproval of murder in
just the same way as the sentence “The sun is shining” is
related to the belief that the sun is shining, whatever that is. The
only difference is that the expressed state is
non-representational.


This has significant semantic consequences, to be sure. Since
non-representational states lack truth-conditions, expressivists cannot
explain the inferential relations among them in the usual way.
They'll have to account for the incompatibility of “Kissing
cousins is wrong” and “Kissing cousins is not wrong”,
for example, in terms of disagreement in attitude (Stevenson 1937) or
in plan (Gibbard 2003). Attempts to do so have proven controversial, to
say the least. For discussion, see the entry on
 Moral Cognitivism vs. Non-Cognitivism.


Although it is definitive of expressivism that the meanings of moral
sentences are explained without appealing to their truth-conditions, it
is important to note that contemporary expressivists do not deny that
it makes sense to talk about moral truth or even moral facts. This is
an important part of their programme of capturing the ‘realist
surface’ of ordinary moral talk. Blackburn emphatically endorses
a minimalist or deflationist theory of truth and facts, according to
which the truth predicate is only a handy device for endorsing
propositions without necessarily mentioning them, as when we say
“Everything the Pope says is true”. As Blackburn puts
it:

 To say that an ethical view is true is just to reaffirm it, and so
it is if we add the weighty words ‘really’,
‘true’, ‘fact’, and so on.  To say that it is
objectively true is to affirm that its truth does not vary with what
we happen to think about it, and once more this is an internal,
first-order ethical position. (Blackburn 1998: 296)



Given minimalism, many questions that might at first sight seem
metaethical, second-order questions about ethics turn out to
be first-order questions within ethics. Is it an objective
fact that it is wrong to force a woman to wear a veil outside her home?
As the expressivist hears this question, it is about how we should
respond to forcing women to wear a veil—perhaps more
specifically, whether it is acceptable for someone to force a woman to
wear a veil if he happens to believe it is morally or religiously
required. That is a first-order ethical question about whether our
reactions to this kind of behaviour should hang on the agents'
own opinions concerning it. In answering it, we thus deploy our
first-order ethical opinions, possibly rethinking them in the light of
recognizing that others hold opposing views.


If we answer that forcing women to wear a veil is
objectively wrong, we are against it regardless of what the agents
themselves think of it. Indeed, since we are against it in this way, we
regard a potential change in our own opinion in favour of
forcing women to wear a veil as a change for the worse, and are
disposed to resist it. This is what it is, for an expressivist, to
regard a moral claim as true independently of anyone's opinion of
it. Expressivism is thus consistent with objectivist first-order views
and is not committed to the idea that were we to come to feel
differently about ethical issues, ethical facts themselves would
change.


The extent to which expressivism can accommodate moral truth, facts,
and objectivity has created no small amount of unclarity about what the
real difference between expressivist and non-expressivist views really
is (see Dreier 2004). To make things even more confusing, contemporary
expressivists also condone talk of moral beliefs, as long as they are
understood as whatever states sentences express, representational or
non-representational. Perhaps the key difference is simply that
expressivists are committed to the priority of non-representational
attitudes in metasemantic explanation. For a more detailed discussion,
see again the entry on
 Moral Cognitivism vs. Non-Cognitivism.
3.3  Subjectivism and Ideal Dispositionalism


Sentimentalists need not think that moral judgments just are
sentiments or attitudes of some sort. They might also be
beliefs about sentiments or the disposition to cause
sentiments. The related semantic view is that moral sentences are about
the speaker's (or someone else's) sentiments or
dispositions to cause sentiments. Although it is surprisingly unusual
to do so, it is important to distinguish these views about judgments,
concepts, and language from similar-sounding views about properties and
facts, since the arguments for and against differ. This section will
focus solely on the first kind of issue.


The simplest semantic account along these lines is Speaker
Subjectivism, according to which the truth condition of an
utterance of “Stealing is wrong” is that the speaker
disapproves of stealing. This disapproval need not consist simply in a
negative sentiment towards stealing, but may also be thought of, in a
Gibbard-like fashion, as endorsement of a moral standard or norm that
prohibits stealing. In other words, the speaker reports the
same attitude that expressivists say the sentence expresses.
This view is suggested by some things that Hume says, in particular the
following:



[W]hen you pronounce any action or character to be vicious, you mean
nothing, but that from the constitution of your nature you have a
feeling or sentiment of blame from the contemplation of it. (T 469)



For speaker subjectivism, there is a non-cognitive element to moral
judgment, but moral sentences can nevertheless be given standard
truth-conditional semantics. Its attraction is thus making sense of
judgment internalism without the need for non-standard semantics. A
generalized version of Speaker Subjectivism is Metaethical
Contextualism, according to which the content of a moral sentence
of the form “A ought to f” is a proposition to the effect
that A ought to f relative to standards S, where S is determined by the
context of utterance (Dreier 1990; Björnsson and Finlay 2010). For
contextualists, the standard need not be one that is endorsed by the
speaker (although it often is).


The standard objection to subjectivism and contextualism is the
Missing Disagreement Problem. Suppose that Ann says “Eating
people is wrong” and Beth, a committed cannibal, replies
“No, eating people is not wrong.” According to simple
speaker subjectivism, what Ann said is true if and only if Ann
disapproves of eating people, and what Beth said is true if and only if
Beth doesn't disapprove of eating people. It can obviously be
simultaneously true that Ann disapproves of eating people and Beth
doesn't, so their utterances don't contradict each other.
Indeed, since what Ann says is true on this picture, it looks like it
should be possible for Beth to say “What Ann says is true, but
eating people is not wrong”. So it seems they don't
disagree any more than if Ann had said “My name begins with an
A” and Beth had said “No, my name begins with a B”.
Yet they do, so Speaker Subjectivism has a problem.


Contemporary subjectivists and contextualists are well aware of this
problem, and offer various suggestions to solve it. Gilbert
Harman's response appeals to pragmatics. When we say that
something is wrong, we presuppose that the hearer shares our
moral standards (Harman 2000: 36). Our conversation is about what the
content of the standard we endorse is, or what it entails about a
particular case. These are issues about which we can genuinely
disagree. If, however, it turns out the hearer doesn't share the
standard, the conversation is defective, and the speaker and
hearer are indeed talking past each other. According to Harman, the
speaker should then withdraw or explicitly relativize the assertion, or
be guilty of linguistic impropriety (ibid.). This is debatable at best,
however.


In any case, this pragmatic strategy appears to unduly restrict the
scope of possible disagreement, since it is possible to disagree with
people who are not part of the conversation. Gunnar Björnsson and
Stephen Finlay (2010) offer an alternative pragmatic proposal,
according to which expressions of disagreement do not target the
proposition that the original utterance actually expressed (which may
be true relative to the speaker's standards) but rather a
different but suitably related proposition that is relevant to
conversational purposes, such as persuading another or deciding what to
do. If Beth says to Ann “That's not true”, she may be
talking about the proposition that eating people is
wrong-relative-to-Beth's-standards rather than what Ann strictly
speaking said. This suggestion is related to the third kind of
subjectivist response, which is retreat to the same notion that
expressivists use: the disagreement does not consist in contradictory
beliefs, but disagreement in attitude. Assume, for simplicity, that
disapproval involves desire to have the agent punished, and approval a
desire not to have the agent punished. Then even if Ann's and
Beth's utterances don't contradict one another, they
disagree in the sense that it is not possible to simultaneously satisfy
the desires entailed by their sincere utterances when they issue a
verdict on cannibalism. If Ann gets her way, Beth doesn't, and
vice versa.


Another issue for Speaker Subjectivism is that the subject matter of
the moral thought is not distinctively evaluative: if Ellen is a
Presbyterian and thinks that stealing is wrong, the content of
Ellen's thought might be just that stealing is such as to arouse
disapproval in Presbyterians. Someone else could have a thought with
the same content without thereby making a moral evaluation of stealing
(Egan 2012: 566). The evaluative aspect is external to the belief, and
consists rather in something like identifying as a Presbyterian, which
involves a desire-like attitude towards avoiding things that
don't fit the Presbyterian moral code. Consequently, there is no
commitment to a distinct kind of evaluative fact. It is not clear
whether this is a problem or an advantage for the theory—according to Jamie Dreier (2009), it is the latter.

Ideal Dispositionalist views evade problems with Speaker
Subjectivism with two moves. The first is idealization: the beliefs and
sentences refer not to the speaker's views, but to those of a
suitably idealized subject (perhaps an idealized version of
the speaker). At the level of logical form, ought claims may have a
tacit argument place for a standard, just as for contextualists—but the standard is context-invariant. The second is
dispositionalization: the reference is not to anyone's actual
sentiments, but to sentiments they would have in suitable
circumstances. Suggestions of this type of view can be found in Hume
and Smith—recall their talk of correcting our
sentiments by reference to the common point of view or the impartial
spectator's response. Here is a recognizably Smithian formulation
of this kind of view:



To judge that X is wrong is to believe that any informed impartial
spectator would disapprove of X.



Roderick Firth's (1952) Ideal Observer Theory is a
more contemporary variant of this kind of view. He formulates it as an
analysis of the meaning of ethical statements, but it can also be taken
as an account of the corresponding thoughts. In general form, it is as
follows:



To judge that X has a moral property is to believe that any ideal
observer would have an ethically significant reaction to X in
conditions ideal for doing so.



By an ‘ethically significant reaction’ Firth means

the kind of moral experience which we take to be evidence, under
ideal conditions, for the truth of our ethical judgments. (Firth
1952: 326) 

He leaves it open whether the reaction is sentimental, so
there are possible variants of Ideal Observer Theory that are not
sentimentalist. In specifying the characteristics of the ideal
observer, Firth uses a ‘pragmatic methodology’ of

examining the procedures which we actually regard, implicitly or
explicitly, as the rational ones for deciding ethical questions.
(ibid. 332) 

If we actually disqualify someone's ethical
verdicts because she is ignorant of non-moral facts, failure to vividly
imagine what something would actually be like, partiality, non-moral
emotions, and inconsistency, this shows that we implicitly regard moral
judgements as valid only when made by an omniscient, omnipercipient,
impartial, dispassionate, consistent, but otherwise normal judge
(ibid. 333–345). These are then the characteristics of the ideal
observer.


Ideal Dispositionalist views avoid the Missing Disagreement Problem.
For example, if Ann believes that any informed impartial spectator
would disapprove of X and Beth believes it's not the case that
any informed impartial spectator would not disapprove of X,
their beliefs contradict each other and they straightforwardly
disagree.  However, this victory for idealized views is achieved by
detachment from people's own actual attitudes, which leads to the
Missing Motivation Problem. The attraction that simple subjectivism,
contextualism, and non-cognitivism share is that if moral thoughts
consist in attitudes or beliefs about standards one endorses, their
putative non-contingent connection to motivation is unproblematic. But
how could beliefs about dispositions to cause sentimental
responses in ideal subjects non-contingently motivate ordinary
thinkers, given the Humean Theory of Motivation (Mackie 1980: 69)?
Some might have the desire to do what an impartial spectator would
approve of, but what about those who don't? As Richard Joyce (2013)
has put it, it appears that one may be just as unmoved by such
thoughts as by the belief that drunken Vikings would mock the
performance of an action, and quite rationally so.


A well-known response to a version of the Missing Motivation Problem
is developed by Michael Smith (1994: 1997). Smith begins with the
initially appealing view that to think that something is desirable is
not just to desire it, but to believe that one would desire
it, were one fully rational, where to be fully rational is to have no
false beliefs, to have all the relevant true beliefs, and to have a
coherent and unified set of desires. Given that becoming fully rational
might itself change what's desirable for me, Smith prefers an
Ideal Advisor model, according to which thinking that A-ing is
desirable for me is to think that a fully rational version of me would
want me to desire to A. Smith's claim is that attributing this
content to people's normative beliefs makes best sense of their
“inferential and quasi-inferential potentials” (1997: 103),
although few are capable of articulating it.


Given this content for desirability beliefs, Smith poses the
question: would S be more coherent, were she to believe that her fully
rational counterpart would desire her to A and desire to A, or
were she to have have the same belief without the desire
(Smith 1994)? Smith claims that the former belief-desire pair makes for
a more coherent psychology, other things being equal. Since rationality
requires coherence, rationality thus requires people's desires to
line up with their desirability beliefs. So rational agents
are motivated by their beliefs about their Ideal Advisors'
desires, and motivation is thus non-contingently linked with normative
judgments. This view allows for the conceptual possibility of
amoralists, as long as they are
irrational.        


Smith's argument is about desirability or normative reason
thoughts, not about moral judgments. But he proposes to bridge the gap
by arguing that first, the desires of fully rational agents converge
regardless of their starting points (Smith 1994), and second, that
among these convergent desires are desires for the sort of things that
commonsense morality requires (Smith 2012). Both of these claims are
controversial, and together make Smith a rationalist rather than
sentimentalist ideal observer theorist. But there may be room for a
sentimentalist theory to appropriate something like his model without
its rationalist elements. That is, it might be a requirement of
rationality that we are motivated to do what we believe an informed
impartial spectator would not resent us for, for example. For Adam
Smith, the voice of an imagined impartial spectator is the voice of
conscience, the part within us that stands in judgment of
ourselves. It is the “peculiar office” or function of
conscience to “bestow censure or applause upon all the other
principles of our nature” (TMS 191). So Adam Smith might argue
that an agent who believes that any impartial spectator would desire
her to do A and fails to desire to A is less coherent (and thus less
rational, other things being equal) than one who combines the belief
with a desire to A. What is decisive is that our beliefs about an ideal
spectator's attitudes define where we ourselves stand, unlike our
beliefs about drunk Vikings, for example.
3.4  Sensibility Theory and Neo-Sentimentalism


The cognitivist sentimentalist views discussed in the previous
section appealed to beliefs about dispositions to cause
sentimental responses in certain kind of subjects. The other main type
of cognitivist view, sensibility theory, regards judgments as
beliefs about merited responses (Wiggins 1987; McDowell 1998).
Sensibility theory begins with an analogy with secondary quality
concepts, such as colour concepts. These concepts, according to many,
are concepts of mind-dependent qualities whose existence isn't
independent of human sensibility. On this view, to experience something
as red, say, is experience it as being such as to look red to normal
human beings in suitable conditions.


This is, to be sure, a controversial view, as many think that colour
experience presents its object as having a simple, non-dispositional
property. Nevertheless, sensibility theorists believe it offers a
partial analogy with moral experience, the difference being that value
is

conceived to be not merely such as to elicit the appropriate
‘attitude’ … but rather such as to merit
it. (McDowell 1985: 143) 

When we conceive of value in this way,
we perceive there to be a reason for, say, admiring or
emulating someone (McDowell 1979).


This state of perceiving or conceiving of there being a reason is a
belief of a unique and controversial sort. According to John McDowell
(1978), it can explain a virtuous person's action without the
help of a related desire playing a causal role (although we can rightly
attribute a desire to a person as a consequence of their being
motivated by the perception of a reason). McDowell thus rejects the
Humean Theory of Motivation (premise 2 in the Argument from
Internalism). His arguments are inspired by his reading of Aristotle
rather than the Early Modern sentimentalist tradition. The Argument
from Uncodifiability is that explaining a virtuous person's
action in terms of a desire for doing N things, where N is a natural
property of actions, combined with the belief that something is N
falsely presumes that there is some finite and codifiable natural kind
N corresponding to every virtuous quality in actions.


Take honesty. It is not just a matter of always speaking truly, for
example, or not misleading others. Sometimes honesty requires being
more forthcoming with information, sometimes less (it is not dishonest
not to tell everything to a gossip journalist). On the Aristotelian
view, there isn't a pattern that could be captured in
non-evaluative terms, and hence no explanation of action in terms of an
independently intelligible desire to instantiate such a pattern:

Occasion by occasion, one knows what to do, if one does, not by
applying universal principles but by being a certain kind of person:
one who sees situations in a certain distinctive way. (McDowell
1979: 73) 

The distinctive way a virtuous person sees a situation is
that certain features, like someone's need to know something, are
salient to her: they silence other concerns. Other things do not stand
out as calling for action, and this suffices to explain what the agent
does.


A familiar objection is that it is possible for someone to share the
virtuous person's belief or “conception of the
situation” but nevertheless lack the motivation. McDowell denies
this:
 
 [T]he relevant conceptions are not so much as possessed
except by those whose wills are influenced appropriately.
(McDowell 1978: 87)
 
 One argument in favour of this is that there is a
difference between being virtuous and being continent. Both kinds of
agents do the right thing—for example, both remain faithful to
their partner. But the continent agent has to struggle with competing
desires that cloud their attention on the noble and the fine. She has
to muster willpower to keep from temptation. The difference between her
and the virtuous person, on this picture, is not in the first instance
a conative one, but a difference in what is salient, which is
simultaneously a cognitive and affective difference. As David
McNaughton maintains, “a way of seeing a situation may itself be
a way of caring or feeling” (McNaughton 1988: 113). A consequence
of this view is that the process of coming to appreciate practical
reasons will involve shaping the agent's motivational
sensitivities and may itself be akin to a non-rational conversion
rather than to rational deliberation from existing motives (McDowell
1995: 100–101).


Purported states of mind with both conative and cognitive features
are often derogatorily labeled “besires” (Altham 1986) by
those who don't believe in them. The basic argument in defense of
the Humean theory, presented notably by Michael Smith (1994: 119–125),
is that beliefs and desires are modally separable: it is at
least conceivable, and according to Smith actual, that someone
maintains the belief that they ought to do something while losing the
associated desire, due to depression, say. In response, McDowell would
have to insist that in becoming depressed, one's conception of
the situation changes, even if one maintains (or acquires) a deflated
belief—the sort of cognitive state that a merely continent
person has that overlaps with the virtuous person's conception.
This is a less outrageous move than is often assumed. After all, it is
commonsensical to say that a depressed person sees things differently,
even if some aspect of continuity is retained.


Sensibility theories belong in the category Justin D'Arms and
Daniel Jacobson (2000a) have labelled neo-sentimentalism. It
is, officially, the view that evaluative concepts are concepts
of appropriateness of sentimental responses. (As discussed in 
Section 4.3, neo-sentimentalists often make related metaphysical claims about
evaluative properties.) That is, to think that something is
shameful is to think that shame is appropriate or that there is
sufficient reason for it. Gibbard's account is a non-cognitivist
variant of this view, since for him thoughts about appropriateness are
non-cognitive, whereas McDowell and Wiggins's view is
cognitivist, since according to them thoughts about merit are beliefs
(or, perhaps, besires).


A key motivation for neo-sentimentalism is that making a judgment
about desirability or shamefulness is distinct from desiring or being
ashamed. The point of using and introducing normative concepts is to
guide our attitudes rather than just express or report them. A clear
advantage of this view is that it promises to account for the rich
variety of evaluative judgments we have—we don't just
have thoughts about right and wrong, but also about who's
enviable or admirable or detestable or funny.


Neo-sentimentalism faces a variety of challenges. Francois Schroeter
(2005) argues that warranted emotional responses do not determine the
extension the most important evaluative concepts, such as
dangerous or wrong, but only minor ones that make
explicit reference to emotion, such as fearful or
shameful. Schroeter contends that the ultimate criterion for
determining whether something is dangerous, for example, is whether it
is liable to cause harm, where harm can be understood in
response-independent terms, such as loss of bodily integrity (Schroeter 2005: 343). In
work in preparation, D'Arms and Jacobson respond by pointing out
that not everything that threatens to violate bodily integrity is
dangerous, nor is everything that is dangerous a threat to bodily
integrity (or some other response-independent feature). Our inquiry
into what is dangerous will be ultimately about the fittingness of
fear, even if we can use response-independent characterizations (is it
likely to kill or hurt someone?) as useful rules of thumb in reasoning
about danger or other evaluative features.


Shaun Nichols (2008) criticizes neo-sentimentalist accounts on the
basis that they cannot make sense of moral judgment in young children.
If neo-sentimentalists are right, to think that something is wrong, for
example, is to think that guilt is fitting for doing it—but,
Nichols claims, children who distinguish moral from conventional
violations do not yet possess the concept of guilt. This is an
empirically fraught issue, since it is not easy to determine either
whether children make full-blown moral judgments or experience guilt.
But there is some evidence that very young children (from 22 months on)
exhibit behavioural signs of guilt (such as gaze avoidance and bodily
tension) after a mishap (Kochanska et al. 2002). Perhaps the more
interesting question is the development of the sense of appropriateness
of emotional responses.


D'Arms and Jacobson themselves say that both varieties of
neo-sentimentalism face what they call the Conflation Problem (2000a:
732). In general terms, it is that for any attitude Y, S may think that
Y is appropriate towards X without thinking that X is Y-able, and vice
versa. If a dictator will kill a hundred people unless I admire him, I
may think it is appropriate for me to admire him to save all those
lives. Nevertheless, I may think the dictator is not admirable. If a
colleague gets a promotion, I may think she is enviable. Nevertheless,
I may not think it is appropriate for me to envy my colleague, as it
would manifest pettiness and worsen the atmosphere of the
department.


Since most responses to the Conflation Problem draw on metaphysical
considerations about right and wrong kinds of reasons for attitudes,
they will be discussed in Section 4.3. It is, however, worth noting
here that some deny there is a genuine problem. What seem to be wrong
kind of reasons for an attitude are not, in fact, reasons for the
attitude at all, but for wanting to have it (Gibbard 1990;
Way 2012). The dictator's threat is no reason for me to admire him,
since it's not the sort of thing to which I can directly
respond with admiration. (Nor does the thought that envy would be
petty directly reduce envy, sadly.) I can, and probably should,
respond to it by wanting to admire him, and trying to bring
it about that I admire him. But, on this line of response, the thought
I have isn't that I have sufficient reason to admire the dictator, but
rather that I have sufficient reason to want to admire him. As these
are distinct thoughts, there is no conflation: even in the presence of
the threat (or, more generally, any intuitively wrong kind of reason
for an attitude), I don't find the attitude itself an appropriate or
rational response. Conversely, in the case of the enviable colleague,
I do find envy appropriate, given her promotion, but nevertheless take
myself to have sufficient reason to want and try to bring about not
envying her, given the bad consequences for the departmental
atmosphere. (For further discussion, see also the entry on Fitting Attitude Theories of
Value.)
3.5  Hybrid Approaches


Hybrid theories solve the problem of fitting together the
representational and practical aspects of moral judgment by arguing
that both cognitive and non-cognitive states are in play somehow: moral
judgments have both a sentimental and a non-sentimental aspect. Several
options have been explored recently. Hybrid expressivists argue that
moral sentences express both kinds of state. Hybrid state theorists
claim that there are psychological states that have both
representational and non-representational aspects. Moral thought
pluralists distinguish between several kinds of moral thought.

Hybrid expressivism comes in many varieties. Some take the
behaviour of pejoratives such as ‘frog’ (for a
French person) as the model for their account. Calling someone a
‘frog’ conveys both a belief that the person is French and
a negative attitude toward the French. Daniel Boisvert (2008) argues
that a normative utterance like “Stealing is wrong”
similarly expresses both a belief that stealing is wrong (which, for
Boisvert, is the belief that it has whatever natural property the
correct moral theory says it has) and disapproval of stealing. On his
view, the belief and attitude are determined by the meaning of the term
independently of the speaker's views, just as in the case of
‘frog’.


In contrast, Michael Ridge's ‘ecumenical
expressivism’ (Ridge 2006) involves speaker-relativity.
Ridge's theory is complex and evolving, but the basic idea is
simple enough. Take the judgment that I must tell the truth to the
judge. As a first approximation, such judgment consists in approval of
actions of a certain kind, and the belief that telling the truth to the
judge is an action of that kind (cf. Barker 2000). Maybe I approve of
actions that maximize utility, and believe that telling the truth to
the judge maximizes utility.


A little less roughly, the judgment amounts to thinking that any
acceptable standard for practical reasoning requires me to tell the
truth to the judge. And this, in turn, is a matter of having a
normative perspective N, and having the representational belief that
any standard admitted by N requires me to tell the truth to the judge
(Ridge forthcoming). The first of these is a complex desire-like state—roughly, embracing a policy that admits a set of standards as
authoritative. (In the example, such standards are utilitarian, but
different people have different normative perspectives.) The second is
an ordinary belief about these very normative standards: that they
require telling the truth to the judge.


Ridge argues that this type of view accounts for the attractions of
non-cognitivism, chiefly avoiding problematic ontological commitment to
non-deflationary moral facts, and explaining practicality. Having a
normative perspective involves a desire-like attitude towards what one
believes to be required by certain standards, practically rational
agents form an instrumental desire to perform such actions. The
cognitive element serves to explain the compositionality and
inferential features of moral language. For example, the judgment
expressed by “Either there is nothing wrong with watching a film
every night or Jesse is going to hell” consists of a normative
perspective N and belief that either no standard admitted by N forbids
watching a film every night or Jesse is going to hell. Validity of
inferences is then understood in terms of avoiding inconsistency of the
associated beliefs. There is no need for a separate logic of attitudes.
(For worries about hybrid expressivism, see Schroeder 2009.)


Jesse Prinz's (2007) account of moral judgment can be
classified as a hybrid state theory. The key to his view is
his theory of emotions (Prinz 2004), according to which they are
perceptions of patterns of bodily changes that represent what they are
“set up to be set off by”—what it is their function
to detect—just the same way as any other psychological states
do on teleological theories of representation. For Prinz, a
moralsentiment is a disposition to respond to certain actions
with a range of self- and other-directed blame- or praise-constituting
emotions, such as guilt, contempt, anger, and gratitude. (He also calls
it a moral rule—to have internalized a rule against
stealing consists in being disposed to respond negatively to stealing.)
A moral judgment consists in the emotion that results from
activating a sentiment, such as anger at stealing or shame for fleeing.
The anger represents stealing as being such as to cause disapprobation
in the judge—that is, as morally wrong, according to
Prinz's moral metaphysics (see Section 4.1). This means the
judgment can be true or false. It also motivates punishing the agent.
Other emotions, and hence judgments, have different motivational
effects—disgust may motivate to avoid the agent instead.


In addition to the standard internalist argument, Prinz employs the
Argument from Parsimony. He claims that empirical research (some of
which was discussed in Section 2.1) shows that moral judgments are
accompanied by emotions, influenced by emotions, and give rise to
emotions. Prinz acknowledges that non-sentimentalists may have a story
to tell about all of these phenomena, but the simplest explanation is
that moral concepts are themselves constituted by emotions or emotional
dispositions (Prinz 2007: 21–47). One challenge to Prinz's
view is thus the seeming possibility of non-emotional moral
judgment.


Finally, moral thought pluralism is a very new approach,
although Elizabeth Radcliffe (2006) argues that Hume himself
distinguished between two kinds of moral thought. Linda Zagzebski
(2003) and Uriah Kriegel (2012) argue in different ways that there are
two kinds of moral judgment, one of which contains an affective
element. Antti Kauppinen (forthcoming a) distinguishes between moral
appearances, which are constituted by manifestations of
sentiments we expect others to share, and moral judgments,
which are (implicitly) beliefs about what would be permitted,
required, or recommended by standards an ideal subject would
endorse. Moral appearances are taken to be parallel to perceptual
appearances—non-doxastic states that attract assent to their
propositional contents
(see Section 5.1). As with other appearances, the existence of moral
thoughts that are not judgments is clearest in cases in which they
clash with judgment.


Kauppinen draws on the observation that it can seem to us that what
we do is wrong even when we sincerely believe it is right, or vice
versa. He maintains that moral seemings have a distinctive
phenomenological and motivational character, which is best explained by
their being sentimental in nature. Motivational internalism is thus
true of moral appearances. Since appearances cause moral beliefs, the
two kinds of thought often co-occur. But moral beliefs can be arrived
at and held independently of moral appearances. This accounts for the
force of motivational externalist objections and the possibility of
amoralism. Since the beliefs are ordinary descriptive ones, there is no
need for a separate moral semantics. Pluralist views thus split the
difference between non-cognitivist and cognitivist sentimentalism: each
is, broadly speaking, true of one important kind of moral thought (in
contrast to hybrid views, according to which each thought has both
non-cognitive and cognitive elements).
4. Moral Metaphysics


It is an appealing thought that moral (and other evaluative) facts
and properties are not just brutely out there independently of human
thought and sensibility. Take the evaluative property of being funny.
How could something be funny, if no actual human being was ever amused
by it? How could something be outrageous if it failed to generate any
outrage when known about, even in those who care about the victim? For
sentimentalists, value, including moral value, is
anthropocentric (D'Arms and Jacobson 2006).


Sentimentalists agree with error theorists that sui
generis, non-natural moral facts would be queer, and that
mind-independent natural facts are unfit for the role of moral facts.
Non-cognitivist sentimentalists treat moral facts as
projections of moral attitudes. Although there is excellent
reason to think Hume wasn't a projectivist, he gave one of the
classic formulations in saying that taste

has a productive
faculty, and gilding and staining all natural objects, borrowed from
internal sentiment, raises in a manner a new creation. (1751:
269) 

We take a sentimental response in ourselves, say envy, and
attribute to the worldly object a feature it doesn't really have,
such as being enviable.


Error theorists treat this projection as much the same as the
attribution of agency to clouds or trees by some primitive culture: a
predictable false belief. Contemporary expressivists, in contrast,
believe that attribution of moral facts and properties serves a
purpose. It enables us to express our commitments in a way that
provides a focal point for disagreement and debate. As discussed above,
on deflationary views of truth and facts, it is a first-order question
whether some attribution is in error or not.


A distinctive kind of sentimentalist moral metaphysics is endorsed
by cognitivist sentimentalists who believe that moral and evaluative
facts are metaphysically determined by some sort of sentimental
responses. According to such views, moral properties are
response-dependent in one way or another. Several varieties
will be discussed below. For a brief overview of the different types of
response-dependence accounts and their relation to other main views in
moral metaphysics, see the
 Response-Dependence Supplement.
4.1 Subjectivism and Relativism


The simplest way to link moral properties with our emotional or
conative responses would be to say that what makes something wrong is
that it is disapproved of, or bad that it is not desired. No one holds
a view this elementary, since it entails that an undetected murder
isn't morally wrong, for example. It also leaves undetermined
whose disapproval is at issue—what if one person disapproves of
an action but someone else approves? Simple Subjectivism improves on it
by indexing moral properties to subjects and referring to
dispositions to cause responses rather than actual responses.
What makes something wrong-for-Mary, for example, is that Mary would
disapprove of it, were she aware of it. A related relativist proposal
is that something is wrong-for-Mary if and only if Mary accepts a
normative standard or framework that prohibits it (Harman 1975).


As noted in Section 2, subjectivists or contextualists about moral
semantics need not think that there are specifically evaluative
properties at all, only natural properties that can be conceived of
under an evaluative mode of presentation that involves a non-cognitive
element. Some nevertheless do so. Edward Westermarck maintained that

[T]o name an act good or bad, ultimately implies that it is apt
to give rise to an emotion of approval or disapproval in him who
pronounces the judgment. (Westermarck 1906: 4). 

According to
Jesse Prinz,

 An action has the property of being morally wrong
(right) just in case there is an observer who has a sentiment of
disapprobation (approbation) toward it. (Prinz 2007: 92)

(Recall that for Prinz a sentiment is a disposition to feel
various emotions, so wrongness doesn't hang on someone actually
having a negative reaction to something.) But this claim is highly
implausible, given that wrongness is unindexed. It is true of almost
anything that someone will disapprove of it, and someone else will
approve of it. Thus, female genital cutting, for example, is
simultaneously both (absolutely) right and wrong. This is a
steep theoretical cost.


The Missing Rigidity Problem for Simple Subjectivism is that it
seems to entail that if we were to begin to approve of slavery, slavery
would come to be morally right—it would be true that we would
respond to it positively when encountering it, say. But surely the
correct description of such a scenario would not be that slavery has
become right, but that we have become worse people (Broad 1944/5: 151).
The Missing Fallibility Problem, which also has to do with tying value
closely to our actual responses, is that a simple subjectivist view
seems to leave insufficient room for mistakes about value. If
what's right is determined by what I approve, I can only be
mistaken about what's right if I'm mistaken about what I in
fact approve. But it is very implausible that the remedy for moral
mistakes is better introspection.
4.2  Ideal Dispositionalism


Paralleling the case of moral judgment, problems with Simple
Subjectivism motivate a move to Ideal Dispositionalism. According to
this type of view, the extension of moral or evaluative properties is
determined by the sentimental responses of idealized subjects of some
sort, or responses under idealized conditions. Consequently, the
Missing Fallibility Problem is handily skirted: we can no doubt be
mistaken about what an ideal observer would approve.


Ideal Dispositionalist views also avoid the Missing Rigidity
Problem. Depending on the details, it may suffice to idealize the
subject of the sentiments: maybe no impartial spectator would approve
of slavery, even if the majority of people were to have a pro-slavery
sensibility. In case the idealization process is path-dependent (so
that the outcome depends on the unidealized initial sentiments of the
subject), Ideal Dispositionalists may make a rigidification move
(Wiggins 1987: 206). They can say that the starting point for
idealization is constituted by actually normal sentiments,
which include a strong desire not to be at the mercy of the good will
of others, among others. Thus, rigidified ideal observers would
disapprove of slavery, even if it became statistically normal to
approve of it.


Ideal Dispositionalism comes in several varieties, which often
correspond to views about the content of moral judgment (Firth 1952;
Lewis 1989; Smith 1994). Even if they avoid problems with fallibility
and rigidity, there are a number of further challenges. Five will be
discussed here.


First, the Euthyphro Dilemma derives its name from the Platonic
dialogue in which Socrates argues against a version of Divine Command
theory. Applied to subjectivism, it can be presented as follows:

 A subjectivist theory defines the subject
whose responses determine the extension of evaluative properties either
in terms whose application presupposes mind-independent evaluative
truths (for short, evaluative terms) or in non-evaluative terms.

If the subject is defined in evaluative
terms, the theory collapses into mind-independent realism: it
presupposes the existence of at least some mind-independent evaluative
truths.

If the subject is defined in
non-evaluative terms, her responses will be morally arbitrary and
lacking in authority to determine the extension of evaluative
properties.

So, a subjectivist theory is either
self-defeating (because of collapse into realism) or false (because of
yielding arbitrary extensions for moral properties).



It is clear that subjectivist accounts with any kind of reductive
ambition cannot embrace the first horn of the dilemma (see below for
non-reductivist accounts). So it is the second horn that they must
face. What exactly is the problem with it? According to Russ
Shafer-Landau, it is that

it may be impossible to craft a set of
[non-evaluative] constraints on attitude formation such that the
emerging attitudes yield prescriptions that match up with our views
about what constitutes paradigmatically moral and immoral
behaviour (Shafer-Landau 2003: 41) 

The challenge is that ideal
observers, when defined in non-evaluative terms, might approve of bad
things, like ethnic cleansing, which would counterintuitively entail
that ethnic cleansing would be morally right.


However, Shafer-Landau admits that there is no knock-down argument
to the effect that any idealization in non-evaluative terms will yield
counterintuitive results. Here a Humean might draw comfort from her
explanatory theory: if our most robust actual moral intuitions
are explained by the sentimental responses we have when we approximate
the Common Point of View, as the Humean claims, it is after all highly
unlikely that the anyone who successfully occupies that perspective
would approve of something we actually find a paradigmatic moral wrong,
such as genocide.


Michael Huemer offers a different angle on the second horn. He says
that if an ideal observer

has no moral reason for desiring what
he does, then his desires are arbitrary and have no moral import. Why
would someone's desiring or approving of something for no
reason make that thing good? (Huemer 2005: 63) 

The problem
with this line is that it does not follow from the fact that something
is not approved for a moral reason that it is approved for
no reason. There is something about an action in virtue of
which it would be approved of by any ideal observer: perhaps it
involves keeping one's promise. The Ideal Observer theorist says
that what makes this natural fact a right-making feature is precisely
that it would be approved of by any ideal observer.


Perhaps the real challenge that the Euthyphro poses concerns the
normative authority of the responses of any kind of
subject defined in non-evaluative terms. One way to develop this
challenge may be called the Missing Normativity Problem. Many believe
that moral rightness or wrongness are categorically
reason-giving features of actions. Everyone, regardless of their
interests and desires, has a reason to refrain from morally wrong
behaviour. Suppose, then, that to be wrong is to be such as to be
disapproved of by any ideal observer. On a reductivist view, this is a
natural property of the action, specified in non-normative terms. The
challenge is: why would such a natural property be categorically
reason-giving? Why should people care about doing only things that
would not be disapproved of by a hypothetical spectator?


As Johnston puts it,

To say that something would be valued
under condition K is not thereby to commend it, but only to make a
descriptive remark about its relation to certain psychological
conditions. (Johnston 1989: 157) 

Similarly, Blackburn notes that
evaluative judgments are

more like verdicts than
hypotheses about the suspected reactions of some other group under some
putative circumstances. (Blackburn 1993: 274) 

These challenges
may be ways of spelling out the force of G. E. Moore's (1903)
famous Open Question Argument: since it makes sense to grant that some
X would be disapproved of by any impartial, informed, but otherwise
normal observer, but nevertheless deny that X is morally wrong, there
is reason to think that being disapproved of by an ideal observer is
not the same thing as being morally wrong. To be sure, the Open
Question Argument is contentious, and there are a number of standard
responses: perhaps the identity of the properties is a
posteriori, like that of water and H2O (Brink 1989), or
perhaps it is an unobvious conceptual truth that we can read off the
platitudes surrounding our concepts (Smith 1994). (For discussion of
the Open Question Argument, see the entry on
 moral naturalism.)


The Missing Normativity Problem is certainly one of the main
outstanding challenges to any reductivist version of sentimentalism.
One direction in which a solution might be sought is drawing on the
kind of response I suggested might be given to the Missing Motivation
Problem. Suppose there is a rational requirement for any agent to care
about what their ideal advisor or any impartial spectator would
endorse, for example. If we have to care about what our ideal advisor
would want us to do in order to be coherent, or perhaps in order to be
self-governing agents in the first place, then the reactions of a
suitable subject in suitable circumstances will be normative for us,
regardless of our contingent desires and interests. To be sure, this
kind of constitutivist sentimentalist response is yet to be
defended in print.


Third, Nick Zangwill (2003) argues that response-dependence theories
can't account for acting from the motive of duty. It seems we can
do something just because it is the right thing to do. When we do so,
our reason isn't always that we want others, even ideal
observers, to approve of us or be disposed to do so (Zangwill 2003:
286). This is something that Adam Smith clearly recognized. He
distinguished between being motivated by love of praise and by love of
praise-worthiness (TMS 132–3, 147). The latter, however, he
identified with desire for self-approbation (the approval of the
imagined impartial spectator) and for “possessing those
qualities, and performing those actions, which we love and admire in
other people” (TMS 150), which is for a wise man “the
principal object, about which he can or ought to be anxious.”
(TMS 136) Doing something out of the motive of duty is more plausibly
understood in terms of dread of “doing any thing which can render
us the just and proper objects of the hatred and contempt of our
fellow-creatures” (TMS 137), such as failing to do our duty. It
is not obvious that the kind of motivations that Smith describes amount
to the “arrant cynicism” Zangwill charges
response-dependence accounts with (2003: 287), even though they involve
desire for approval.


The fourth issue is the Indeterminacy Problem. Given a
characterisation of an ideal observer, is there really such a thing as
an action that would be approved of by any ideal observer?
Here is how Richard Brandt formulated the objection:



The fact of ethnology and psychological theory suggest that there
could (causally) be two persons, both “ideal observers” in
Firth's sense, who would have different or even opposed reactions
(approval, experience of apparent requiredness) with respect to the
same act, say on account of past conditioning, a different system of
desires, etc. (Brandt 1955: 408)



If ideal observers disagree, there is, according to the theory, no
fact of the matter. This problem derives from an essential feature of
idealized dispositional theories: the idealization begins from what
people are actually like, and the process may not guarantee convergence
in the relevant respects. The only two possibilities are going
relativist (as Brandt himself does) or defining the process of
idealization so as to guarantee convergence. The latter, however,
threatens to disengage the ideal responses from motivation and lose the
connection between values and beings like us.


Finally, the Unmotivated Idealization Problem is that it is not
obvious that the move from actual responses or dispositions to ideal
dispositions has a rationale that is consistent with the core ideas of
response-dependence theory. David Enoch (2005) has recently made a
forceful case for this problem. He notes that if there are
response-independent facts, it makes good sense to privilege responses
of certain kind of subjects in certain conditions, because such
features of subjects and conditions are conducive to tracking the
response-independent facts. But that option is obviously closed for the
subjectivist.


Enoch claims that there is no real alternative rationale that is not
ad hoc or that doesn't tacitly rely on response-independent
realism. For example, appealing to our actual justificatory practice,
in which we may privilege responses under full imaginative
acquaintance, for example, is not an option, since that practice is
itself best explained by the underlying assumption that there are
mind-independent moral facts (Enoch 2005: 774). However, Hume might
object that the rationale for stepping back from our actual sentimental
responses is avoiding “continual contradictions in society and
conversation” and other practical problems (see Section 2.2). If
this is right, our actual justificatory practice and the privileged
place it gives to reflectively corrected responses thus has an
explanation and rationale that do not presuppose mind-independent
evaluative facts. (For a different response based on the idea that
uninformed desires are not really desires for a certain option but only
for what the option is falsely thought to be, see Sobel 2009.)
4.3  Sensibility Theory and Neo-Sentimentalism


For sensibility theories, an evaluative property is not a
disposition to cause responses in us, but the property of
meriting a response from us. A sensibility theory version of
the response-dependence equation looks like this:


X is M if and only if X merits R / any virtuous
subject S would respond to X with R in ideal circumstances



It is an obvious and familiar complaint against views of this type
that the analysis is uninformative. After all, normative terms
occur on both sides of the equation: the right-hand side refers to
meriting and virtuous subjects. There is no attempt
to reduce evaluative properties to non-evaluative ones. Neither
responses nor properties have metaphysical priority, but are instead
“siblings” (McDowell 1987). One argument in favour of this
is the claim that the relevant response cannot be identified
independently of the (concept of the) property (Wiggins 1987: 195).
Sensibility theorists nevertheless claim that the non-reductive
elucidation offers an advantage over primary quality views, according
to which moral properties have no essential relation to us.


In response to this point, Terence Cuneo (2001: 581) distinguishes
between strong and weak primary quality views. The latter do claim that
moral properties must be characterized in terms of appropriate
responses, but nevertheless deny that kindness, say, is
constituted by meriting responses—it is rather a
mind-independent feature in virtue of which responses are merited. It
is thus not clear whether the no-priority view has an advantage over
weak primary quality views.


Sensibility theories are a species of what is often called a Fitting
Attitudes (FA) Analysis of value (Rabinowicz and
Rønnow-Rasmussen 2004). The general form of an FA analysis is
the following:


X is E if and only if, and because, R is an appropriate or
fitting response to X / there is sufficient reason to
respond to X with R.



The ‘because’ indicates that the direction of
metaphysical explanation is from fittingness of attitudes to the
property, and not the other way: something is good because it is
fitting to desire it, and not fitting to desire because it is good.
This rules out weak primary quality views, which accept that value and
fitting attitudes go together, but claim that it is value that makes
the attitude fitting and not vice versa. Some identify FA analyses with
neo-sentimentalism (Tappolet 2011), but this is a theoretically
unhelpful classification, since many forms of FA analysis regard the
appropriateness or fittingness of attitudes itself as either a
mind-independent normative fact that can be intellectually intuited
(such as Ewing 1948) or as a truth determined by what would be
rationally or reasonably accepted (such as Scanlon 1998). These FA
views thus significantly depart from the key motivations for
sentimentalism, and are better classified as FA variants of
non-naturalism and constructivism.


The specific features of sentimentalist FA analyses come out most
notably in the responses that sentimentalists can give to the
metaphysical echo of the Conflation Problem, namely the Wrong Kind of
Reasons problem. This is the problem that what makes a response
appropriate or gives sufficient reason for it may be something that has
nothing to do with the relevant value. If an evil demon threatens to
smite you unless you admire it for its threat, you may have sufficient
reason to admire the demon (Rabinowicz and Rønnow-Rasmussen
2004). But that doesn't mean the demon is admirable—quite
the contrary. In the jargon, admiration is not a fitting
response to the demon, since it is appropriate for the wrong kind of
reason.


There are various proposals to distinguish between right and wrong
kind of reasons for attitudes, not all of which are sentimentalist
(e.g., Parfit 2011). Justin D'Arms and Daniel Jacobson (2000b)
present a distinctively sentimentalist alternative. Their piecemeal
solution appeals to alethic standards of correctness derived
from the content of the attitude in question. Assuming that an emotion
has a cognitive component that presents or construes things as being in
a certain way (see Section 5.1), it can be either accurate or
inaccurate, depending on whether things are that way. The right kind of
reasons for or against the attitude are those that bear on its
accuracy. As they put it,

 An emotional episode presents its
object as having certain evaluative features; it is unfitting …
when its object lacks those features. (2000b: 73)


The example D'Arms and Jacobson use is envy. According to
them, it broadly speaking presents a rival as having a desirable
possession in a negative light. The right kind of reasons bearing on
whether a rival is enviable are thus those that have to do with what
she possesses and its desirability relative to what you have. If a
colleague gets a promotion you wanted, envy may be fitting in this
sense, and consequently, given a fitting attitudes account of
evaluative properties, the colleague will be enviable. This is the case
even if envy is morally or prudentially inappropriate—the
latter kind of reasons do not bear on the fittingness of envy.


Adam Smith offers an alternative sentimentalist account of
fittingness in criticizing the intuitionist FA analyses of his
time:



[T]here are some modern systems, according to which virtue consists
in propriety; or in the suitableness of the affection from which we
act, to the cause or object which excites it … None of those
systems either give, or even pretend to give, any precise or distinct
measure by which this fitness or propriety of affection can be
ascertained or judged of. That precise and distinct measure can be
found nowhere but in the sympathetic feelings of the impartial and
well-informed spectator. (TMS 346)



A natural take on this is that Smith accepts the FA analysis that an
action is wrong if and only if it is fitting to resent the agent for
it, for example. But he then gives a distinctively sentimentalist cast
on what it is for something to be fitting. This normative fact
consists in the response being endorsed by an impartial and
well-informed spectator. Kauppinen (forthcoming b) argues that if such
endorsement is understood as approval of manifesting the
attitude by doing what the attitude by its nature motivates one to do,
and not only approval of having the attitude, Smithian
sentimentalists can avoid the Wrong Kind of Reason problem. For
example, admiration essentially motivates emulation (Schroeder
2010b). It is fitting only when an ideal subject of a suitable kind
would approve of emulating its object. In contrast, it is appropriate
for the wrong kind of reason when an ideal subject would only approve
of having the attitude but not manifesting it. Insofar as a subject
can be ideal in many ways—such as morally or
aesthetically—this type of analysis allows distinguishing
between morally and aesthetically fitting responses.
5. Moral Epistemology


Hume famously argued that we cannot infer an ‘ought’
proposition from an ‘is’ proposition, because the former
introduces “a new relation” of an entirely different kind
(T 469). This means we cannot come to know moral truths by theoretical
reasoning from known non-moral truths. This argument is based on
metaphysical and explanatory arguments to the effect that moral truths
aren't the sort of relations or facts that reasoning can discover
(see the
 Anti-Rationalism Supplement).
 The consequence is that ethics is epistemically
autonomous. In this, epistemic sentimentalists agree with
intuitionists, but they deny that basic moral propositions are
self-evident, so we cannot come to know their truth merely by
understanding them either. Sentimentalists also reject the Kantian idea
that pure practical reason can yield moral knowledge. Instead, we come
to know basic moral truths by way of emotional experience.


Epistemic sentimentalists do not, to be sure, claim that we should
just go with the gut and throw reason to the wind. Hume was emphatic
that theoretical reasoning is typically needed to establish the true
nature and consequences of the actions and characters that we judge
(e.g., Hume 1751: 268–269). Nor do sentimentalists deny that we
can reason from basic moral principles to derived principles or
verdicts with the help of factual premises. It is only the basic moral
beliefs that cannot (or need not) be inferred from other moral or
non-moral truths that are held to be supported by emotional
experience.
5.1  The Perceptual Model


Talk of a moral sense suggests an epistemic picture according to which
moral knowledge is similar to knowledge acquired by other senses.  We
simply attend to something, and immediately, without any kind of
reasoning, just know whether it's right or wrong, just as we come to
know the colour or shape of a car just by looking at it. This picture
of immediate knowledge surely has some commonsensical appeal—I
don't have to spend a lot of time thinking about whether torturing a
dog is wrong. And it is no doubt often the case that belief in the
presence of the wrong-making natural properties (such as intentionally
causing excruciating pain to a whimpering dog) triggers an emotional
reaction in us. It is plausible, and supported by empirical data (see Section 2.1), that the emotional response
often precedes and perhaps causes the moral judgment. But is it a
perception or something analogous?


In the case of ordinary perceptual experience, an object
instantiates an observable property, such as being red, and this causes
us (in the right way) to have a corresponding phenomenal representation
of the object, such as a visual experience of a red object in front of
us (Audi 2013). Many believe that this experience is not itself a
belief, since the two can come apart: I can believe that a stick in the
water is straight while it nevertheless perceptually appears to me that
it is not straight. However, in an ordinary case, having a perceptual
experience provides (propositional) justification for the corresponding
belief, at least according to epistemological internalists.
Epistemologists debate whether this requires only the absence of
defeaters or also some type of warrant to rule out skeptical scenarios
(see Tucker (ed.) 2013). 


So is there such a thing as emotional moral perception? The answer
depends, in part, on the nature of emotions. On Hume's view, a
passion is “an original existence” which “contains
not any representative quality, which renders it a copy of any other
existence” (T 415). If this is the case, then emotional
experience cannot justify belief the same way contentful perceptual
experience does. Most contemporary epistemic sentimentalists reject
Hume's theory of emotions. Instead, they subscribe to some
variety of a representational theory of emotions, motivated by the
thought that emotions can be assessed as appropriate or fitting or even
rational (de Sousa 1987). This suggests that emotions are
about something—that they have intentional
content.


One representational theory holds that emotions involve or consist
in a judgment that the target of the emotion (such as flying
on an airplane) has the property that is the formal object of
the emotion (such as being dangerous in the case of fear) (Kenny 1963;
Lyons 1980). Sabine Roeser (2011) defends this type of account in the
moral case. According to her, moral emotions are “at the same
time both value judgments and affective states” (Roeser 2011:
149). On her view, they constitute intuitions just in the same sense as
traditional intuitionists claim: they are direct apprehensions of
non-natural states of affairs. (This is a clear case in which epistemic
and metaphysical variants of sentimentalism come apart.) Any view of
this type faces the challenge of explaining why our emotions would
reliably track such non-natural facts. If being wrong has nothing to do
with being such as to arouse a disapproving reaction in us in some
suitable circumstances, why should we think that there is a reliable
connection between being wrong and our disapproval? Beside the
reliability concern, there is also the worry that value judgments in
general are not self-justifying, so it is not clear why judgments
embedded in emotion would justify further belief.


In any case, it is a well-known problem with judgmental theories of
emotion in general that emotions can be recalcitrant, that is,
come apart from our judgments. We can be hopeful while believing our
prospects are dim, or worried in spite of judging that everything is
all right. This motivates many to regard emotions as being or
containing or being analogous to perceptions, in particular
evaluative perceptions (de Sousa 1987; Tappolet 2000, 2011; Helm 2001;
Prinz 2004, 2007; Zagzebski 2003; Goldie 2007; Döring 2007). On
this type of view, emotions and perceptual experiences have many common
features: they are spontaneous, informationally encapsulated (that is,
relatively independent from the subject's beliefs and desires),
have a characteristic phenomenology, have conceptual (and/or
non-conceptual) content, and represent or construe the world as being
in a certain (evaluative) way without involving judgment or belief.
Consequently, they can non-inferentially but defeasibly justify
evaluative belief just as sense perceptions can justify empirical
belief.


The main challenge for the perceptual analogy is capturing the
causal element that seems essential to genuine perception: is
the wrongness of an action the sort of thing that can cause us to have
a feeling of disapprobation, for example? It certainly seems plausible
that what we literally perceive is the property that grounds the
wrongness of the action, such as the shooting of a peaceful
demonstrator by a police officer, and then respond to it with an
emotional reaction, which construes the action as wrong. If so, perhaps
it is better to think of emotions as quasi-perceptual
appearances that constitute moral intuitions rather than
perceptions (Kauppinen 2013). On this view, emotions
don't represent things as having certain properties in virtue of
being triggered by those properties when functioning properly, as Prinz
(2004) claims, but rather in virtue of their phenomenal character. The
way an emotion feels is not irrelevant to how it construes its object.
The feelings involved in anger, for example, aren't directionless
sensations, but have a qualitative character in virtue of which anger
presents its object as offensive (Kriegel forthcoming).


As with the judgmentalist view, there is room for perceptualist or
quasi-perceptualist views that are not committed to sentimentalist
metaphysics, such as Tappolet (2011), as well as those that are, such
as Prinz (2007). It is much easier for the latter to explain why
emotions should be thought of as ways of accessing evaluative truths.
They can offer a constitutive explanation of the reliability
of the responses: since the facts are constitutively linked to
emotional responses, there is good reason to think emotional responses
track them, at least in suitable conditions.


The plausibility of the analogy or identity between emotions and
perceptions hangs on the details. Critics like Mikko Salmela (2011) and
Michael Brady (2011) point to various differences in cognitive
processing and reason-responsiveness. Perceptualists and
quasi-perceptualists also need to make clear which emotions can justify
and when. Even if moral perception (or sentimental intuition) is
epistemically as good as sense perception, we know that in some
circumstances our senses are not reliable. But how do we know which
circumstances? This calibration challenge was already noted by
Hutcheson:



But may there not be a right or wrong state of our moral sense, as
there is in our other senses, according as they represent their objects
to be as they really are, or represent them otherwise? So may not our
moral sense approve that which is vicious, and disapprove virtue, as a
sickly palate may dislike grateful food, or a vitiated sight
misrepresent colours or dimensions? Must we not know therefore
antecedently what is morally good or evil by our reason, before we can
know that our moral sense is right? (Hutcheson 1728: 177)



Hutcheson's response was to point out that even if moral sense
can mislead, it doesn't follow that reason is needed to
provide a standard for it, or that it's capable of doing so.
After all, it's not by reasoning that we fundamentally correct
mistakes of colour perception. Rather, we try to ascertain which
circumstances are conducive to properly functioning perception (perhaps
by way of an a priori inquiry) and then try to place ourselves
in such circumstances and look again. What the suitable circumstances
in the moral case are like depends on the nature of moral facts. For
relativists like Prinz (2007), the only thing that matters is that our
reactions genuinely reflect our sentiments towards the action. For
ideal dispositionalists, David Lewis offers a basic recipe:



To find out whether we would be disposed, under ideal conditions, to
value it, put yourself in ideal conditions, if you can, making sure you
can tell when you have succeeded in doing so. Then find out whether you
value the thing in question, i.e., whether you desire to desire it. If
you do, that confirms that it is a value. (Lewis 1989: 117)



(Note that Lewis's suggestion seems to involve a kind of
inference from the proposition that I'm in ideal
conditions and the proposition that I value x to x being valuable. If
so, his model is not a perceptualist one.) For Lewis himself, the ideal
conditions for valuing are those of full imaginative acquaintance with
the object. For Hume and Smith, the ideal conditions of moral judging
involve occupying the ‘common point of view’ or the
perspective of an impartial and well-informed spectator. As discussed
in Section 2.2, they both believe that achieving this requires
sympathizing (or empathizing) with the feelings or reactive attitudes
of those immediately affected while controlling for predictable
distortions. Unless they are felt from the common point of view, our
emotional responses will not reliably track the response-dependent
moral facts. Contrary to the way psychologists sometimes represent
Hume, he thus does not condone relying on just any flashes of
affect.
5.2  Tracking and Pragmatic Theories


Not all epistemic sentimentalists subscribe to the perceptualist
model. One alternative is provided by John Allman and Jim Woodward
(2008), who argue that moral intuitions (in the sense of immediate
judgments resulting from what psychologists call System 1) involving
emotional processing can reliably track moral facts after a suitable
kind of implicit learning. They draw on empirical work on the
development of expertise. In implicit learning, the learner,
such as a novice nurse, is repeatedly exposed to certain cues, (such as
babies manifesting different symptoms), makes certain decisions to act
(giving certain kind of treatment to the baby), and then receives
clear, independent feedback on whether the decisions were correct (the
symptoms either go away or get worse) (Kahneman and Klein 2009). As a
result, the learner may become an expert, who is able to respond
immediately and appropriately to situations without necessarily being
able to articulate why. Allman and Woodward's suggestion is that
a similar kind of training of our emotional responses is possible in
the moral case.


The core challenge for this type of view is that there is a
difference between training emotions to be responsive to potentially
morally relevant information, such as

mental states of
others and their likely behavior in interactive situations, as well as
the likely consequences of such behaviour (Allman and Woodward
2008: 173), 

and training them to be responsive to moral facts
themselves. It is not clear whether there is any analogue to the
unambiguous and independent negative feedback that a nurse receives
after giving the wrong treatment in the case of making a mistaken moral
judgment.


A very different non-perceptualist suggestion is made by Shaun
Nichols and Michael Gill. It draws on the empirical assumption that
many core moral judgments are explained by emotions or affect-backed
rules, and cannot be either explained or justified by reasoning alone
(see Section 2.2). One way to respond to realizing this is giving up
our emotion-based moral convictions. But Nichols and Gill argue that is
problematic:



The evidence suggests that if the influence of emotion is
eliminated, one's pattern of moral judgment will be incongruous
or bizarre to commonsense—one's pattern of moral judgment
will look to be not merely a refinement or revision of commonsense
morality but a very different thing altogether. (Nichols and Gill 2008:
152)



Given that our actual judgments are largely explained by affective
responses to rule-prohibited actions, we have to either accept that
emotions can justify or “give up the bulk of commonsense
morality” (Nichols and Gill 2008: 153) This argument
doesn't claim that emotions track moral truth or provide some
kind of internalist epistemic justification. It simply appeals to the
undesirable pragmatic consequences of rejecting the influence of
emotion. We'd have to regard our opposition to incest,
sacrificing one to save many, and privileging the near and the dear as
unjustified. There are, to be sure, error theorists who happily embrace
this conclusion. Even non-error theorists might say the sort of
considerations that Nichols and Gill put forward cannot show that
emotion-based moral beliefs are epistemically justified.
5.3  Debunking Arguments


The empirical data suggesting that at least some moral beliefs are
based on emotional responses has been claimed by some to undercut their
justification. Most prominently, Joshua Greene (Greene et al. 2001;
Greene 2008; Greene et al. 2009) and Peter Singer (2005) have argued
that deontological (more precisely, non-utilitarian) moral
theories are unwarranted rationalizations of gut reactions that are
outputs of the Intuitive System. In contrast, utilitarian judgments are
held to result from conscious processing by the Reasoning System, and
therefore to be justified. Although some things that Greene and Singer
say impugn emotion-based judgments as such, their main argument is best
construed as follows:

Deontological beliefs are proximately
caused by affective responses of type D.
Affective responses of type D are
sensitive to factors such as the use of personal force or
up-close-and-personal causing of harm to others.
Whether harm to others is caused by
personal force or up close is morally irrelevant.
So, deontological beliefs are formed in
response to morally irrelevant factors, and are therefore epistemically
unwarranted.

 The first two premises of the argument are empirical. Most
evidence for them comes from studies of Trolley Cases. In Bystander, a
person has to choose between letting a trolley run over and kill five
people and hitting a switch to divert it to a side track, on which it
will run over and kill one. In Footbridge, a person has to choose
between letting a trolley kill five and pushing a heavy man off the
bridge, so that the trolley will only kill the heavy man. Most people
think it is permissible to turn the trolley in Bystander, but not to
push the heavy man in Footbridge, even though both scenarios pit the
death of one against the death of five. Greene's hypothesis that the
non-utilitarian response to Footbridge is caused by an automatic
affective process is supported by neuroimaging, cognitive load, and
reaction-time studies (Greene et al. 2001; Greene et al. 2008), as
well as studies of patients with brain damage to emotion-processing
areas (according to Koenigs et al. 2007 such patients have more
utilitarian responses). Variation of details of cases suggests that
these processes are responsive to the use of personal force (Greene et
al. 2009)—for example, people are less likely to condemn
dropping the heavy man if the agent uses a switch to open a trap door
in the footbridge.


Premise 3 of the reconstructed argument is a substantive moral
assumption. Selim Berker argues on this basis that
“neuroscientific results are actually doing no work” (2009:
294) in the argument. But as Greene (manuscript) plausibly notes,
establishing the factual premises of the argument is not nothing. If
they are accepted, the non-utilitarian who relies on commonsense
intuitions faces the unpleasant task of arguing that personal force or
distance are, after all, morally relevant considerations. Greene also
provides some independent argument that affective processes as such are
likely to fail at tracking moral truth. The idea is that the relevant
negative feelings are ultimately explained as evolutionarily adaptive
“point-and-shoot” responses to life in small-scale
societies (cf. Singer 2005: 347–348). As such, they are likely to
be unreliable, at least in circumstances in which we can harm or help
at long distance.


Some responses to this argument simply challenge the empirical data.
Perhaps most effectively, Guy Kahane et al. (2012) broaden the
investigation from the trolley cases, and find that when deontological
responses are counterintuitive (such as when one must choose between
honesty and lying to prevent serious harm), the patterns that Greene
observes are reversed: it is the subjects who give a deontological
response who manifest controlled processing, while utilitarian
responses are automatic. Kahane (2012) concludes that the most
plausible hypothesis is that the Reasoning System gets involved when we
balance other considerations against the initial verdict of our
Intuitive System, regardless of whether the intuition is utilitarian or
deontological. This supports no debunking conclusions, nor the superior
rationality of utilitarianism. Taking a different line, some Kantians,
such as Allan Wood (2011), simply declare the intuitions irrelevant to
justifying deontological theory. On their picture, it is pure practical
reason that justifies moral judgments, so what causes most
people's reactions is neither here nor there.


Finally, while Greene makes a plausible case that some emotional
processes are sensitive to morally irrelevant factors, it is
questionable whether this generalizes. Sentimentalists like Nichols and
Hume who deny that the relevant emotions are adaptations seem to avoid
the point-and-shoot charge, if they are right. Reflection on the
process that results in our verdicts might increase rather than
diminish our confidence. In this vein, Hume notes at the very end of
the Treatise that once we see the origin of our moral
judgments in sympathy felt from the common point of view, we
“must certainly be pleas'd to see moral distinctions
deriv'd from so noble a source” (T 619). Our moral sense

must certainly acquire new force, when reflecting on itself, it
approves of those principles, from whence it is deriv'd, and
finds nothing but what is great and good in its rise and origin
(T 619)


What this brief account suggests is that when we engage in a process
of what would now be called wide reflective equilibrium, in
which we try to find the best fit for our particular and general moral
convictions and known psychological and sociological facts, including
facts about the origin of our moral convictions, we will
reflectively endorse those moral convictions that result from
impartial sympathy. After all, if Hume and Smith are on the right track
in their explanatory hypotheses, such responses are sensitive to
features like contributing to the general good, violating trust, or
being used as a mere means, regardless of whether the actions in
question redound to our self-interest or affect our near and dear. On
the other hand, if we come to believe that some moral belief of ours
reflects partiality or the influence of mere distance, we lose
confidence in it. On this coherentist picture, then, we assess the
implications of moral psychological hypotheses on the basis of
substantive convictions that we hold, such as our approval of unbiased
judgment. At least if emotions are perceptions or quasi-perceptions of
value, emotion-based beliefs start out with initial credibility in this
reflective equilibrium process. Its outcome may well be opting for
embracing rather than rejecting the right kind of emotion-based
judgments.