The term “nationalism” is generally used to describe
two phenomena: (1) the attitude that the members of a nation have when
they care about their national identity, and (2) the actions that the
members of a nation take when seeking to achieve (or sustain)
self-determination.  (1) raises questions about the concept of a
nation (or national identity), which is often defined in terms of
common origin, ethnicity, or cultural ties, and specifically about
whether an individual's membership in a nation should be regarded as
non-voluntary or voluntary.  (2) raises questions about whether
self-determination must be understood as involving having full
statehood with complete authority over domestic and international
affairs, or whether something less is required.
It is traditional, therefore, to distinguish nations from states
— whereas a nation often consists of an ethnic or cultural
community, a state is a political entity with a high degree of
sovereignty. While many states are nations in some sense, there are
many nations which are not fully sovereign states. As an example, the
Native American Iroquois constitute a nation but not a state, since
they do not possess the requisite political authority over their
internal or external affairs.  If the members of the Iroquois nation
were to strive to form a sovereign state in the effort to preserve
their identity as a people, they would be exhibiting a state-focused
nationalism.
Nationalism has long been ignored as a topic in political
philosophy, written off as a relic from bygone times. It came into the
focus of philosophical debate two decades ago, in the nineties, partly
in consequence of rather spectacular and troubling nationalist clashes
such as those in Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia and the former Soviet
republics. Surges of nationalism tend to present a morally ambiguous,
and for this reason often fascinating, picture.  “National
awakening” and struggles for political independence are often
both heroic and cruel; the formation of a recognizably national state
often responds to deep popular sentiment but sometimes yields inhuman
consequences, from violent expulsion and “cleansing” of
non-nationals to organized mass murder. The moral debate on
nationalism reflects a deep moral tension between solidarity with
oppressed national groups on the one hand and repulsion in the face of
crimes perpetrated in the name of nationalism on the other. Moreover,
the issue of nationalism points to a wider domain of problems related
to the treatment of ethnic and cultural differences within democratic
polity, arguably among the most pressing problems of contemporary
political theory.
In the last decade the focus of the debate about nationalism has
shifted towards issues in international justice, probably in response
to changes on the international scene: bloody nationalist wars such as
those in the former Yugoslavia have become less conspicuous, whereas
the issues of terrorism, of the “clash of civilizations”
and of hegemony in the international order have come to occupy public
attention. One important link with earlier debates is provided by the
contrast between views of international justice based on the
predominance of sovereign nation-states and more cosmopolitan views
that insist upon limiting national sovereignty or even
envisage its disappearance. Another new focus for philosophers is
provided by issues of territory and territorial rights, which connect
the topic of nation-states (or, “the nation state”) with
questions about boundaries, migration, resource rights and vital
ecological matters.
In this entry we shall first present conceptual issues of
definition and classification (Sections 1 and 2) and then the
arguments put forward in the debate (Section 3), dedicating more space
to the arguments in favor of nationalism than to those against it, in
order to give the philosophical nationalist a proper hearing.
 
1. What is a Nation?
1.1 The Basic Concept of Nationalism
Although the term “nationalism” has a variety of
meanings, it centrally encompasses the two phenomena noted at the
outset: (1) the attitude that the members of a nation have when they
care about their identity as members of that nation and (2) the
actions that the members of a nation take in seeking to achieve (or
sustain) some form of political sovereignty (see for example, Nielsen
1998–9, 9). Each of these aspects requires elaboration. (1)
raises questions about the concept of a nation or national identity,
about what it is to belong to a nation, and about how much one ought
to care about one's nation.  Nations and national identity may be
defined in terms of common origin, ethnicity, or cultural ties, and
while an individual's membership in the nation is often regarded as
involuntary, it is sometimes regarded as voluntary. The degree of care
for one's nation that nationalists require is often, but not
always, taken to be very high: according to such views, the claims of
one's nation take precedence over rival contenders for authority and
loyalty (see Berlin 1979, Smith 1991, Levy 2000, and the discussion in
Gans 2003; for a more extreme characterization see the opening pages
of Crosby 2005, and for a recent rich and interesting discussions of
nationalist attitudes see Yack 2012).
(2) raises questions about whether sovereignty requires the
acquisition of full statehood with complete authority over domestic and
international affairs, or whether something less than statehood
suffices. Although sovereignty is often taken to mean full statehood
(Gellner 1983, ch. 1; for discussion of Gellner's views see Meadwell
2012, 2014, and papers in Malesevic and Hugarard 2007), possible
exceptions have been recognized (Miller 1992 (87), and Miller
2000). Some authors even defend an anarchist version of
patriotism-moderate nationalism foreshadowed by Bakunin (see Robert
Sparrow, “For the Union Makes Us Strong: Anarchism and
Patriotism”, in Primoratz and Pavkovic 2007).
Despite these definitional worries, there is a fair amount of
agreement about the historically paradigmatic form of nationalism. It
typically features the supremacy of the nation's claims over other
claims to individual allegiance and full sovereignty as the persistent
aim of its political program. Territorial sovereignty has
traditionally been seen as a defining element of state power and
essential for nationhood. It was extolled in classic modern works by
Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau and is returning to center stage in the
debate, though philosophers are now more skeptical (see below). Issues
surrounding the control of the movement of money and people (in
particular immigration) and the resource rights implied in territorial
sovereignty make the topic politically center in the age of
globalization and philosophically interesting for nationalists and
anti-nationalists alike.
The territorial state as political unit is seen by nationalists as
centrally ‘belonging’ to one ethnic-cultural group and as
actively charged with protecting and promulgating its traditions. This
view is exemplified by the classical, “revivalist”
nationalism that was most prominent in the 19th century in Europe and
Latin America. This classical nationalism later spread across the
world and still marks many contemporary
nationalisms.
1.2 The Concept of a Nation
In its general form the issue of nationalism concerns the mapping
between the ethno-cultural domain (featuring ethno-cultural groups or
“nations”) and the domain of political organization. In
breaking down the issue, we have mentioned the
importance of the attitude that the members of a nation have when they
care about their national identity. This point raises two sorts of
questions. First, the descriptive ones:


(1a)What is a nation and what is national identity?
(1b)What is it to belong to a nation?
(1c)What is the nature of pro-national attitude?
(1d)Is membership in a nation voluntary or involuntary?


Second, the normative ones:


(1e)Is the attitude of caring about national
  identity always appropriate?
(1f)How much should one care?


This section discusses the descriptive questions, starting with
(1a) and (1b). (The normative questions are addressed in Section 3 on
the moral debate.) If one wants to enjoin people to struggle for their
national interests, one must have some idea about what a nation is and
what it is to belong to a nation. So, in order to formulate and ground
their evaluations, claims, and directives for action, pro-nationalist
thinkers have expounded theories of ethnicity, culture, nation and
state. Their opponents have in turn challenged these
elaborations. Now, some presuppositions about ethnic groups and
nations are essential for the nationalist, while others are
theoretical elaborations designed to support the essential ones. The
definition and status of the social group that benefits from the
nationalist program, variously called the “nation”,
“ethno-nation” or “ethnic group”, is
essential. Since nationalism is particularly prominent with groups
that do not yet have a state, a definition of nation and nationalism
purely in terms of belonging to a state is a non-starter.
Indeed, purely “civic” loyalties are often categorized
separately under the title “patriotism”, or
“constitutional patriotism” (Habermas 1996; see the
discussion in Markell 2000; for a wider understanding of patriotism
see Primoratz and Pavkovic 2007). This leaves two extreme options and
a number of intermediates. The first extreme option has been put
forward by a small but distinguished band of theorists, including
Renan 1882 and Weber 1970; for a recent defense, see Brubaker
2004 and for a comparison with religion, Brubaker 2013. According
to their purely voluntaristic definition, a nation is any group of
people aspiring to a common political state-like organization. If such
a group of people succeeds in forming a state, the loyalties of the
group members become “civic” (as opposed to
“ethnic”) in nature. At the other extreme, and more
typically, nationalist claims are focused upon the non-voluntary
community of common origin, language, tradition and culture: the
classic ethno-nation is a community of origin and culture, including
prominently a language and customs. The distinction is related
(although not identical) to that drawn by older schools of social and
political science between “civic” and “ethnic”
nationalism, the former being allegedly Western European and the
latter more Central and Eastern European, originating in Germany (a
very prominent proponent of the distinction is Hans Kohn
1965). Philosophical discussions centered around nationalism tend to
concern the ethnic-cultural variants only, and this habit will be
followed here. A group aspiring to nationhood on this basis will be
called here an ‘ethno-nation’ to underscore its
ethno-cultural rather than purely civic underpinnings. For the
ethno-(cultural) nationalist it is one's ethnic-cultural background
that determines one's membership in the community. One cannot chose to
be a member; instead, membership depends on the accident of origin and
early socialization. However, commonality of origin has become
mythical for most contemporary candidate groups: ethnic groups have
been mixing for millennia.
Sophisticated pro-nationalists therefore tend to stress cultural
membership only and speak of “nationality”, omitting the
“ethno-” part (Miller 1992, 2000; Tamir 1993 and 2013;
Gans 2003). Michel Seymour’s proposal of a “socio-cultural
definition” adds a political dimension to the purely cultural
one: a nation is a cultural group, possibly but not necessarily united
by a common descent, endowed with civic ties (Seymour 2000). This is
the kind of definition that would be accepted by most parties in the
debate today. So defined, the nation is a somewhat mixed category, both
ethno-cultural and civic, but still closer to the purely
ethno-cultural than to the purely civic extreme.
The wider descriptive underpinnings of nationalist claims have varied
over the last two centuries. The early German elaborations talk about
“the spirit of a people”, while somewhat later ones,
mainly of French extraction, talk about “collective
mentality”, to which specific and significant causal
powers are ascribed. A later descendent of this notion is the idea of a
“national character” peculiar to each nation, which partly
survives today under the guise of national “forms of life”
and of feeling (Margalit 1997, see below). For almost a century, up to
the end of the Second World War, it was customary to link nationalist
views to organic metaphors for society. Isaiah Berlin, writing as late
as the early seventies, proposed to define
nationalism partly as consisting of the conviction that people belong to a
particular human group, and that “…the characters of the
individuals who compose the group are shaped by, and cannot be
understood apart from, those of the group …” (first
published in 1972, reprinted in Berlin, 1979: 341). The nationalist
claims, according to Berlin, that “the pattern of life in a
society is similar to that of a biological organism”
(ibid.), and that the needs of this ‘organism’
determine the supreme goal for all of its members. Most contemporary
defenders of nationalism, especially philosophers, avoid such
language. The organic metaphor and talk about character have been
replaced by one master metaphor: that of national identity. It is
centered upon cultural membership, and used both for the identity of a
group and for the socially based identity of its members, e.g., the
national identity of George insofar as he is English or
British. Various authors unpack the metaphor in various ways: some
stress involuntary membership in the community, others the strength
with which one identifies with the community, and yet others link it
to the personal identity of each member of the community. Addressing
these issues, nationalist philosophers such as Alisdair
MacIntyre (1994), Charles Taylor (1989), and M. Seymour have
significantly contributed to introducing and maintaining important
topics such as community, membership, tradition and social identity
into contemporary philosophical debate.
Let us now turn to the issue of the origin and
“authenticity” of ethno-cultural groups or
ethno-nations. In social and political science one usually
distinguishes two kinds of views. The first can be called
“primordialist” views. According to them, actual
ethno-cultural nations have either existed “since time
immemorial” (an extreme, somewhat caricatured version,
corresponding to nineteenth century nationalist rhetoric), or at least
for a long time during the pre-modern period (Hastings 1997, see the
discussion of his views in Nations and Nationalism, Volume 9,
2003). Anthony Smith champions a very popular moderate version of this
view (1991, 2001, 2008 and the book 2009 and paper 2011) under the
name “ethnosymbolism.” For a fine development of this line
see also the works of John Hutchinson (most recently his 2005 book)
and of Roshwald (2006, debated in Nations and Nationalism
2008, Volumes 1 and 4 respectively). A volume dedicated to A. Smith
debates his ethnno-nationalism (Leouss and Grosby, eds., 2007);
recently a historical defense has been offered by Azar Gat and
Alexander Yakobson (2013). According to this approach, nations are
like artichokes, in that they have many “unimportant
leaves” that can be chewed up one by one, but also have a heart,
which remains after the leaves have been eaten (the metaphor is due to
Stanley Hoffmann; for details and sources see the debate between Smith
2003 and Özkirimli 2003. For interesting historical details see a
recent collection by Derks & Roymans 2009). The second are the
modernist views, placing the origin of nations in modern times. They
can be further classified according to their answer to an additional
question: how real is the ethno-cultural nation? The modernist realist
view is that nations are real but distinctly modern creations,
instrumental in the genesis of capitalism (Gellner 1983, Hobsbawn
1990, and Breuilly 2001 and 2011). The realist view contrasts with
more radical antirealism. According to one such view, nations are
merely “imagined” but somehow still powerful entities;
what is meant is that belief in them holds sway over the believers
(Anderson 1965). The extreme anti-realist view claims that nations are
pure “constructions” (see Walker 2001 for an overview and
literature and, more recently, Malesevic 2011). These divergent views
seem to support rather divergent moral claims about nations: see for
instance the collections edited by Breen and O'Neill (2010) and by
Lecours and Moreno (2010). For an overview of nationalism in political
theory see Vincent 2001 and the encyclopedic volume edited by Delanty
and Kumar (2006). For a more recent account combining political
theory, history and quantitative research see (Wimmer 2013); other
relevant books are De Lange 2010 and Bechhofer & McCrone 2009.
Indeed, older authors — from great thinkers like Herder and
Otto Bauer to the propagandists who followed their footsteps —
took great pains to ground normative claims upon firm
ontological realism about nations: nations are real, bona
fide entities. However, the contemporary moral debate has tried
to diminish the importance of the imagined/real divide. Prominent
contemporary philosophers have claimed that normative-evaluative
nationalist claims are compatible with the “imagined”
nature of a nation. (See, for instance, MacCormick 1982; Miller 1992,
2000; Tamir 1993, Gans 2003, Moore 2009, 2010, Dagger 2009 and, for an
interesting discussion, Frost 2006.) They point out that common
imaginings can tie people together, and that actual interaction
resulting from togetherness can engender important moral
obligations.
Let us now turn to question (1c) about the nature of pro-national
attitudes. The explanatory issue that has interested political and
social scientists concerns ethno-nationalist sentiment, the paradigm
case of a pro-national attitude. Is it as irrational, romantic and
indifferent to self-interest as it might seem on the surface? The
issue has divided authors who see nationalism as basically irrational
and those who try to explain it as being in some sense rational.
Authors who see it as irrational propose various explanations of why
people assent to irrational views. Some say, critically, that
nationalism is based on “false consciousness”. But where
does such false consciousness come from? The most simplistic view is
that it is a result of direct manipulation of “masses” by
“elites”.  On the opposite side, the famous critic of
nationalism Elie Kedourie (1960) thinks this irrationality is
spontaneous. A decade ago Liah Greenfeld went as far as linking
nationalism to mental illness in her provocative (2005) article; see
also her (2006) book. On the opposite side, Michael Walzer has offered
a sympathetic account of nationalist passion in his (2002).  Authors
relying upon the Marxist tradition offer various deeper
explanations. To mention one, the French structuralist Étienne
Balibar sees it as a result of the “production” of
ideology effectuated by mechanisms which have nothing to do with
spontaneous credulity of individuals, but with impersonal, structural
social factors (Balibar and Wallerstein, 1992). (For an overview of
Marxist approaches see Glenn 1997). Now we turn to those who see
nationalist sentiments as being rational, at least in a very wide
sense. Some authors claim that it is often rational for individuals to
become nationalists (Hardin 1985). Consider the two sides of the
nationalist coin. On the first side, identification and cohesion
within an ethno-national group relates to inter-group cooperation, and
cooperation is easier for those who are part of the same
ethno-national group. To take an example of ethnic ties in a
multiethnic state, a Vietnamese newcomer to the United States will do
well to rely on his co-nationals: common language, customs and
expectations might help him a lot in finding his way in new
surroundings. Once the ties are established and he has become part of
a network, it is rational to go on cooperating, and ethnic sentiment
secures the trust and the firm bond needed for smooth cooperation. A
further issue is when it is rational to switch sides; to stay with our
example, when does it become profitable for our Vietnamese to develop
an all-American patriotism?  This has received a detailed elaboration
in David Laitin (1998, summarized in 2001; applied to language rights
in Laitin and Reich 2004; see also Laitin 2007), who uses material
from the former Soviet Union. On the other side of the nationalist
coin, non-cooperation with outsiders can lead to sometimes extreme
conflict between various ethno-nations. Can one rationally explain the
extremes of ethno-national conflict?  Authors like Russell Hardin
propose to do so in terms of a general view of when hostile behavior
is rational: most typically, if an individual has no reason to trust
someone, it is reasonable for that individual to take precautions
against the other. If both sides take precautions, however, each will
tend to see the other as increasingly inimical. It then becomes
rational to start treating the other as an enemy. Mere suspicion can
thus lead by small, individually rational steps to a situation of
conflict. (Such negative development is often presented as a variant
of the Prisoner's Dilemma; see the entry on 
 prisoner's dilemma).  It is relatively easy to spot the
circumstances in which this general pattern applies to national
solidarities and conflicts (see also Wimmer 2013). The line of thought
just sketched is often called the “rational choice
approach”. It has enabled the application of conceptual tools
from game-theoretic and economic analyses of cooperative and
non-cooperative behavior to the explanation of ethno-nationalism.
It is worth mentioning, however, that the individualist
rational-choice approach, centered upon personal rationality, has
serious competitors. A tradition in social psychology, initiated by
Henri Tajfel (1981), shows that individuals may identify with a
randomly selected group even when membership in the group brings no
tangible rewards. Does rationality of any kind underlie this tendency
to identification? Some authors (Sober & Wilson 1998) answer in
the affirmative. They propose a non-personal, evolutionary sort of
rationality: individuals who develop a sentiment of identification and
sense of belonging end up better off in the evolutionary race; hence
we have inherited such propensities. Initially, sentiments were
reserved for kin, supporting the spreading of one's own genes.  But
cultural evolution has taken over the mechanisms of identification
that initially developed within biological evolution. As a result, we
project the sentiment originally reserved for kinship onto our
cultural group. More detailed explanations from socio-biological
perspectives differ greatly among themselves and constitute a wide and
rather promising research program (see an overview in Goetze
2001). There is a growing literature connecting these issues with
cognitive science, from Searle-White 2001 to Hogan 2009 and Yack
2012.
Finally, as for question (1d), the nation is typically seen as an
essentially non-voluntary community to which one belongs by birth and
early nurture and such that the belonging is enhanced and made more
complete by one’s additional conscious endorsement. Avishai Margalit
and Joseph Raz express a common view when they write about belonging
to a nation: “Qualification for membership is usually determined
by non-voluntary criteria. One cannot choose to belong. One belongs
because of who one is” (Margalit and Raz, 1990, 447). Belonging
brings crucial benefits: “Belonging to a national form of life
means being within a frame that offers meaning to people's choice
between alternatives, thus enabling them to acquire an identity”
(Margalit 1997, 83). Why is national belonging taken to be
involuntary? It is often attributed to the involuntary nature of
linguistic belonging: a child does not decide which language will
become her or his mother tongue, and one's mother tongue is often
regarded as the most important depository of concepts, knowledge,
social and cultural significance. All these are embedded in the
language, and do not exist without it. Early socialization is seen as
socialization into a specific culture, and very often that culture is
just assumed to be a national one. “There are people who express
themselves ‘Frenchly’, while others have forms of life
that are expressed ‘Koreanly’ or
‘Icelandicly’,” writes Margalit (1997, 80). The
resulting belonging is then to a large extent non-voluntary. (There
are exceptions to this basically non-voluntaristic view: for instance,
theoretical nationalists who accept voluntary changes of nationality.
(See also Ernst Renan's 1882 (19) famous definition of a nation as
constituted by ‘everyday plebiscite’.)
2. Varieties of Nationalism
2.1 Concepts of Nationalism: Strict and Wide
We pointed out at the very beginning of the entry that
nationalism focuses upon (1) the attitude that the members of a nation
have when they care about their national identity, and (2) the actions
that the members of a nation take when seeking to achieve (or sustain)
some form of political sovereignty. The politically central point is
(2): the actions enjoined by the nationalist. To these we now turn,
beginning with sovereignty and territory, the usual foci of a national
struggle for independence. They raise an important issue:


(2a)
Does political sovereignty within or over a territory
require statehood or something weaker?


 The classical answer is that a state is required.  A more liberal
answer is that some form of political autonomy suffices.  Once this
has been discussed, we can turn to the related normative issues:


(2b)What actions are morally
permitted to achieve sovereignty and to maintain it?
(2c)Under
what conditions is it morally permitted to take actions of this
kind?


Consider first the classical nationalist answer to (2a). Political
sovereignty requires a state “rightfully owned” by the
ethno-nation (Oldenquist 1997, who credits the expression to the
writer Czeslaw Milosz). Developments of this line of thought often
state or imply specific answers to (2b), and (2c), i.e., that in a
national independence struggle the use of force against the
threatening central power is almost always a legitimate means for
bringing about sovereignty. However, classical nationalism is not only
concerned with the creation of a state but also with its maintenance
and strengthening.  Nationalism is sometimes used to promote claims
for the expansion of a state (even at the cost of wars) and for
isolationist policies. Expansion is often justified by appeal to the
unfinished business of bringing literally all members of the
nation under one state and sometimes by territorial and resource
interests. As for maintenance of sovereignty by peaceful and merely
ideological means, political nationalism is closely tied to cultural
nationalism. The latter insists upon the preservation and transmission
of a given culture, or more accurately, of recognizably ethno-national
traits of the culture in its pure form, dedicating artistic creation,
education and research to this goal. Of course, the ethno-national
traits to be preserved can be actual or invented, partly or fully
so. Again, in the classical variant the relevant norm claims that one
has both a right and an obligation (“a sacred duty”) to
promote such a tradition. Its force trumps other interests and even
other rights (a trump which is often needed in order to carry out the
national independence struggle). In consequence, classical nationalism
has something to say about the ranking of attitudes as well: in
response to (1e), caring for one's nation is given the status of a
fundamental duty for each of its members, and in answer to (1f), the
scope is taken as unlimited. In summary, for future reference:
Classical nationalism is the political program that sees
the creation and maintenance of a fully sovereign state owned by a
given ethno-national group (“people” or
“nation”) as a primary duty of each member of the
group. Starting from the assumption that the appropriate (or
“natural”) unit of culture is an ethno-nation, it claims
that a primary duty of each member is to abide by
one's recognizably ethno-national culture in all cultural matters.
Classical nationalists are usually vigilant about the kind of
culture they protect and promote and about the kind of attitude people
have to their nation-state. This watchful attitude carries some
potential dangers: many elements of a given culture that are
universalist or simply not recognizably national may fall prey to such
nationalist enthusiasms. Classical nationalism in everyday life puts
various additional demands on individuals, from buying more expensive
home-produced goods in preference to cheaper imported ones to
procreating as many future members of the nation as one can
manage. (See Yuval-Davies 1997, and Yack 2012.)
Besides classical nationalism (and its more radical extremist
cousins), various moderate views are also nowadays classified as
nationalist. Indeed, the philosophical discussion has shifted to these
moderate or even ultra-moderate forms, and most philosophers who
describe themselves as nationalists propose very moderate nationalist
programs. Let me characterize these briefly:
Nationalism in a wider sense is any complex of attitudes,
claims and directives for action ascribing a fundamental political,
moral and cultural value to nation and nationality and deriving
obligations (for individual members of the nation, and for any
involved third parties, individual or collective) from this ascribed
value.
Nationalisms in this wider sense can vary somewhat in their
conceptions of the nation (which are often left implicit in their
discourse), in the grounds for and degree of its value, and in
the scope of their prescribed obligations. (The term can also
be applied to other cases not covered by classical nationalism, for
instance to the hypothetical pre-state political forms that an ethnic
identity might take). Moderate nationalism is less demanding than classical
nationalism and sometimes goes under the name of
“patriotism.” (A different usage, again, reserves
“patriotism” for valuing of civic community and loyalty to
state, in contrast to nationalism, centered around ethnic-cultural
communities). The variations of nationalism most relevant for
philosophy are those that influence the moral standing of claims and
of recommended nationalist practices. The elaborate philosophical
views put forward in favor of nationalism will be referred to here
as “theoretical nationalism”, the adjective serving to
distinguish such views from less sophisticated and more practical
nationalist discourse. The central theoretical nationalist evaluative
claims can be charted on the map of possible positions within
political theory in the following useful but somewhat simplified and schematic
way.
Nationalist claims featuring the nation as central to political
action must answer two crucial general questions. First, is there one
kind of large social group (smaller than the whole of mankind) that is
of special moral importance? The nationalist answer is that there is
just one, namely, the nation. When an ultimate choice is to be made,
the nation has priority. (This answer is implied by rather standard
definitions of nationalism offered by Berlin, discussed in Section 1.,
and Smith in his 2001.) Second, what are the grounds for an
individual’s obligations to the morally central group? Are they based
on voluntary or involuntary membership in the group? The typical
contemporary nationalist thinker opts for the latter, while admitting
that voluntary endorsement of one's national identity is a morally
important achievement. On the philosophical map, pro-nationalist
normative tastes fit nicely with the communitarian stance in general:
most pro-nationalist philosophers are communitarians who choose the
nation as the preferred community (in contrast to those of their
fellow communitarians who prefer more far-ranging communities, such as
those defined by global religious traditions). However, some writers
who describe themselves as liberal nationalists, prominently including
Will Kymlicka (2001, 2003, 2007), reject communitarian
underpinning.
Before proceeding to moral claims, let me briefly sketch the issues
and viewpoints connected to territory and territorial rights that are
essential for nationalist political programs. (I am adapting the
excellent taxonomy of A. Kollers (2009, Ch. 1) to the topic at hand.)
Why is territory important for ethno-national groups, and what are the
extent and grounds of territorial rights? Its primary importance
resides in sovereignty and all the associated possibilities for
internal control and external exclusion. Add to this the Rousseauian
view that political attachments are essentially bounded and that love
—or, to put it more mildly, republican civil friendship—
for one’s group requires exclusion of some “other”, and
the importance becomes quite obvious. What about the grounds for the
demand for territorial rights?  Nationalist and pro-nationalist views
mostly rely on the attachment that members of a nation have to
national territory and to the formative value of territory for a
nation to justify territorial claims (see Miller 2000 and Meissels
2009, with some refinements discussed below). This is similar in some
respects to the rationale given by proponents of indigenous peoples’
rights (Tully 2004, but see also Hendrix 2008) and in other respects
to Kollers's (2009) ethno-geographical non-nationalist theory, but
differs in preferring ethno-national groups as the sole carriers of
the right.  These attachment views stand in stark contrast to more
pragmatic views about territorial rights as means for conflict
resolution (e.g., Levy 2000). Another quite popular alternative is the
family of individualistic views grounding territorial rights in rights
and interests of individuals, for instance in their human rights
(Buchanan 2004), pre-political Lockean property rights (Simmons 2001),
individual resource rights (Steiner 1999), or political association
rights (Wellman 2005). On the extreme end of anti-nationalist views
stands the idea of Pogge (if he can be interpreted this way) that
there are no specific territorial problems for political
philosophy—the “dissolution approach”, as Kollers
calls it. Some of the authors mentioned are cosmopolitan critics of
nationalism, most prominently Buchanan and Pogge.
2.2 Moral Claims: The Centrality of Nation
We now pass to the normative dimension of nationalism. We shall
first describe the very heart of the nationalist program, i.e., sketch
and classify the typical normative and evaluative nationalist claims.
These claims can be seen as answers to the normative subset of our
initial questions about (1) pro-national attitudes and (2)
actions.
We will see that these claims recommend various courses of action:
centrally, those meant to secure and sustain a political organization
— preferably a state — for the given ethno-cultural
national community (thereby making more specific the answers to our
normative questions (1e), (1f), (2b), and (2c)). Further, they enjoin
the community’s members to promulgate recognizable ethno-cultural
contents as central features of the cultural life within such a
state. Finally, we shall discuss various lines of pro-nationalist
thought that have been put forward in defense of these claims. To
begin, let us return to the claims concerning the furthering of the
national state and culture. These are proposed by the nationalist as
norms of conduct. The philosophically most important variations
concern three aspects of such normative claims:
(i) The normative nature and strength of the claim: does it promote
merely a right (say, to have and maintain a form of political
self-government, preferably and typically a state, or have cultural
life centered upon a recognizably ethno-national culture), or a moral
obligation (to get and maintain one), or a moral, legal and political
obligation? The strongest claim is typical of classical nationalism;
its typical norms are both moral and, once the nation-state is in
place, legally enforceable obligations for all parties
concerned, including for the individual members of the ethno-nation. A
weaker but still quite demanding version speaks only of moral
obligation (“sacred duty”). A more liberal version is
satisfied with a claim-right to having a state
“rightfully owned” by the ethno-nation.
(ii) The strength of the nationalist claim in relation to various
external interests and rights: to give a real example, is the use of
the domestic language so important that even international conferences
should be held in it, at the cost of losing the most interesting
participants from abroad? The force of the nationalist claim is here
being weighed against the force of other claims, including those of
individual or group interests or rights. Variations in comparative
strength of nationalist claims take place on a continuum between two
extremes. At one rather unpalatable extreme, nation-focused claims
take precedence over any other claims, including over human
rights. Further towards the center is the classical nationalism that
gives nation-centered claims precedence over individual interests and
many needs (including pragmatic collective utility), but not
necessarily over general human rights. (See, for example, McIntyre
1994, Oldenquist 1997.) On the opposite end, which is mild, humane and
liberal, the central nationalist claims are accorded prima facie
status only (see Tamir 1993, Gans 2003, and most recently Miller's
2013 book, which looks for a compromise).
(iii) For which groups are the nationalist claims meant to be
valid?  What is their scope? One approach claims that they are valid for every
ethno-nation and thereby universal. An example would be the claim
“every ethno-nation should have its own state”. To put it
more officially

Universalizing nationalism is the political program that
claims that every ethno-nation should have a state that it
should rightfully own and the interests of which it should
promote.
Alternatively, a claim may be particularistic, such as the claim
“Group X ought to have a state”, where this
implies nothing about any other group:

Particularistic nationalism is the political program
claiming that some ethno-nation should have its state, without
extending the claim to all ethno-nations. It claims thus either


by omission (unreflective particularistic nationalism), or
by explicitly specifying who is excluded: “Group
X ought to have a state, but group Y should not”
(invidious nationalism).


The most difficult and indeed chauvinistic sub-case of
particularism, i.e., (B), has been called “invidious”
since it explicitly denies the privilege of having a state to some
peoples. T. Pogge (1997) proposes a further division of (B) into the
“high” stance, which denies it to some types of
groups, and the “low” one which denies it to
some particular groups. Serious theoretical nationalists
usually defend only the universalist variety, whereas the
nationalist-in-the-street most often defends the egoistic
indeterminate one (“Some nations should have a state, above all
mine!”). Classical nationalism comes in both particularistic and
universalistic varieties.
Although the three dimensions of variation — internal
strength, comparative strength, and scope — are logically
independent, they are psychologically and politically
intertwined. People who are radical in one respect tend also to be
radical in other respects. In other words, certain clusters of
attitudes appear to be most stable, so that extreme (or moderate)
attitudes on one dimension psychologically and politically belong with
extreme (or moderate) ones on others. Pairing extreme attitudes on one
dimension with moderate ones on the others is psychologically and
socially unstable.
The nationalist picture of morality traditionally has been quite
close to the dominant view in the theory of international relations
called “realism”. Put starkly, the view is that morality
ends at the boundaries of the nation-state; beyond there is nothing
but anarchy. The view is explicit in Friederich Meinecke (1965,
Introduction) and Raymond Aron (1962) and very close to the surface in
Hans Morgenthau (1946); for interesting links with contemporary
nationalisms, see the paper by Michael C. Williams (2007) and the book
edited by Duncan Bell (2008). It nicely complements the main classical
nationalist claim about nation-state, i.e., that each ethno-nation or
people should have a state of its own, and suggests what happens next:
nation-states enter into competition in the name of their constitutive
peoples.
3. The Moral Debate
3.1 Classical and liberal nationalisms
Let us return to our initial normative question centered around (1)
attitudes and (2) actions. Is national partiality justified, and to
what extent? What actions are appropriate to bring about sovereignty?
In particular, are ethno-national states and institutionally protected
(ethno-)national cultures goods independent from the individual will
of their members, and how far may one go in protecting them? The
philosophical debate for and against nationalism is a debate about the
moral validity of its central claims. In particular the ultimate moral
issue is the following: is any form of nationalism morally permissible
or justified, and, if not, how bad are particular forms of it? (For
debates on partiality in general, see Chatterjee and Smith 2003 and,
more recently, Feltham and Cottingham 2010.)
Why do nationalist claims require a defense? In some situations
they seem plausible: for instance, the plight of some stateless
national groups — the history of Jews and Armenians, the
historical and contemporary misfortunes of Kurds — lends
credence to the idea that having their own state would have solved the
worst problems. Still, there are good reasons to examine nationalist
claims more carefully. The most general reason is that it should first
be shown that the political form of nation state has some value as
such, that a national community has a particular, or even central,
moral and political value, and that claims in its favor have normative
validity. Once this is established, a further defense is needed. Some
classical nationalist claims appear to clash — at least under
normal circumstances of contemporary life — with various values
that people tend to accept. Some of these values are considered
essential to liberal-democratic societies, while others are important
specifically for the flourishing of creativity and culture. The main
values in the first set are individual autonomy and benevolent
impartiality (most prominently towards members of groups culturally
different from one's own). The alleged special duties towards one's
ethno-national culture can and often do interfere with individuals'
right to autonomy. Also, construed too strictly these duties can
interfere with other individual rights, e.g., the right to
privacy. Many feminist authors have noted that the typical nationalist
suggestion that women have a moral obligation to give birth to new
members of the nation and to nurture them for the sake of the nation
clashes with both the autonomy and the privacy of these women
(Yuval-Davis 1997, Moller-Okin 1999, 2002 and 2005, and the discussion
in the volume on Okin, Satz et al. 2009). Another endangered value is
diversity within the ethno-national community, which can also be
thwarted by the homogeneity of a central national culture.
Nation-oriented duties also interfere with the value of
unconstrained creativity. For example, telling writers, musicians or
philosophers that they have a special duty to promote national
heritage interferes with the freedom of creation. The question
here is not whether these individuals have the right to promote their
national heritage, but whether they have a duty to do so.
Between these two sets of endangered values, the autonomy-centered
and creativity-centered ones, fall values that seem to arise from
ordinary needs of people living under ordinary circumstances (Barry
2001). In many modern states, citizens of different ethnic background
live together and very often value this kind of life. The very fact of
cohabitation seems to be a good that should be upheld. Nationalism
does not tend to foster this kind of multiculturalism and pluralism,
judging from both theory (especially the classical nationalist one)
and experience. But the problems get worse. In practice, it does not
seem accidental that the invidious particularistic form of
nationalism, claiming rights for one's own people and denying them to
others, is so widespread. The source of the problem is the competition
for scarce resources: as Ernst Gellner (1983) famously pointed out,
there is too little territory for all candidate ethnic groups to have
a state, and the same goes for other goods demanded by nationalists
for the exclusive use of their co-nationals. According to some authors
(McCabe 1997), the invidious variant is more coherent than any other
form of nationalism: if one values one's own ethnic group highly the
simplest way is to value it tout court. If one definitely
prefers one's own culture in all respects to any foreign one, it is a
waste of time and attention to bother about others. The universalist,
non-invidious variant introduces enormous psychological and political
complications.  These arise from a tension between spontaneous
attachment to one's own community and the demand to regard all
communities with an equal eye.  This tension might make the humane,
non-invidious position psychologically unstable, difficult to uphold
in situations of conflict and crisis, and politically less
efficient.
Philosophers sympathetic to nationalism are aware of the evils that
historical nationalism has produced and usually distance themselves
from these. They usually speak of “various accretions that have
given nationalism a bad name”, and they are eager to
“separate the idea of nationality itself from these
excesses” (Miller 1992, 87 and Miller, 2000). Such thoughtful
pro-nationalist writers have participated in an ongoing philosophical
dialogue between proponents and opponents of the claim (see the
anthologies McKim & McMahan 1997, Couture, Nielsen, & Seymour
1998, Miscevic 2000 and Primoratz and Pavkovic 2007). In order to help
the reader find his or her way through this involved debate, we shall
briefly summarize the considerations which are open to the
ethno-nationalist to defend his or her case. (Compare the useful
overview in Lichtenberg 1997.) Further lines of thought built upon
these considerations can be used to defend very different varieties of
nationalism, from radical to very moderate ones.
It is important to offer a warning concerning the key assumptions
and premises figuring in each of the lines of thought
summarized below: namely, that the assumptions often live an
independent life in the philosophical literature. Some of them figure
in the proposed defenses of various traditional views which have
little to do with the concept of a nation in particular.
For brevity, I shall reduce each line of thought to a brief
argument; the actual debate is more involved than one can
represent in a sketch. I shall indicate, in brackets, some prominent
lines of criticism that have been put forward in the debate. (These
are discussed in greater detail in Miscevic 2001.) The main arguments
in favor of nationalism purporting to establish its fundamental
claims about state and culture will be divided into two sets. The
first set of arguments defends the claim that national communities
have a high value, often seen as non-instrumental and independent of
the wishes and choices of their individual members, and argues that
they should therefore be protected by means of state and official
statist policies.  The second set is less deeply
‘philosophical’ (or ‘comprehensive’), and
encompasses arguments from the requirements of justice,
independent from substantial assumptions about culture and cultural
values.
The first set will be presented here in more detail, since it has
formed the core of the debate. It depicts the community as the deep
source of value or as the unique transmission device connecting its
members to some important values. In this sense, the arguments from
this set are communitarian in a particularly “deep” sense,
since they are grounded in basic features of the human condition. Here
is a characterization.

The deep communitarian perspective is a theoretical
perspective on political issues (in the case under consideration, on
nationalism) that justifies a given political arrangement (here, a
nation-state) by appeal to deep philosophical assumptions about human
nature, language, community ties and identity (in a deeper,
philosophical sense).
The general form of deep communitarian arguments is as follows.
First, the communitarian premise: there is some uncontroversial good
(e.g., a person's identity), and some kind of community is essential
for acquisition and preservation of it. Then comes the claim that the
ethno-cultural nation is the kind of community ideally suited for this
task. Unfortunately, this crucial claim is rarely defended in detail
in the literature. But here is a sample from Margalit, whose last
sentence has been already quoted above:

The idea is that people make use of different styles to express
their humanity. The styles are generally determined by the communities
to which they belong. There are people who express themselves
‘Frenchly’, while others have forms of life that are
expressed ‘Koreanly’ or … ‘Icelandicly’.
(1997, 80)
Then follows the statist conclusion: in order for such a community
to preserve its own identity and support the identity of its
members, it has to assume (always or at least normally) the political
form of a state. The conclusion of this type of argument is that the
ethno-national community has the right to an ethno-national state and the
citizens of the state have the right and obligation to favor their own
ethnic culture in relation to any other.
Although the deeper philosophical assumptions in the arguments stem
from the communitarian tradition, weakened forms have also been
proposed by more liberal philosophers. The original communitarian
lines of thought in favor of nationalism suggest that there is some
value in preserving ethno-national cultural traditions, in feelings of
belonging to a common nation, and in solidarity between a nation's
members. A liberal nationalist might claim that these are not the
central values of political life but are values
nevertheless. Moreover, the diametrically opposing views, pure
individualism and cosmopolitanism, do seem arid, abstract, and
unmotivated by comparison. By cosmopolitanism I shall understand a
moral and political doctrine of the following sort:

Cosmopolitanism is the view that
 
one's primary moral obligations are
directed to all human beings (regardless of geographical or cultural
distance), and
political arrangements should faithfully reflect this universal
moral obligation (in the form of supra-statist arrangements that take
precedence over nation-states).


Critics of cosmopolitanism sometimes argue that these two
claims are incoherent, since human beings generally strive best under
some global institutional arrangement (like ours) that concentrates
power and authority at the level of states.
Confronted with opposing forces of nationalism and cosmopolitanism,
many philosophers opt for a mixture of liberalism-cosmopolitanism and
patriotism-nationalism. In his writings B. Barber glorifies “a
remarkable mixture of cosmopolitanism and parochialism” that
in his view characterizes American national identity (in Cohen 1996,
31).  Charles Taylor claims that “we have no choice but to be
cosmopolitan and patriots” (ibid, 121). Hilary Putnam
proposes loyalty to what is best in the multiple traditions in which each
of us participates, apparently a middle way between a narrow-minded
patriotism and an overly abstract cosmopolitanism (ibid,
114). The compromise has been foreshadowed by Berlin (1979), and
Taylor (1989, 1993) and its various versions worked out in
considerable detail by authors such as Yael Tamir (1993), David Miller
(1995, 2000, 2007), Kai Nielsen (1998), Michel Seymour (2000) and
Chaim Gans (2003). (See also the debate around Miller's work in De
Schutter and Tinnevelt 2011.) In the last two decades it has occupied
center stage in the debate and even provoked re-readings of
historical nationalism in its light, for instance in Miller (2005a),
Sung Ho Kim (2002) or Brian Vick (2007). Most liberal nationalist
authors accept various weakened versions of the arguments we list
below, taking them to support moderate or ultra-moderate nationalist
claims.
It is important to mention here a more utopian proposal due to
Chandran Kukathas (2003), which nicely combines multicultural
pluralism with the distinctiveness of particular communities that
classical nationalism celebrates. His “liberal
archipelago” consists of units called “islands” that
vary greatly amongst each other but are for the most part internally
culturally homogenous. Some of these individual islands might be quite
unpleasant by liberal standards; what makes the archipelago liberal
overall is that each community guarantees its dissenting members the
right to exit (which might have a high price, if former members have
nowhere to go with any prospect for a decent life). The first level of
political organization might thus be non-liberal (Kukathas hopes it
will not turn out to be so), while the second level would be strongly
liberal. The proposal nicely combines the traditional features of
classical nationalism with very liberal, almost anarchic traits of the
whole. Unfortunately, it is hard to see what would keep such an
archipelago together without a strong unifying state, which Kukathas
would not have. A clear danger is a slide towards a multipolar
achipelago, with some big and powerful islands (say, a huge Islamic
island, a huge EU-type island, and so on).
Let me return to the main line of exposition. Here are the main
weakenings of classical ethno-nationalism that liberal,
limited-liberal and cosmopolitan nationalists propose. First,
ethno-national claims have only prima facie strength, and cannot trump
individual rights. Second, legitimate ethno-national claims do not in
themselves automatically amount to the right to a state, but rather to
the right to a certain level of cultural autonomy. The main models of
autonomy are either territorial or non-territorial: the first involves
territorial devolution; the second, cultural autonomy granted to
individuals regardless of their domicile within the state. (For a very
stimulating discussion of comparative advantages and disadvantages of
each, see the papers by Reiner Bauböck and Will Kymlicka in
Dieckoff 2004; the former defends the non-territorial, and the latter
the territorial option.) Third, ethno-nationalism is subordinate to
civic patriotism, which has little or nothing to do with ethnic
criteria. Fourth, ethno-national mythologies and similar
“important falsehoods” are to be tolerated only if benign
and inoffensive, in which case they are morally permissible despite
their falsity.  Finally, any legitimacy that ethno-national claims may
have is to be derived from choices the concerned individuals are free
to make.
3.2 Arguments in favor of nationalism: the deep need for community
Consider now the particular arguments from the first set. The first
argument depends on assumptions that also appear in the subsequent
ones, but it further ascribes to the community an intrinsic value. The
later arguments point more towards an instrumental value of nation,
derived from the value of individual flourishing, moral understanding,
firm identity and the like.
(1) The Argument From Intrinsic Value. Each ethno-national
community is valuable in and of itself since it is only within the
natural encompassing framework of various cultural traditions that
important meanings and values are produced and transmitted. The
members of such communities share a special cultural proximity to each
other.  By speaking the same language and sharing customs and
traditions, the members of these communities are typically closer to
one another in various ways than they are to those who don't share the
same culture. The community thereby becomes a network of morally connected
agents, i.e., a moral community, with special, very strong ties of
obligation. A prominent obligation of each individual concerns the
underlying traits of the ethnic community, above all language and
customs: they ought to be cherished, protected, preserved and
reinforced. The general assumption that moral obligations increase
with cultural proximity is often criticized as problematic. Moreover,
even if we grant this general assumption in theory, it breaks down in
practice. Nationalist activism is most often turned against close (and
substantially similar) neighbors rather than against distant
strangers, so that in many important contexts the appeal to proximity
will not work. It might, however, retain its potential force against
culturally distant groups.
(2) The Argument from Flourishing. The ethno-national
community is essential for each of its members to flourish. In
particular, it is only within such a community that an individual can
acquire concepts and values crucial for understanding the community's
cultural life in general and the individual's own life in
particular. There has been much debate on the pro-nationalist side
about whether divergence of values is essential for separateness of
national groups. The Canadian liberal nationalists Seymour (1999),
Taylor, and Kymlicka pointed out that the ‘divergences of value
between different regions of Canada’ that aspire to separate
nationhood are ‘minimal’. Taylor (1993, 155) concluded
that it is not separateness of value that matters. This result is
still compatible with the argument from flourishing if
‘concepts and values’ are not taken to be specifically
national as communitarian nationalists (MacIntyre 1994, Margalit
1997) have claimed. Critics of nationalism point out that
flourishing might have too high a price, especially in the form of
aggressiveness towards neighbors. B. Yack notes the danger in
situations where various factors combine against neighbors:
“calculations of interest, feelings of social friendship and
beliefs about justice” (2012, 221); see also the discussion of
Yack in Hearn et al. 2014. 
(3) The Argument from Identity. Communitarian philosophers
emphasize nurture over nature as the principal force determining our
identity as people — we come to be who we are because
of the social settings and contexts in which we mature. This claim
certainly has some plausibility. The very identity of each person
depends upon his/her participation in communal life (see MacIntyre
1994, Nielsen, 1998, and Lagerspetz 2000). For example, Nielsen
writes:
We are, to put it crudely, lost if we cannot identify ourselves
with some part of an objective social reality: a nation, though not
necessarily a state, with its distinctive traditions. What we find in
people — and as deeply embedded as the need to develop their
talents — is the need not only to be able to say what they can
do but to say who they are. This is found, not created, and is found
in the identification with others in a shared culture based on
nationality or race or religion or some slice or amalgam
thereof…. Under modern conditions, this securing and nourishing
of a national consciousness can only be achieved with a nation-state
that corresponds to that national consciousness (1993, 32).
Given that an individual's morality depends upon their having a
mature and stable personal identity, the communal conditions that
foster the development of personal identity must be preserved
and encouraged. (For the opposite line, denying the importance of
fixed and homogenous identity and proposing hybrid identities, see the
papers in Iyall Smith and Leavy 2008.) Philosophical nationalists
claim that the nation is the right format for preserving and
encouraging such identity-providing communities. Therefore, communal
life should be organized around particular national cultures. The
classical nationalist proposes that cultures should be given their
own states, while the liberal nationalist proposes that cultures should
get at least some form of political protection. (For a discussion of
linguistic issues, often tied to identity, see Kymlicka & Patten
2003 and Patten 2003.)
(4) The Argument from Moral Understanding. A particularly
important variety of value is moral value. Some values are universal,
e.g., freedom and equality, but these are too abstract and
“thin”. The rich, “thick” moral values are
discernible only within particular traditions, to those who have
wholeheartedly endorsed the norms and standards of the given
tradition. As Charles Taylor puts it, “the language we have come
to accept articulates the issues of the good for us” (1989,
35). The nation offers a natural framework for moral traditions, and
thereby for moral understanding; it is the primary school of
morals. (I note in fairness that Taylor himself is ambivalent about
the national format of morality.) An often-noticed problem with this
line of thought is that particular nations do not each have a special
morality of their own. Also, detailed, “thick”
morality may vary more across other divisions, such as class or gender
divisions, than across ethno-national groups. (For a sophisticated and
intriguing recent discussion of some surprising consequences of the
claim that there are “national values”, and of what happens
when classical liberal values are counted as “national
values”, see Laegard (2007).)
(5) The Argument from Diversity. Each national culture
contributes uniquely to the diversity of human cultures. The
most famous twentieth century proponent of the idea, Isaiah Berlin
(interpreting Herder, who first saw this idea as significant),
writes:
The ‘physiognomies’ of cultures are unique: each
presents a wonderful exfoliation of human potentialities in its own
time and place and environment. We are forbidden to make judgments of
comparative value, for that is measuring the incommensurable. (1976,
206)
The carrier of basic value is thus the totality of cultures, from
which each national culture and style of life that contributes to the
totality derives its own value. The argument from diversity is
therefore pluralistic: it ascribes value to each particular culture
from the viewpoint of the collective totality of cultures. Assuming
that the (ethno-)nation is the natural unit of culture, the
preservation of cultural diversity amounts to institutionally
protecting the purity of (ethno-)national culture. The plurality of
cultural styles can be preserved and enhanced by tying them to
ethno-national “forms of life”. A pragmatic inconsistency
might threaten this argument. The issue is who can legitimately
propose ethno-national diversity as ideal: the nationalist is much too
tied to his or her own culture to do it, while the cosmopolitan is too
eager to preserve intercultural links that go beyond the idea of
having a single nation-state. Moreover, is diversity a value such that
it deserves to be protected whenever it exists?  Should the protection
of diversity be restricted to certain aspects of culture(s)
proposed in full generality? (For a more restricted, moderate version
of the argument from diversity, appealing to the analogy with
bio-diversity but focusing exclusively upon linguistic diversity, see
François Grin in Kymlicka and Patten (2003)).
The line of thought (1) is not individualistic. And (5) can be
presented without reference to individuals: diversity may be good in
its own right, or may be good for nations. But the other lines of thought
in the set just presented are all linked to the importance of
community life in relation to the individual. They emerged from the
“deep” communitarian perspective, and a
recurrent theme is the importance of the fact that membership in the
community is not chosen but rather involuntary. In each argument,
there is a general communitarian premise (a community, to which one
has no choice whether or not to belong, is crucial for one's identity,
or for flourishing or some other important good). This premise is
coupled with the more narrow, nation-centered descriptive claim that
the ethno-nation is precisely the kind of community ideally suited for
the task. However, liberal nationalists do not find these arguments
completely persuasive.  In their view, the premises of the arguments
may not support the full package of nationalist ambitions and may not
be unconditionally valid. For an even more skeptical view stemming
from social science, see Hale (2008). Hale's conclusion is worth
quoting: “Ethnicity is driven by uncertainty reduction, whereas
ethnic politics are driven by interest” (2008, 241).  Still,
there is a lot to these arguments, and they might support liberal
nationalism and a more modest stance in favor of national
cultures.

We conclude this sub-section by pointing to an interesting and
sophisticated pro-national stance that developed by David Miller over
the course of decades, from his work of 1990 to the most recent work
of 2013. He accepts multicultural diversity within a society but
stresses an overarching national identity, taking as his prime example
British national identity, which encompasses the English, Scottish and
other ethnic identities. He demands an “inclusive identity,
accessible to members of all cultural groups” (2013, 91). Such
identity is necessary for basic social solidarity, and it goes far
beyond simple constitutional patriotism, Miller claims. A skeptic
could note the following. The problem with multicultural society is
that national identity has historically been a matter of
ethno-national ties and has required sameness in the weighted majority
of cultural traits (common language, common
“history-as-remembered”, customs, religion and so
on). However, multi-cultural states typically bring together groups
with very different histories, languages, religions, even quite
contrasting appearances. Now, how is the overarching “national
identity” to be achieved starting from the very thin identity of
common belonging to a state? One seems to have a dilemma. Grounding
social solidarity in national identity requires the latter to be
rather thin and seems likely to end up as full-on, unitary cultural
identity. Thick constitutional patriotism may be the only possible
attitude that can ground such solidarity while preserving the original
cultural diversity.
3.3 Arguments in favor of nationalism: issues of justice
Arguments in the second set concern political justice and do
not rely on metaphysical claims about identity, flourishing and
cultural values. They appeal to (actual or alleged) circumstances
that would make nationalist policies reasonable (or permissible or
even mandatory), such as (a) the fact that a large part of the world
is organized into nation states (so that each new group aspiring to
create a nation-state just follows an established pattern), or (b) the
circumstances of group self-defense or of redressing past injustice
that might justify nationalist policies (to take a special case). Some
of the arguments also present nationhood as conducive to important
political goods, such as equality.
(1) The Argument From the Right to Collective
Self-determination. A group of people of a sufficient size has a
prima facie right to govern itself and decide its future membership,
if the members of the group so wish. It is fundamentally the
democratic will of the members themselves that grounds the right to an
ethno-national state and to ethno-centric cultural institutions and
practices. This argument presents the justification of
(ethno-)national claims as deriving from the will of the members of
the nation.  It is therefore highly suitable for liberal nationalism
but not appealing to a deep communitarian who sees the demands of the
nation as independent from, and prior to, the choices of
particular individuals. (For extended discussion of this argument, see
Buchanan 1991, which has become a contemporary classic; Moore 1998;
and Gans 2003. For some exchanges of arguments, see J. Levy in
Dieckoff 2004, and the volume on secession by Pavković and Radan
2007, and the work of Christopher Heath Wellman 2005. An
interesting volume from a legal perspective is Kohen 2006, and some
interesting case studies are presented in Casertano 2013. For an
extremely negative judgment see Yack 2012, Ch. 10.)
(2) The Argument From the Right to Self-defense and to
Redress Past Injustices. Oppression and injustice give the victimized
group a just cause and the right to secede. If a minority group is
oppressed by the majority to the extent that almost every minority member is
worse off than most members of the majority simply in virtue of belonging to
the minority, then nationalist claims on behalf of the minority are morally
plausible and potentially compelling. This argument implies a
restrictive answer to our questions (2b) and (2c): the use of force in
order to achieve sovereignty is legitimate only in the cases of
self-defense and redress. Of course, there is a whole lot of work to
be done specifying against whom force may legitimately be used, and
how much damage may be done to how many. It establishes a typical
remedial right, acceptable from a liberal standpoint. (See
the discussion in Kukathas and Poole 2000, also Buchanan 1991. For
past injustices see Waldron 1992).
(3) The Argument From Equality. Members of a minority group
are often disadvantaged in relation to a dominant culture because they
have to rely on those with the same language and culture to conduct
the affairs of daily life. Since freedom to conduct one's daily life
is a primary good, and it is difficult to change or give up reliance
upon one's minority culture to attain that good, this reliance can lead
to certain inequalities if special measures are not taken. Spontaneous
nation-building by the majority has to be moderated. Therefore,
liberal neutrality itself requires that the majority provide certain
basic cultural goods, i.e., granting differential rights. (See
Kymlicka 1995b, 2001 and 2003.) Institutional protections and the
right to the minority group's own institutional structure are remedies
that restore equality and turn the resulting nation-state into a more
moderate multicultural one. (See Kymlicka 2001, 2003.) (We note an
interesting recent proposal by Robert E. Goodin (2006), who
distinguishes two motivations for multiculturalism and two possible
resultant kinds: polyglot multiculturalism and protective
multiculturalism. The latter is of Kymlicka's cast, focused upon
protecting the interests of the minority from disregard by the majority; the former is
inspired by ideals of diversity and the value of variety, the
availabity of which in a given country “expands the choice set
of autonomous agents” (2006, 290).)
(4) The Argument From Success. The nation-state has in the
past succeeded in promoting equality and democracy. As Craig Calhoun
writes in his recent book, “(…) imagining democracy
requires thinking of ”the people“ as active and coherent
and oneself as both a member and an agent. Liberalism informs the
notion of individual agency, but provides weak purchase at best on
membership and on the collective cohesion and capacity of
the demos. In the modern era, the discursive formation that
has most influentially underwritten these dimensions of democracy is
nationalism” (2007, 147). Ethno-national solidarity is a
powerful motive for a more egalitarian distribution of goods (Miller
1995, Canovan 1996, 2000). The nation-state also seems to be essential
to safeguard the moral life of communities in the future, since it is
the only form of political institution capable of protecting
communities from the threats of globalization and
assimilationism. (For a detailed critical discussion of this argument
see Mason 1999.) Calhoun himself is acutely aware of the limitations
of his praise of nationalism, mentioning some on the same page as that
from which we quoted above.
A much more deflating view of the nation-state’s success was
recently offered by A. Roshwald in his (2006) book, which cited the
paradoxical and contradictory nature of nationalist claims. To quote a
fine summary given by A. Smith:
For Roshwald, nationalism is at once ancient and very
modern; it employs twin conceptions of time, cyclical and linear; it
seeks self-determination while manifesting a sense of victimhood; it
insists on the nation's particularity of chosenness while claiming a
universal mission; and finally, it reveals a symbiosis of kindred and
mingled blood, of ethnic and civic nationhood. Through these
antinomies, nationalism is constantly able to renew itself and adapt
to different situations …. (Smith 2008b, 638)

Pro-capitalists might derive an even more problematic kind of
appeal to success from the theory of Liah Greenfeld, according to whom
“the factor responsible for the reorientation of economic
activity toward growth is nationalism”, and “the
unprecedented position of the economic sphere in the modern
consciousness is a product of the dynamics of American society, in
turn shaped by the singular characteristics of American
nationalism” (2001, 1). Greenfeld herself is very critical of
nationalism, but someone might contemplate incorporating her theory
(cleansed of her critical attitude) into a defense of nationalism.
These political arguments can be combined with deep communitarian
ones. However, taken in isolation, their perspective offers a
“liberal culturalism” that is more suitable for
ethno-culturally plural societies. More remote from classical
nationalism than the liberal nationalism of Tamir and Nielsen, it
eschews any communitarian philosophical underpinning (see the detailed
presentation and defense in Kymlicka 2001; his recent, truly
encyclopedic work (2007) that still occasionally calls such
culturalism ‘nationalist’; a short summary in Kymlicka
2003; and Gans 2003). The idea of moderate nation-building points to
an open multi-culturalism, in which every group receives its share of
remedial rights but, instead of walling itself off from others,
participates in a common, overlapping civic culture and in open
communication with other sub-communities. Given the variety of
pluralistic societies and intensity of trans-national interactions,
such openness seems to many to be the only guarantee of stable social
and political life (see the debate in Shapiro and Kymlicka
1997). Openness is important to avoid the trap Margaret Canovan calls
“the paradox of the prowling cats” (2001). She warns that
“new nationalist theories inadvertently contain perverse
incentives to do the exact opposite of what theorists intend to
authorize”. The only solution seems to be extreme
moderation. The dialectics of moderating nationalist claims in the
context of pluralistic societies might thus lead to a stance
respectful of cultural differences, but liberal and potentially
cosmopolitan in its ultimate goals.
The liberal nationalist stance is mild and civil, and there is much
to be said in favor of it. It tries to reconcile our intuitions in
favor of some sort of political protection of cultural communities
with a liberal political morality. Of course, this raises issues of
compatibility between liberal universal principles and the particular
attachments to one's ethno-cultural nation. Very liberal nationalists
such as Tamir divorce ethno-cultural nationhood from statehood. Also,
the kind of love for country they suggest is tempered by all kinds of
universalist considerations, which in the last instance trump national
interest (Tamir 1993, 115; see also Moore 2001 and Gans 2003). There
is an ongoing debate among philosophical nationalists about how much
weakening and compromising is still compatible with a stance's being
nationalist at all. (For example, Canovan 1996 (ch. 10) presents Tamir
as having abandoned the ideal of ‘nation-state’, and
thereby nationhood as such; Seymour (1999) criticizes Taylor and
Kymlicka for turning their backs on genuine nationalist programs, and
proposing multiculturalism instead of nationalism.) There is also a
streak of cosmopolitan interest present in the work of some liberal
nationalists (Nielsen 1998/9). For a more sociological approach to the
dialectic of the global and the ethno-national, see the Introduction
to Delanty and Kumar 2006 and Delanty's contribution to that
volume.
In recent years issues of nationalism have been
increasingly integrated into the debate about the international order (see
the entries on
 globalization
 and
 cosmopolitanism).
The main conceptual link is the claim that nation-states are natural,
stable and suitable units of the international order. It is
underpinned by the assumption that to each nation-state corresponds a
“people”, a culturally homogenous population whose members
are prone to solidarity with their compatriots. Central to the recent
debate is the view set out in John Rawls' “Law of Peoples”
(1999), which ascribes a great deal of political promise and a high
moral value to the international system composed of liberal and decent
nation-states. More cosmopolitan critics of Rawls argue against such a
high status for nation-states and criticize the assumption of
homogenous “peoples” (Pogge 2001, 2002; O'Neil 2000;
Nussbaum 2002 (Other Internet Resources), Barry, 1999). A related
debate concerns the role of minorities in the processes of
globalization (see Kaldor, 2004). Philosophers’ interest in the
morality of the international order has generated interesting
proposals about alternative sub-national and supra-national units,
which could play a role distinct from that of nation-states and might
even come to supplement them (for a fine summary see Held 2003, and
for an interesting recent overview of alternatives see Walzer 2004,
chapter 12). Moreover, the two approaches might ultimately converge: a
multiculturalist liberal nationalism and a moderate,
difference-respecting cosmopolitanism have a lot in common. One
investigation in this direction has been undertaken by Kok-Chor Tan
(2004, see in particular ch. 5). However, he is quite skeptical about
the convergence in his later 2011 paper (see also his 2012 book).
3.4 Nation-state in global context

Let me start by briefly returning to the recent debates on territory
and nation and then pass to issues of global justice. Liberal
nationalists (Miller 2000, 2007; Gans 2003; Meissels 2009) try to
preserve the traditional nationalist link between ethnic
“ownership” of the state and sovereignty and territorial
control, but in a much more flexible and sophisticated setting. Tamar
Meissels thus argues in favor of “taking existing national
settlements into account as a central factor in demarcating
territorial boundaries” since this line “ has both liberal
foundations” (i.e., in the work of John Locke) and
liberal-national appeal (2009, 159) grounded in its affinity with the
liberal doctrine of national self-determination. She combines it with
Chaim Gans' interpretation of ‘historical right’ claims as
‘the right to formative territories’ (Gans 2003,
Ch. 4). She thus combines “historical arguments, understood as
claims to formative territories”, with her argument from
settlement and insists on their interplay and mutual reinforcement,
presenting them as being “most closely related to, and based on,
liberal nationalist assumptions and underlying ideas” (Meissels
2009, 160). She nevertheless stresses that more than one ethnic group
can have formative ties to a given territory, and that there might be
competing claims based on settlement. (Yack (2012, 203ff) starts from
the same point to derive much more pessimistic conclusions.)
But, given the ethno-national
conflicts of the twentieth century, one can safely assume that culturally plural states divided
into isolated and closed sub-communities glued together merely by
arrangements of modus vivendi are inherently unstable.
Stability might therefore require that the pluralist society envisioned
by liberal culturalists promote quite intense intra-state interaction
between cultural groups in order to forestall mistrust, reduce
prejudice, and create a solid basis for cohabitation.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, more cosmopolitan authors
(Buchanan 2003, Waldron 2005, Other Internet Resources) also point to
the fact of multiple settlements in roughly the same territory and to
the importance of the proximity of various ethno-cultural groups. They
stress internal cultural pluralism: for reasons of peace and security,
state borders should bring together distinct cultural groups
(typically ethno-national ones), and they in fact most often do
so. Combining the cultural motivation to foster open multiculturalism
and Waldron's security-based motivation to structure states for the
purpose of resolving conflicts and establishing justice, forming a
state becomes a duty we owe to anyone with whom we are likely to come
into endemic conflict. (Waldron 2005, Other Internet Resources).
But where should one stop? The question arises since there are a
lot of geographically open, interacting territories of various
sizes. Consider first the geographical openness of big continental
planes, then add the modern ease of interaction (“No island is
an island any more”, one could say), and, finally and
dramatically, the substantial ecological interconnectedness of land
and climate. The cosmopolitan logic regarding the interests
of peace and security therefore suggests joining together bigger and
bigger units in a kind of recursive scheme. For instance, the EU was
created to secure lasting peace, and other supra-statal and
macro-regional might follow its lead. Ultimately, the combination of
ethno-cultural and security-focused considerations might thus point in
a clearly cosmopolitan direction when formulating and resolving
dilemmas about matters of territory. This brings us to the wider issue
concerning cosmopolitanism.
What are the obligations of nations and nation-states towards
neighbors, and even more distant Others? This issue is regaining
prominence in recent debates on nationalism. (Again, see the entries on
 globalization
 and
 cosmopolitanism.)
It encompasses a range of sub-topics: national responsibility to
non-nationals, reparations and distributive justice beyond the state,
individual states’ obligations with regard to global ecological
problems like waste and climate change, and finally, immigration and
responsibilities of nation-states towards potential immigrants. 
 Since the present entry is on nationalism, we stress the
pro-national accounts, taking Miller (2007, 2013) as our paradigm. In
principle one might think of intermediate positions falling between
two extremes: on one extreme, completely closed nation-states, like in
Fichte's early nineteenth century utopia of Closed commercial
state; on the other, completely opened borders, like in the
arrangement proposed by Joseph Carens (2013). However, the tough
nationalistic line is no longer proposed seriously in ethical debates,
so the furthest pro-national extreme is in fact a relatively moderate
stance, exemplified by Miller in the works listed. Here is a typical
proposal of his concerning global justice based on nation states:
 It might become a matter of national pride to have set
aside a certain percentage of GDP for developmental goals –
perhaps for projects in one particular country or group of countries
… . (2013, 182)
 A similar proposal might work for the reduction of the emission of
greenhouse gasses, he continues. It is a challenging idea, and a
critic might ask how it would fare under normal circumstances. Imagine
the proposal is accepted by leading industrial countries, and each
chooses its beneficiaries. Suppose a benefactor state B1 adopts a
beneficiary state C1 and proceeds to deliver aid. What if a political
faction in C1 that is hostile to B1 pushes its co-nationals to turn to
some other benefactor? Would B1 allow opponent factions in C1 to act
freely, or would it “gently” intervene (in a situation
where there is no global regulatory power)? Similarly, if B1 needed
international support in its dealings with some other powerful country
B2, it would certainly count on C1 to give it. This arrangement is
beginning to look somewhat colonial. (Even worse things might happen
in a situation of economic crisis: if B1 has been feeding C1 for ten
years, during a crisis it might become greedy for C1's resources; what
would prevent it from blackmailing C1?)
 So much for issues of aid. On the opposite extreme one finds
strong cosmopolitans, like Thomas Pogge, who blame the global order
for injustices committed against the poor and recommend a considerable
redistribution of goods as a remedy to restore justice. In between we
find authors like Mathias Risse (2013), who proposes a highly
structured conception of justice that preserves the statist order of
international politics but accepts common ownership of the Earth and
places considerable duties on states: inequalities are allowed, but
only if all inhabitants of the Earth have enough to satisfy their
basic needs.
Miller has also put forward the most thoughtful pro-nationalist
proposal concerning immigration. His proposal allows refugees to seek
asylum temporarily until the situation in their country of origin
improves; it also limits economic migration. Miller argues against the
defensibility of a global standard for equality, opportunity, welfare,
etc., because measures of just equality are context-bound. People do
have the right to a minimum standard of living, but the right to
migrate only activates as a last resort after all other measures
within a candidate-migrant’s country of origin have been tried.
As mentioned, the opposite extreme is occupied by those like Joseph
Carens (2013) who defend completely open borders. Many recent views
seem to converge to the middle ground. There, we find proposals like
those of Thomas Christiano (2012), Mathias Risse (2013) and Michael
Blake (2013). Christiano, for example, proposes working from the
relatively just system of existing norms that oblige cooperation
between states. He thinks that the right way to proceed is to
negotiate consensus agreements satisfying individual beneficiary and
benefactor states as well as international legal norms. A poor state
might send a number of workers to a rich state on a temporary basis;
these workers would then return to their country of origin to foster
development. International law would provide a framework of
legitimacy, and negotiations between states would provide concrete,
and hopefully just, solutions.
4. Conclusion
The philosophy of nationalism nowadays does not concern itself much
with the aggressive and dangerous form of invidious nationalism that
often occupies center stage in the news and in sociological research.
Although this pernicious form can be of significant instrumental value
in mobilizing oppressed people and restoring their sense of dignity, its
moral costs are usually taken by philosophers to outweigh its
benefits.  Nationalist philosophers distance themselves from
such aggressive forms of nationalism and mainly seek to construct and defend
very moderate versions; these have therefore come to be the main focus
of recent philosophical debate.

The debate carries an interesting methodological message overlooked in
the literature. Authors defending the importance of ethno-national and
cultural considerations standardly point to their enormous practical
impact, and underlying factual, social and historical factors. It is
no wonder that the prominent pro-nationalist thinker D. Miller insists
on the importance of social and historical facts for political
philosophy and moral decisions (2013, chapters 1 and 2). Indeed, when
drawing from the usual resources for theorizing in political
philosophy — principles, facts (including presumed facts), and
intuitions from thought experiments — cosmopolitan authors
typically stress the importance of principles, while pro-nationalists
stress that of facts. Miller’s demand for “attention to factual
presuppositions of our principles” (2013, 26) is characteristic
of pro-nationalist methodology.

In presenting the claims that nationalists defend, we have proceeded
from the more radical towards more liberal nationalist
alternatives. In examining the arguments for these claims, we have
presented metaphysically demanding communitarian arguments resting
upon deep communitarian assumptions about culture, such as the premise
that the ethno-cultural nation is the most important community for all
individuals. This is an interesting and respectable claim, but its
plausibility has not yet been established. The moral debate about
nationalism has resulted in various weakenings of culture-based
arguments, proposed by liberal nationalists, which render the
arguments less ambitious but much more plausible.  Having abandoned
the old nationalist ideal of a state owned by a single dominant
ethno-cultural group, liberal nationalists have become receptive to
the idea that identification with a plurality of cultures and
communities is important for a person's social identity. They have
equally become sensitive to trans-national issues and more willing to
embrace a partly cosmopolitan perspective.
Liberal nationalism has also brought to the fore more modest, less
philosophically or metaphysically charged arguments grounded in
concerns about justice. These stress the practical importance of
ethno-cultural membership, ethno-cultural groups’ rights to have
injustices redressed, democratic rights of political association, and
the role that ethno-cultural ties and associations can play in
promoting just social arrangements. Liberal culturalists such as
Kymlicka have proposed minimal and pluralistic versions of nationalism
built around such arguments. In these minimal versions, the project of
building classical nation-states is tempered or abandoned and replaced
by a more sensitive form of national identity that can thrive in a
multicultural society. This new project, however, might demand a
further widening of our moral perspectives. The twentieth century has
taught us that culturally-plural states divided into isolated and
closed sub-communities glued together only by arrangements of
mere modus vivendi are inherently unstable. Stability might
therefore require that the plural society envisioned by liberal
culturalists promote quite intense interaction between cultural groups
in order to forestall mistrust, reduce prejudice and create a solid
basis for cohabitation. On the other hand, as noted above in
connection with issues of territorial justice, once membership in
multiple cultures and communities is legitimized, social groups will
spread beyond the borders of a single state (e.g., groups bound by
religious or racial ties), thus creating an opening for at least a
minimal cosmopolitan perspective.  The internal dialectic driven by
concern for ethno-cultural identity might in this way lead to
pluralistic and potentially cosmopolitan political arrangements that
are rather distant from what was classically understood as
nationalism.