The term “naturalism” has no very precise meaning in
contemporary philosophy. Its current usage derives from debates in
America in the first half of the last century. The self-proclaimed
“naturalists” from that period included John Dewey, Ernest
Nagel, Sidney Hook and Roy Wood Sellars. These philosophers aimed to
ally philosophy more closely with science. They urged that reality is
exhausted by nature, containing nothing “supernatural”,
and that the scientific method should be used to investigate all areas
of reality, including the “human spirit” (Krikorian 1944;
Kim 2003).
So understood, “naturalism” is not a particularly
informative term as applied to contemporary philosophers. The great
majority of contemporary philosophers would happily accept naturalism
as just characterized—that is, they would both reject
“supernatural” entities, and allow that science is a
possible route (if not necessarily the only one) to important truths
about the “human spirit”.
Even so, this entry will not aim to pin down any more informative
definition of “naturalism”. It would be fruitless to try
to adjudicate some official way of understanding the term. Different
contemporary philosophers interpret “naturalism”
differently. This disagreement about usage is no accident. For better
or worse, “naturalism” is widely viewed as a positive
term in philosophical circles—few active philosophers nowadays
are happy to announce themselves as
“non-naturalists”.[1]
 This inevitably leads to a divergence in
understanding the requirements of “naturalism”. Those
philosophers with relatively weak naturalist commitments are inclined
to understand “naturalism” in a unrestrictive way, in
order not to disqualify themselves as “naturalists”,
while those who uphold stronger naturalist doctrines are happy to set
the bar for “naturalism”
higher.[2]
Rather than getting bogged down in an essentially definitional
issue, this entry will adopt a different strategy. It will outline a
range of philosophical commitments of a generally naturalist stamp,
and comment on their philosophical cogency. The primary focus will be
on whether these commitments should be upheld, rather than on whether
they are definitive of “naturalism”. The important thing
is to articulate and assess the reasoning that has led philosophers in
a generally naturalist direction, not to stipulate how far you need to
travel along this path before you can count yourself as a paid-up
“naturalist”.
As indicated by the above characterization of the
mid-twentieth-century American movement, naturalism can be separated
into an ontological and a methodological component. The ontological
component is concerned with the contents of reality, asserting that
reality has no place for “supernatural” or other
“spooky” kinds of entity. By contrast, the methodological
component is concerned with ways of investigating reality, and
claims some kind of general authority for the scientific method.
Correspondingly, this entry will have two main sections, the first
devoted to ontological naturalism, the second to methodological
naturalism.
Of course, naturalist commitments of both ontological and
methodological kinds can be significant in areas other than
philosophy.  The modern history of psychology, biology, social science
and even physics itself can usefully be seen as hinging on changing
attitudes to naturalist ontological principles and naturalist
methodological precepts. This entry, however, will be concerned solely
with naturalist doctrines that are specific to philosophy. So the
first part of this entry, on ontological naturalism, will be concerned
specifically with views about the general contents of reality that are
motivated by philosophical argument and analysis. And the second part,
on methodological naturalism, will focus specifically on
methodological debates that bear on philosophical practice, and in
particular on the relationship between philosophy and science.
 

1. Ontological Naturalism
1.1 Making a Causal Difference
A central thought in ontological naturalism is that all
spatiotemporal entities must be identical to or metaphysically
constituted by 
physical[3] 
entities. Many ontological naturalists thus
adopt a physicalist attitude to mental, biological and other such
“special” subject matters. They hold that there is
nothing more to the mental, biological and social realms than
arrangements of physical entities.
The driving motivation for this kind of ontological naturalism is
the need to explain how special entities can have physical effects.
Thus many contemporary thinkers adopt a physicalist view of the mental
realm because they think that otherwise we will be unable to explain
how mental processes can causally influence our bodies and other
physical items. Similar considerations motivate ontologically
naturalist views of the biological realm, the social realm, and so
on.
It may not be immediately obvious why this need to account for
physical effects should impose any substantial naturalist constraints
on some category. After all, there seems nothing a priori
incoherent in the idea of radically unscientific
“supernatural” events exerting a causal influence on
physical processes, as is testified by the conceptual cogency of
traditional stories about the worldly interventions of immaterial
deities and other outlandish beings.
However, there may be a posteriori objections to such
non-natural causal influences on the physical world, even if there are
no a priori objections. We shall see below how modern
scientific theory places strong restrictions on the kinds of entities
that can have physical effects. Given that mental, biological and
social phenomena do have such effects, it follows that they must
satisfy the relevant restrictions.
Note how this kind of argument bites directly only on those
categories that do have physical effects. It places no immediate
constraints on categories that lack any such effects, which arguably
include the mathematical and modal realms, and perhaps the moral
realm.  We shall return to the question of whether there are any
further reasons for ontologically naturalist views about causally
non-efficacious categories in sections 1.7
and 1.8 below.
1.2 Modern Science and Causal Influence
There is an interesting history to modern science’s views
about the kinds of things that can produce physical effects. It will
be worth rehearsing this history in outline, if only to forestall a
common reaction to ontological naturalism. It is sometimes suggested
that ontological naturalism rests, not on reasoned argument, but on
some kind of unargued commitment, some ultimate decision to nail
one’s philosophical colours to the naturalist
mast.[4] And
this diagnosis seems to be supported by the historical contingency of
naturalist doctrines, and in particular by the fact that they have
become widely popular only in the past few decades. However,
familiarity with the relevant scientific history casts the matter in a
different light. It turns out that naturalist doctrines, far from
varying with ephemeral fashion, are closely responsive to received
scientific opinion about the range of causes that can have physical
effects.
A short version of this history runs like this: (1) the mechanistic
physics of the seventeenth century allowed only a very narrow range of
such causes; (2) early Newtonian physics was more liberal, and indeed
did not impose any real restrictions on possible causes of physical
effects; (3) however, the discovery of the conservation of energy in
the middle of the nineteenth century limited the range of possible
causes once more; (4) moreover, twentieth-century physiological
research has arguably provided evidence for yet further
restrictions.
Let us now rehearse this story more slowly.
(1) The “mechanical philosophers” of the early
seventeenth century held that any material body maintains a constant
velocity unless acted on, and moreover held that all action is due to
impact between one material particle and another. So stated, the
mechanical philosophy immediately precludes anything except impacting
material particles from producing physical effects. Leibniz saw this
clearly, and concluded that it discredited Descartes’
interactive dualism, which had a non-material mind influencing the
physical world (Woolhouse 1985). (Of course, Leibniz did not therewith
reject dualism and embrace the physicalist view that minds are
composed of material particles, but instead opted for
“pre-established harmony”.  Views which avoid ontological
naturalistic views of the mind by denying that it has any physical
effects will be discussed further in
section 1.6 below.)
(2) At the end of the seventeenth century Newtonian physics
replaced the mechanical philosophy of Descartes and Leibniz. This
reinstated the possibility of interactive dualism, since it allowed
disembodied forces as well as impacts to cause physical
effects. Newtonian physics was open-ended about the kinds of forces
that exist. Early Newtonians posited fundamental mental and vital
forces alongside magnetic, chemical, cohesive, gravitational and
impact forces. Accordingly, they took sui generis mental
action in the material world to be perfectly consistent with the
principle of physics. Moreover, there is nothing in the original
principles of Newtonian mechanics to stop mental forces arising
autonomously and spontaneously, in line with common assumptions about
the operation of the mind (Papineau 2002: Appendix Section 3).
(3) In the middle of the nineteenth century the conservation of
kinetic plus potential energy came to be accepted as a basic principle
of physics (Elkana 1974). In itself this does not rule out fundamental
mental or vital forces, for there is no reason why such forces should
not be “conservative”, operating in such a way as to
compensate losses of kinetic energy by gains in potential energy
and vice versa. (The term “nervous energy” is a
relic of the widespread late nineteenth-century assumption that mental
processes store up a species of potential energy that is then released
in action.) However, the conservation of energy does imply that any
such special forces must be governed by strict deterministic laws: if
mental or vital forces arose spontaneously, then there would be
nothing to ensure that they never led to energy increases.
(4) During the course of the twentieth century received
scientific opinion became even more restrictive about possible
causes of physical effects, and came to reject sui generis
mental or vital causes, even of a law-governed and predictable
kind. Detailed physiological research, especially into nerve cells,
gave no indication of any physical effects that cannot be explained
in terms of basic physical forces that also occur outside living
bodies. By the middle of the twentieth century, belief in sui
generis mental or vital forces had become a minority view. This
led to the widespread acceptance of the doctrine now known as the
“causal closure” or the “causal completeness of
the physical”, according to which all physical effects have
fully physical causes.
1.3 The Rise of Physicalism
This historical sequence casts light on the evolution of
ontologically naturalist doctrines. In the initial seventeenth-century
mechanical phase, there was a tension, as Leibniz observed, between
the dominant strict mechanism and interactive dualism. However, once
mechanism was replaced by the more liberal doctrines of Newtonian
physics in the second phase, science ceased to raise any objections to
dualism and more generally to non-physical causes of physical effects.
As a result, the default philosophical view was a non-naturalist
interactive pluralism which recognized a wide range of fundamental
non-physical influences, including spontaneous mental influences (or
“determinations of the soul” as they would then have been
called).
In the third phase, the nineteenth-century discovery of the
conservation of energy continued to allow that sui generis
non-physical forces can interact with the physical world, but
required that they be governed by strict force laws. sui
generis mental and vital forces were still widely accepted, but
an extensive philosophical debate about the significance of the
conservation of energy led to a widespread recognition that any such
forces would need to be law-governed and thus amenable to scientific
investigation. We might usefully view this as a species of
ontological naturalism that falls short of full physicalism.  Mental
and other special forces were non-physical in the sense that they
arose only in special circumstances and not throughout the
spatiotemporal realm, but even so they fell within the realm of
scientific law and lacked spontaneous autonomy. (As many commentators
at the time recognized, this weaker form of naturalism already
carried significant philosophical implications, particularly for the
possibility of free 
will.[5]) 
In the final twentieth-century phase, the acceptance of the casual
closure of the physical led to full-fledged physicalism. The causal
closure thesis implied that, if mental and other special causes are to
produce physical effects, they must themselves be physically
constituted. It thus gave rise to the strong physicalist doctrine that
anything that has physical effects must itself be physical.
In support of this understanding of the twentieth-century history, it is
noteworthy how philosophers began to formulate arguments for
physicalism from the 1950s onwards. Some of these arguments appealed
explicitly to the causal closure of the physical realm (Feigl 1958;
Oppenheim and Putnam 1958). In other cases, the reliance on causal
closure lay below the surface. However, it is not hard to see that
even in these latter cases the causal closure thesis played a crucial
role.
Thus, for example, consider J.J.C. Smart’s (1959) thought
that we should identify mental states with brain states, for otherwise
those mental states would be “nomological danglers” which
play no role in the explanation of behaviour. Or take David
Lewis’s (1966) and David Armstrong’s (1968) arguments
that, since mental states are picked out by their causal roles, and
since we know that physical states play these roles, mental states
must be identical with those physical states. Again, consider Donald
Davidson’s (1970) argument that, since the only laws governing
behaviour are those connecting behaviour with physical antecedents,
mental events can only be causes of behaviour if they are identical
with those physical antecedents. At first sight, it might not be
obvious that these arguments require the causal closure thesis. But a
moment’s thought will show that none of these arguments would
remain cogent if the closure thesis were not assumed, and it were thus
left open that some physical effects (the movement of matter in arms,
perhaps, or the firings of the motor neurones which instigate those
movements) were not determined by prior physical causes at all, but
by sui generis mental causes.
Sometimes it is suggested that the indeterminism of modern
quantum mechanics creates room for sui generis non-physical
causes to influence the physical world. However, even if quantum
mechanics implies that some physical effects are themselves
undetermined, it provides no reason to doubt a quantum version of
the causal closure thesis, to the effect that the chances
of those effects are fully fixed by prior physical
circumstances. And this alone is enough to rule out sui
generis non-physical causes. For such sui generis
causes, if they are to be genuinely efficacious, must presumably
make an independent difference to the chances of physical effects,
and this in itself would be inconsistent with the quantum causal
closure claim that such chances are already fixed by prior physical
circumstances. Once more, it seems that anything that makes a
difference to the physical realm must itself be physical.
1.4 Reductive and Non-Reductive Physicalism
It will be worth being explicit about the way the causal closure
principle supports physicalism. First we assume that mental causes
(biological, social, …) have physical effects. Then the causal
closure principle tells us that those physical effects have physical
causes. So, in order to avoid an unacceptable proliferation of causes
for those physical effects (no “systematic
overdetermination”), we need to conclude that the mental
(biological, social, …) causes of those effects are not
ontologically separate from their physical causes.
However, even if this general line of argument is accepted, there
is room for differing views about exactly what its denial of
ontological separateness requires. Let us agree that causes are
“events” (or “facts”) that involve
instantiations of 
properties.[6]
 So, if some special cause is not
ontologically separate from some physical cause, the property
instantiations that it involves cannot themselves be ontologically
separate from the property instantiations involved in the physical
cause. At this point, however, there are divergent views about how
tight a constraint this imposes.
One school holds that it requires type-identity, the strict
identity of the relevant special properties with physical
properties. On the other side stand “non-reductive”
physicalists, who hold that the causal efficacy of special causes will
be respected as long as the properties they involve are
“realized by” physical properties, even if they are not
reductively identified with them.
Type-identity is the most obvious way to ensure the
non-separateness of special and physical causes: if exactly the same
properties comprise the special and physical cause, the two causes
will themselves be fully identical. Still, type-identity is a very
strong doctrine. Type identity about thoughts, for example, would
imply that the property of thinking about the square root of two is
identical with some physical property. And this seems highly
implausible. Even if all human beings with this thought must be
distinguished by some common physical property of their
brains—which itself seems unlikely—there remains the
argument that other life-forms, or intelligent androids, will also be
able to think about the square root of two, even though their brains
may share no significant physical properties with ours (Fodor 1974;
Bickle 2013).
This “variable realization” argument has led many
philosophers to seek an alternative way of reconciling the efficacy of
mental and other special causes with the causal closure thesis, one
which does not require the strict identity of non-physical and
physical properties. The general idea of this “non-reductive
physicalism” is to allow that instantiations of a given special
property will always be grounded in or metaphysically determined by
instantiations of physical properties, but that these
“realizing” physical properties might be different in
different cases. So, for example, any being who thinks about the
square root of two will do so in virtue of instantiating some physical
properties, but these can be different physical properties in
different cases—in one human being it may be one set of neural
arrangements, in another a different set, and in other life forms it
might involves nothing like neural properties at all.
There are various more detailed ways of filling out this idea of
non-reductive physicalism. A common feature is the requirement that
special properties should metaphysically supervene on physical
properties, in the sense that any two beings who share the realizing
physical properties will necessarily share the same special
properties, even though the physical properties which so realize the
special ones can be different in different beings. This arguably
ensures that nothing more is required for any specific instantiation
of a special property than its physical realization—even God
could not have created your brain states without thereby creating your
feelings—yet avoids any reductive identification of special
properties with physical ones. (This is a rough sketch of the
supervenience formulation of physicalism. For more see Stoljar
2015.)
Some philosophers object that non-reductive physicalism does not in
fact satisfy the original motivation for physicalism, on the grounds
that it does not really reconcile the efficacy of mental and other
special causes with the causal closure thesis (Kim 1998; Robb and Heil
2014: Section 6). According to non-reductive physicalism, special
properties are not type-identical with any strictly physical
properties, even though they supervene on them. But this then seems to
imply that any given special cause will be distinguishable from the
physical cause that realizes it, to the extent that it involves the
instantiation of a different property. (The property of thinking about
the square root of two is definitely a different property from the
neural property that realizes it in me, say, since another being could
share the former property without sharing the latter.)
The opponents of non-reductive physicalism then insist that this
gives us an unacceptable proliferation of causes for the physical
effects of special causes after all—both the physical cause
implied by the causal closure thesis and the distinct special
cause. In response, advocates of non-reductive physicalism respond
that there is nothing wrong with such an apparent duplication of
causes if it is also specified that the latter metaphysically
supervene on the former.
The issue here hinges on the acceptability of different kinds of
systematic overdetermination (Bennett 2003). All can agree that it
would be absurd if the physical effects of special causes always had
two metaphysically independent causes. Plugging this into the causal
closure argument for physicalism, we can conclude that there can be
no metaphysically independent non-physical causes (such as Cartesian
dualist mental causes) for effects that already have full physical
causes. However, even if “strong overdetermination” by
two ontologically independent causes is so ruled out, this does not
necessarily preclude “weak overdetermination” by both a
physical cause and a metaphysically supervenient special cause.
Advocates of non-reductive physicalism argue that this kind of
overdetermination is benign and consistent with the causal
argument’s denial of strong overdetermination, since now the
two causes are not metaphysically distinct—the special cause
isn’t genuinely additional to the physical cause (nothing more
is needed for your feelings than your brain states).
1.5 Physicalist Downwards Causation
Some recent writers have explored a different way of upholding the
causal efficacy of non-reduced mental and other special causes. Where
the “benign overdetermination” option says certain effects
have a special cause as well as a physical cause, these
writers urge that some effects have a special cause instead
of a physical cause.
Suppose a pigeon pecks at crimson tiles. Is the pecking caused by
the specific shade, crimson, or the more generic colour, red? The
natural answer is that it depends. If the pigeon pecks only at crimson
tiles, and not at other shades of red, then it is the crimsonness that
is causing the pecking, whereas, if the pigeon pecks at any shade of
red, it is the redness. Examples like these have led a number of
writers to require that causes be proportional to their
effects (Yablo 1992; Menzies 2008; List and Menzies 2009, 2010).  We
should attribute the effect to that property that is specific enough
to suffice for it, but no more specific than that.
This suggests that sometimes special causes and not their
physical realizers might be responsible for physical effects. Suppose
I want to hail a taxi, and that this desire is realized by some brain
state, and that I then wave my arm. It seems that it will then be the
desire that is proportional to the waving, not the brain state, in
that I would still have waved my arm if my desire had been differently
realized, though not if I hadn’t had the desire at all.
Some will say that in such cases the desire
causally explains the waving, but that it is still the brain
state that causes it. This thought appeals to the intuition
that real causal relations are always constituted by basic physical
interactions, by bits of matter bumping into each other. But this
intuition is not decisive, and a number of theoretical considerations
speak against it.  For instance, the “difference-making”
account of causation developed by James Woodward implies that generic
properties can often eclipse their more specific realizations as
causes (Woodward 2005), as does the view that causation is a
relatively macroscopic phenomenon whose temporal asymmetry is
analogous to the temporal asymmetries of thermodynamics (Loewer 2007;
Papineau 2013).
It is worth observing that physicalists who advocate this kind of
downwards special causation are in some danger of sawing off the
branch they are sitting on, in that they now seem to be advocating
counter-examples to the causal closure of the physical. If my
arm’s waving is caused by my desire and not by my brain state,
it has a special cause and not a physical cause, and this will refute
the closure thesis that every physical effect has some fully physical
cause. Since the original rationale for embracing physicalism was
supposed to be science’s discovery that the physical realm is
causally closed, this may seem to leave physicalists in an awkward
position.
However, even if the examples of “downwards” causation
do undermine the thesis of the causal closure of the physical, it
may still be possible to rework the original argument for
physicalism in terms of closure under nomological determination,
rather than causal
 closure.[7]
 Nothing in the idea of proportional
causation threatens the idea that modern physics shows that all
physical effects (or their chances) are fully nomologically
determined by physical antecedents, in the form of non-special force
fields, even if they aren’t always caused by them. And it is
arguable that this in itself rules out the possibility of some
metaphysically independent non-physical factor making any causal
difference to the unfolding of the physical world.
1.6 Conscious Properties and the Causal Closure Arguments
Some philosophers take there to be compelling arguments against the
view that conscious states are metaphysically constituted by
physical states. Putting this together with the closure claim that
physical effects always have physical causes, and abjuring the idea
that the physical effects of conscious causes might be strongly
overdetermined by both a physical cause and an ontologically
independent conscious cause, they are led to the view that conscious
states must be “epiphenomenal”, lacking any power to
causally influence the physical realm (Jackson 1982, 1986; Chalmers
1996).[8]
The rejection of physicalism about conscious properties certainly
has the backing of intuition. (Don’t zombies—beings who
are physically exactly like humans but have no conscious
life—intuitively seem metaphysically possible?) However,
whether this intuition can be parlayed into a sound argument is a
highly controversial issue, and one that lies beyond the scope of
this entry.  A majority of contemporary philosophers probably hold
that physicalism can resist these
arguments.[9]
But a significant minority take the other side, and for them
epiphenomenalism is the natural
option.[10]
If the majority are right, and the arguments against physicalism
about conscious states are not in fact compelling, then physicalism
seems clearly preferable to epiphenomenalism. In itself,
epiphenomenalism is not an attractive position. It requires us to
suppose that conscious states, even though they are caused by
processes in the physical world, have no effects on that world. This
is a very odd kind of causal structure. Nature displays no other
examples of such one-way causal intercourse between realms. By
contrast, a physicalist naturalism about conscious states will
integrate the mental realm with the causal unfolding of the
spatiotemporal world in an entirely familiar way. Given this, general
principles of theory choice would seem to argue strongly for
physicalism over
 epiphenomenalism.[11]
If we focus on this last point, we might start wondering why the
causal closure thesis is so important. If general principles of
theory choice can justify physicalism, why bring in all the
complications associated with causal closure? The answer is that
causal closure is needed to rule out interactionist dualism. General
principles of theory choice may dismiss epiphenomenalism in favour of
physicalism, but they do not similarly discredit interactionist
dualism. As the brief historical sketch earlier will have made clear,
interactionist dualism offers a perfectly straightforward theoretical
option requiring no commitment to any bizarre causal
structures. Certainly the historical norm has been to regard it as
the default account of the causal role of the mental realm. Given
this, arguments from theoretical simplicity cut no ice against
interactionist dualism. Rather, the case against interactionist
dualism hinges crucially on the empirical thesis that all physical
effects already have physical causes. It is specifically this claim
that makes it difficult to see how dualist states can make a causal
difference to the physical 
world.[12]
It is sometimes suggested that physicalism about the mind can be
vindicated by an “inference to the best
explanation”. The thought here is that there are many
well-established synchronic correlations between mental states and
brain states, and that physicalism is a “better
explanation” of these correlations than epiphenomenalism (Hill
1991; Hill and McLaughlin 1999). From the perspective outlined here,
this starts the argument in the middle rather than the beginning, in
effect assuming that interactionist dualism has already been ruled
out. After all, if we believed interactionist dualism, then we
wouldn’t think that fundamentally dualist mental pains, say,
needed any help from synchronic neural correlates to produce
physical effects, and so wouldn’t have any reason to suppose
that they were synchronically correlated with any particular brain
states. Rather our rationale for believing in such synchronic
correlations is that the causal closure of the physical realm has
already ruled out interactive dualism, so to speak, whence we infer
that mental states can only systematically precede physical effects
if they are correlated with the physical causes of those
effects.
1.7 Moral Facts
G.E. Moore’s well-known “open question” argument
is designed to show that moral facts cannot possibly be identical to
natural facts. Suppose that the natural properties of some situation
are completely specified. It will always remain an open question,
argued Moore, whether that situation is morally good or bad (Moore
1903).
Moore took this argument to show that moral facts constitute a
distinct species of non-natural fact. However, any such non-naturalist
view of morality faces immediate difficulties, deriving ultimately
from the kind of causal closure thesis discussed above. If all
physical effects are due to a limited range of physically-grounded
natural causes, and if moral facts lie outside this range, then it
follow that moral facts can never make any difference to what happens
in the physical world (Harman 1986). At first sight this may seem
tolerable (perhaps moral facts indeed don’t have any physical
effects). But it has awkward epistemological consequences. For beings
like us, knowledge of the spatiotemporal world is mediated by physical
processes involving our sense organs and cognitive systems. If moral
facts cannot influence the physical world, then it is hard to see how
we can have any knowledge of them.
The traditional non-naturalist answer to this problem is to posit a
non-natural faculty of “moral intuition” that gives us
some kind of direct access to the moral realm (as explained in Ridge
2014: Section 3). However, causal closure once more makes it
difficult to make good sense of this suggestion. Presumably at some
point the posited intuitive faculty will need to make a causal
difference in the physical world (by affecting what people say and
do, for example). And at this point the causal closure argument will
bite once more, to show that a non-natural intuitive faculty would
inevitably commit us to the absurdity of strong
overdetermination.[13]
In the face of this kind of difficulty, most contemporary moral
philosophers have turned away from moral non-naturalism and opted for
some species of naturalist view. We can divide the naturalist options
here into two broad categories: irrealist and realist. Irrealist moral
naturalists aim to account for moral discourse by offering naturalist
accounts of the social and linguistic and practices that govern it,
but without supposing that moral utterances report on moral facts with
a substantial independent existence (Joyce 2015). By contrast,
naturalist moral realists agree with moral non-naturalists against
irrealists that substantial moral facts exist, but seek to locate them
in the natural realm rather than in some sui generis
non-natural realm (Lenman 2014).
Both these broad categories have further sub-divisions. Among the
irrealists, we can distinguish explicitly non-cognitivist views like
emotivism and prescriptivism which deny that moral judgements express
beliefs (Hare 1952; Blackburn 1993; Gibbard 2003), from cognitivist
views that accept that moral judgements do express beliefs but deny a
substantial reality to the putative facts to which they answer; and
among the latter cognitivist views we can distinguish error-theoretic
fictionalist options which view moral judgements as simply false
(Mackie 1977; Kalderon 2005) from projectivist options which hold that
moral discourse is sufficiently disciplined for its judgements to
qualify for a species of truth even though they do not report on
independently existing causally significant facts (Wright 1992; Price
2011). 
Naturalist moral realism also comes in different varieties. In
recent debates two versions have figured prominently; “Cornell
realism”, which includes moral facts among the causally
significant facts but resists their type-reducibility to non-moral
facts (Sturgeon 1985; Boyd 1988), and “moral
functionalism” which is happy to equate moral facts with
straightforwardly descriptive facts (Jackson 1998). 
Any kind of moral naturalist realist needs to reject Moore’s
open question argument. They have two alternatives here. One is to
insist that Moore’s posited openness is relatively superficial,
and that there is no principled barrier to inferring moral facts a
priori from the non-moral natural facts, even if such inferences
will sometimes require a great deal of information and reflection. The
other is to argue that the constitution of moral facts by non-moral
natural facts is an a posteriori matter, akin to the relation
between water and H2O, and that therefore Moore’s
openness only points to a conceptual gap, not a metaphysical one
(Ridge 2014: Section 2).
This sub-section has focused on morality. But there are other
areas which arguably involve matters of value, such as theoretical
and practical reason, aesthetics, and so on. The constraints placed
on theories of moral facts by naturalist considerations will
apply, mutatis mutandis, in these areas too, militating
against theories that posit non-natural value-bearing facts and in
favour of naturalist alternatives, of either a realist or irrealist
stripe.
1.8 Mathematical Facts
Mathematics raises many of the same issues for ontological
naturalism as morality. Mathematical claims typically involve a
commitment to abstract objects like numbers and sets, eternal entities
outside space and time. This might seem cogent at first sight, but
once more epistemological difficulties quickly arise. Abstract objects
can have no effects in the spatiotemporal world. How then can
spatiotemporal being like ourselves come to know about them?
However the mathematical case does not fully parallel the moral
one.  One of the options in the moral case was naturalist realism,
which reads moral claims as about natural facts which play causal
roles in the spatiotemporal world. However, given the explicit
commitment of mathematical claims to abstract objects without
spatiotemporal location, this option does not seem available in the
mathematical case (but see Maddy 1990). So we seem required to choose
between naturalist irrealism or an ontologically non-naturalist
realism that upholds the reality of non-spatiotemporal mathematical
entities.
As in the moral case, one response to the epistemological
challenges facing such a non-naturalist realism is to posit some
faculty of intuition which gives us access to the abstract
mathematical realm.  Kurt Gödel arguably favoured a view along
these lines (Parsons 1995). However, once more this only seems to push
the problem back.  There seems no good way for the posited faculty to
bridge the causal gap between the abstract and the spatiotemporal
realms.
An alternative version of non-naturalist realism aims to vindicate
mathematical and modal claims as essential parts of our best overall
theories of the world. According to this line of thought, defended by
Hilary Putnam, our empirically best-supported scientific theories
commit us to mathematical entities; ergo, we are entitled to believe
in such entities (Putnam 
1971).[14]
However, it is contentious whether our best-supported empirical
theories do commit us to abstract mathematical entities. The most
prominent version of naturalist irrealism about mathematics, Hartry
Field’s fictionalism, disputes precisely this claim. According
to Field, there are ways of constructing “nominalist”
versions of scientific theories that avoid commitment to abstract
mathematical objects. From Field’s point of view, these
nominalized versions of our scientific theories are explanatorily
superior to the “platonist” alternatives. Field argues
that we do not have to regard mathematics itself as literally true in
order to understand its use in science and other applications. Rather
it can be viewed as a “useful fiction” which facilitates
inferences between nominalistic scientific claims, but is not itself
implicated in our most serious beliefs about the world (Field 1980,
1989).
Not all philosophers of mathematics are convinced that Fieldian
nominalizations are available to replace all scientific references to
abstract mathematical objects. In particular, some have argued that
certain explanations of nominalist facts make essential reference to
abstract objects (Baker 2005; Batterman 2010). In response, others
have sought to show that there are in fact good nominalist
explanations of the facts in question (Daly and Langford 2009;
Butterfield 2011; Menon and Callender 2013). In any case, it is not
clear that Field’s metaphysical stance requires a full execution
of his nominalizing programme, as opposed to a case for its cogency:
difficulties in constructing nominalist theories can always be
attributed to limitations of human ingenuity rather than the reality
of abstract mathematical objects (Leng 2013).
Perhaps the most popular contemporary alternative to fictionalism
is the version of non-naturalist realism offered by the neo-Fregean
thesis that abstract mathematical beliefs can be justified as analytic
truths that follow from logic and certain meaning stipulations. The
idea has been most fully developed in connection with arithmetic,
where Crispin Wright has shown how Peano’s postulates can be
derived within the framework of second-order logic from nothing except
the Humean principle that the same number attaches to equinumerous
concepts.  According to Wright, this principle can be viewed as an
implicit definition of our concept of number. If this is right, then
it has indeed been shown that arithmetic, and therewith the existence
of numbers as abstract objects, follows from logic and definition
alone (Wright 1983; Hale and Wright 2003). There has also been some
attempt to extend the programme to mathematical analysis (Shapiro
2000; Wright 2000).
One query that might be put to this programme is whether the Humean
principle and analogous assumptions can really be viewed as analytic
definitions. If they commit us to numbers and other abstract objects
whose existence cannot established without them, then they are
arguably doing more than definitions should. A related issue is
whether the overall neo-Fregean position is properly viewed as
realist. From its perspective, the role of abstract mathematical
objects in the overall scheme of things seems to be exhausted by their
making our mathematical statements true; given this, it might seem
better to classify it as a species of irrealism (MacBride 2003).
To complete this discussion of ontological naturalism, let us
briefly consider the realm of modality, understood as the subject
matter of claims that answer to something more than
actuality. Modality raises many of the same issues as mathematics, but
the topic is complicated by the prior question of the content of modal
claims, and in particular about whether they quantify over non-actual
possible worlds. Whereas there is little dispute about the initial
semantic analysis of mathematical claims—they purport to refer
to abstract numbers, sets, functions and so on—there is somewhat
less unanimity about the possible worlds analysis of modal claims
(Nolan 2011b).
To the extent that modal claims do quantify over possible worlds,
the ontological points made about mathematics apply will here too.
Since non-actual worlds do not inhabit our spatiotemporal realm, an
ontologically naturalist realism seems to be ruled out from the
start.  The remaining alternatives are irrealism or non-naturalist
realism. The former alternative has been explored in recent years by
modal fictionalists (Rosen 1990; Nolan 2011a). The options under
the latter heading meet the same epistemological challenges as in
the mathematical case: brute intuition faces causal problems; it is
contentious whether we should take our best scientific theories to
commit us to possible worlds; and, if modal knowledge is to be
analytically a priori, on the model of mathematical
neo-Fregeanism, then it is not obvious that it can take us to
knowledge of possible worlds construed realistically.  
2. Methodological Naturalism
2.1 Philosophy and Science
In what follows, “methodological naturalism” will be
understood as a view about philosophical practice. Methodological
naturalists see philosophy and science as engaged in essentially the
same enterprise, pursuing similar ends and using similar methods.
In some philosophy of religion circles, “methodological
naturalism” is understood differently, as a thesis about natural
scientific method itself, not about philosophical method. In this
sense, “methodological naturalism” asserts that religious
commitments have no relevance within science: natural science itself
requires no specific attitude to religion, and can be practised just
as well by adherents of religious faiths as by atheists or agnostics
(Draper 2005). This thesis is of interest to philosophers of religion
because many of them want to deny that methodological naturalism in
this sense entails “philosophical naturalism”, understood
as atheism or agnosticism. You can practice natural science in just
the same way as non-believers, so this line of thought goes, yet
remain a believer when it comes to religious questions.
Not all defenders of religious belief endorse this kind of
“methodological naturalism”. Some think that religious
doctrines do make a difference to scientific practice, yet are
defensible for all that (Plantinga 1996). In any case, this kind of
“methodological naturalism” will not be discussed further
here. Our focus will be on the relation between philosophy and
science, not between religion and science.
It is uncontentious that philosophers differ widely in their
initial attitudes to natural science. Some philosophers celebrate
science, and seek out ways in which philosophy can be illuminated by
it. Other philosophers view science with suspicion, and feel that any
dependence on science somehow infringes the autonomy of
philosophy. However, such temperamental differences need not
themselves amount to differing views about the nature of
philosophy. After all, even those philosophers who are suspicious of
science will need to allow scientific findings are sometimes of
philosophical significance—we need only think of the role that
the causal closure of physics was shown earlier to play in the
contemporary mind-body debate. And, on the other side, even the
philosophical friends of science must admit that there are some
differences at least between philosophy and natural science—for
example, that philosophers do not generally gather empirical data in
the way that scientists do.
If we want to isolate a serious debate about philosophical method,
we will need to go beyond initial reactions to science and look at
more specific methodological commitments. In order to focus what
follows, let us thus understand methodological naturalism as asserting
that at bottom philosophy and science are both concerned to establish
synthetic knowledge about the natural world, and moreover to achieve
this by a posteriori investigation.
Methodological naturalists in this sense will of course allow that
there are some differences between philosophy and science. But they
will say that these are relatively superficial. In particular, they
will argue that they are not differences in aims or methods, but
simply a matter of philosophy and science focusing on different
questions. For one thing, philosophical questions are often
distinguished by their great generality. Where scientists think about
viruses, electrons or stars, philosophers think about spatiotemporal
continuants, properties, causation and time. Categories like these
structure all our thinking about the natural world. A corollary is
that alternative theories at this level are unlikely ever to be
decided between by some simple experiment, which is no doubt one
reason that philosophers do not normally seek out new empirical
data. Even so, the methodological naturalist will insist, such
theories are still synthetic theories about the natural world,
answerable in the last instance to the tribunal of a
posteriori empirical data.
Not all philosophical questions are of great generality. Think of
topics like weakness of will, the importance of originality in art,
or the semantics of fiction. What seems to identify these as
philosophical issues is that our thinking is in some kind of
theoretical tangle, supporting different lines of thought that lead
to conflicting conclusions. Progress requires an unravelling of
premises, including perhaps an unearthing of implicit assumptions
that we didn’t realize we had, and a search for alternative
positions that don’t generate further contradictions. Here
too a posteriori data are clearly not going to be crucial
in deciding theoretical questions—often we have all the data
we could want, but can’t find a good way of accommodating
them.  Still, methodological naturalists will urge, this once more
doesn’t mean that a posteriori synthetic theories are
not the aim of philosophy. An a posteriori synthetic theory
unraveled from a tangle is still an a posteriori synthetic
theory, even if no new observations or experimental findings went
into its construction.
2.2 Philosophical Intuitions: Analytic or Synthetic?
An obvious objection to methodological naturalism appeals to the
role that intuitions play in philosophical debate. Where
scientists test their theories against the findings of observation and
experiment, philosophers typically test theirs against intuitions. On
the face of things, this argues that philosophy uses a
distinctively a priori method of investigation.
However, this objection is not decisive. One issue is whether
intuitions do play a central role in philosophical method. We shall
discuss this further in section 2.5
below. But even if it is assumed that intuitions are central to
philosophy, this is not necessarily inconsistent with methodological
naturalism. For it is not to be taken for granted that philosophical
intuitions have a distinctive a priori status. There is also
the possibility that they answer in the end to a posteriori
evidence, like the kind of intuitions at play in scientific thought
experiments.
Before we turn to these issues, a prior question is whether
philosophical intuitions should be viewed as analytic or synthetic.
While there is an extensive contemporary debate about the importance
of intuitions in philosophy (DePaul and Ramsey 1998; Knobe and
Nicholls 2008; Pust 2014; Cappelen 2012), this question is
surprisingly little 
asked.[15]
 No doubt this is a result of Quine’s
doubts about the analytic-synthetic distinction. This is not the
place to assess Quine’s arguments.  But, whatever exactly they
establish, they do not rule out all notions of analyticity that might
allow us to press our question. For example, the notion of a
statement whose truth follows from logic and definitions will serve
well enough for our purposes (Papineau 2015; see also Russell
2008).[16] We
shall understand analyticity in this way in what follows.
The choice between analyticity and syntheticity poses a familiar
dilemma for friends of a priori intuitions. If
philosophical intuitions are analytic, then this will plausibly
render them a priori, but it will call their philosophical
significance in question. By contrast, if they are synthetic, then
they may well be of substantial philosophical significance, but then
it will be less easy to understand how they can be a
priori. 
2.3 The Canberra Plan
A significant number of contemporary philosophers view philosophy
as resting on “conceptual analysis”. At first sight, this
might seem to commit them to the view that philosophy trades in
analytic claims. However, as we shall see in the next section, it is
by no means clear that all its advocates understand conceptual
analysis in this way.
One influential school, however, is relatively explicit about the
importance of analytic claims to philosophy. Led by David Lewis and
Frank Jackson, and widely known as the “Canberra Plan”,
this approach argues that philosophy starts with an initial analysis
of concepts employed by everyday thought, such as free will,
say, or knowledge, or moral value, or conscious
experience (Jackson 1998). Once this has been done, philosophy
can then turn to “serious metaphysics” to demonstrate how
a limited number of ingredients (for example, physical ingredients)
might satisfy these everyday concepts. This second stage is likely to
appeal to synthetic a posteriori scientific knowledge about
the fundamental nature of reality. But the purely analytic first
stage, argues Jackson, also plays an essential part in setting the
agenda for the subsequent metaphysical investigation.
An initial question about this programme relates to its scope. It
is by no means clear that all, or indeed any, philosophically
interesting concepts can be subject to the relevant kind of
analysis. Jackson himself assumes that pretty much all everyday
concepts can be analysed as equivalent to “the kind which
satisfies such-and-such folk
assumptions”.[17] 
But it is arguable that many everyday
concepts are not so constituted, but rather have their semantic
contents fixed by observational, causal or historical relations to
their referents.
Still, we can let this point pass. Even if we suppose, for the sake
of the argument, that a range of philosophically interesting everyday
concepts do have their contents fixed in the way the Canberra
programme supposes, there are further objections to its understanding
of philosophical method.
Let us look a bit more closely at the posited initial
agenda-setting stage of the Canberra programme. Upon closer
examination, it is not clear that this makes any essential appeal to
analytic knowledge.  Defenders of the Canberra plan
characteristically explain their strategy in terms of “Ramsey
sentences”(e.g., Jackson 1998: 140). Suppose T(F)T(F)T(F) is the
set of relevant everyday assumptions involving some philosophically
interesting concept. For example, F may be the concept
belief, and the assumptions in T may include
“characteristically caused by perceptions”,
“combines with desires to generate actions”, and
“has causally significant internal structure”. Then the
Ramsey sentence corresponding to T(F)T(F)T(F) is “∃!Φ(T(Φ))∃!Φ(T(Φ))\exists!\Phi
(T(\Phi))”.[18] 
For the concept belief, this would say

 There is some unique kind that is
  characteristically caused by perceptions, combines with desires to
  generate actions, and has causally significant internal structure.

 The Canberra suggestion is then that, once we
have articulated the relevant Ramsey sentence, we will be in a
position to turn to serious metaphysics to identify the underlying
nature of the F that plays the relevant role.
However, if this is the Canberra procedure, then there is no reason
to think of it as appealing to analytic knowledge at any stage. A
Ramsey sentence of the kind at issue says that there actually exists
some entity satisfying certain requirements (there is a kind of state
that is caused by perceptions …). Sentences like this make
eminently synthetic and falsifiable claims. It is not a matter of
definition that humans actually have internal states that play the
causal role associated with the concept of belief. The Canberra
strategy thus seems no different from the prescription that philosophy
should start with the synthetic theories endorsed by everyday thought,
and then look to our more fundamental theories of reality to see what,
if anything, makes these everyday theories true. This seems entirely
in accord with methodological naturalism—philosophy is in the
business of assessing and developing synthetic theories of the
world.
The crucial point here is that Ramsey sentences don’t define
concepts like belief, but eliminate them. They give us a way of saying
what our everyday theories say without using the relevant concept
(there is a kind of state that is caused by perceptions …) If
we want definitions, then we need “Carnap sentences”, not
Ramsey sentences (Lewis 1970). The Carnap sentence corresponding to
“∃!Φ(T(Φ))∃!Φ(T(Φ))\exists!\Phi(T(\Phi))” is “If
∃!Φ(T(Φ)∃!Φ(T(Φ)\exists!\Phi(T(\Phi), then T(F)T(F)T(F)”.  (If there is
a kind of state that is caused by perceptions …, then
it’s belief.) Carnap sentences can plausibly be viewed as akin
to stipulations that fix the reference of the relevant concepts, and
to that extent as analytic claims that can be known a
priori. But this certainly does not mean that Ramsey sentences,
which make substantial claims about the actual world, are also
knowable via a priori analysis. (Note how you can accept a
conditional Carnap sentence even if you reject the corresponding
unconditional Ramsey sentence. You can grasp the folk concept of
belief even if you reject the substantial folk theory of belief.)
Can’t defenders of the Canberra programme argue that it is
the analytic Carnap sentences that are crucial in setting
philosophical agendas, not the synthetic Ramsey sentences? But this
seems wrong. We will want to know about the fundamental nature of
belief if we suppose that there is a kind of state that is
characteristically caused by perceptions, and so on. That is certainly
a good motivation for figuring out whether and how the fundamental
components of reality might constitute this state. But the mere fact
that everyday thought contains a concept of such a state in itself
provides no motivation for further investigation. (In effect, the
function of a Carnap sentence is to provide a shorthand for talking
about the putative state posited by the corresponding Ramsey
sentence. It is hard to see how any important philosophical issues
could hang on the availability of such a shorthand.)
To emphasize the point, consider the everyday concept of a soul,
understood something that is present in conscious beings and survives
death. This concept of a soul can be captured by the analytic Carnap
sentence: “If certain entities inhabit conscious beings and
survive death, then they are souls”. Accordingly, this Carnap
sentence will be agreed by everybody who has the concept of soul,
whether or not they believe in souls. Yet this Carnap sentence will
not per se raise any interesting metaphysical questions for
those who deny the existence of souls. These deniers won’t start
wondering how the fundamental constituents of reality realize
souls—after all, they don’t believe in souls. It is only
those who accept the corresponding Ramsey sentence (“There are
parts of conscious beings that survive death”) who will see a
metaphysical issue here. Moreover, the Ramsey sentence will pose this
metaphysical issue whether or not it is accompanied by some analytic
Carnap sentence to provide some shorthand alternative terminology. In
short, the methodological naturalist can insist that anybody
interested in “serious metaphysics” should start by
articulating the substantial existential commitments of our folk
theories, as articulated in their synthetic Ramsey sentences. Any
further analytic conceptual commitments add nothing of philosophical
significance.
The point generalizes beyond the contrast between Ramsey and Carnap
sentences. On reflection, it is hard to see why any purely
definitional analytic truths should matter to philosophy. Synthetic
everyday truisms can certainly be philosophically significant, and so
their articulation and evaluation can play an important philosophical
role. But there is no obvious motive for philosophy to concern itself
with definitions that carry no implications about the contents of
reality. 
2.4 A Priori synthetic Intuitions?
Advocates of the Canberra plan are explicit that “conceptual
analysis” is concerned with analytic truths. However, many other
philosophers who advertise themselves as engaging in “conceptual
analysis” do not take themselves to be committed to this
implication.
Sometimes it is explicitly specified that “conceptual
analysis” involves articulating synthetic theories and assessing
them against a posteriori evidence. (A particularly clear
version of this picture of conceptual analysis is given in Brandom
2001. See also Goldman 2007.) So understood, the view that philosophy
is engaged in “conceptual analysis” seems perfectly
consistent with methodological naturalism.
Other philosophers are also explicit that “conceptual
analysis” issues in synthetic claims, but simultaneously regard
it as a source of a priori knowledge (e.g., Jenkins 2008,
2012). This combination of views is less straightforward. In
particular, it seems open to the traditional query: how is such
synthetic a priori knowledge possible? If some claim is not
guaranteed by the structure of our concepts, but answers to the nature
of the world, then how is it possible to know it without a
posteriori evidence?
Yet other philosophers distance themselves from talk of conceptual
analysis, but even so feel that philosophical reflection is a source
of synthetic a priori intuition (Sosa 1998, 2007). They too
would seem to face the traditional query of how synthetic a
priori knowledge is possible.
In this context, Timothy Williamson has recently argued that the
traditional distinction between a priori and a
posteriori knowledge is less than clear-cut, and in particular
that it breaks down in connection with the intuitions on which
philosophers rely. In Williamson’s view, there is a distinctive
philosophical method in which intuitive judgements play a central
role, but there is no warrant for classifying the relevant intuitions
as a priori rather than a posteriori (Williamson
2013).
However, it is arguable that this does not so much address as
by-pass the underlying question. Perhaps philosophical intuitions are
not best classified as clearly “a priori”. But,
if philosophy’s distinctive methodology relies on synthetic
intuitions, this still seems to call for some explanation of the
source of their reliability.
Doubts about the reliability of philosophical intuitions have been
amplified over the past few years by the findings of
“experimental philosophy”. Empirical studies have
indicated that many central philosophical intuitions are by no means
universal, but rather peculiar to certain cultures, social classes and
genders (Knobe and Nichols 2008). This variability of intuitions is in
obvious tension with their reliability. If different people have
opposed philosophical intuitions, then it cannot be that intuitions of
this kind are always true.
Timothy Williamson has responded to this challenge from
experimental philosophy by suggesting that, while the intuitions of
ordinary people on philosophical matters might be unreliable, those of
philosophers in particular can be trusted. In his view, a proper
philosophical training winnows out mistaken philosophical reactions
(2007: 191; 2011).  However, this position still seems to call for a
positive explanation of how synthetic philosophical knowledge might be
established without a posteriori evidence, even if it is
restricted to trained philosophers.
The possibility of such an explanation is not of course to be
dismissed out of hand. We will do well to remember that a
priori does not just mean analytic. There is no contradiction in
the idea of experience-independent access to synthetic truths. After
all, until the eighteenth century no modern philosopher doubted that
God had bestowed on us powers of reason that would enable us to
arrive at perception-independent knowledge of a range of synthetic
claims. Even if few contemporary philosophers would still appeal to
God in this context, there are other possible mechanisms that could
play an equivalent role. It is not to be ruled out that our
biological heritage, for example, has fixed a range of beliefs in us
whose reliability owes nothing to our individual ontogenetic
experience.  Indeed there is a case for viewing certain aspects of
our cultural heritage as playing a similar role, imbuing us with
certain beliefs whose justification rests on ancestral rather than
individual experience.[19]
However, it is one thing to point to the general possibility of
biological and cultural mechanisms constituting
experience-independent sources of reliable knowledge, another to
show that such mechanisms operate within philosophy. Even if there
are areas of thought which rest on such foundations, this does not
show that the intuitions of philosophers in particular have a
similar backing. Moreover, there is arguably direct reason to doubt
that they do. It is not just the intuitions of everyday people on
philosophical matter that have a poor track record. The same applies
to philosophers through history. It is not hard to think of
deep-seated intuitions appealed to by past philosophers that have
since been discredited. (A purely mechanical being cannot reason;
space must be Euclidean; an effect cannot be greater than its cause;
every event is determined; temporal succession cannot be relative.)
In the next section we will see that there is reason to suppose that
this unreliability is intrinsic to the nature of philosophy.
2.5 The Role of Thought Experiments
A central feature of contemporary philosophy is the use of
intuitive judgements about test cases to test philosophical
theories. The description theory of names is challenged by
Kripke’s imagined counterexamples, the tripartite theory of
knowledge by Gettier cases, and so on.
At first pass, this feature of philosophical method might seem to
presuppose that philosophy is centrally concerned with analytic
claims.  After all, isn’t the point of imagined possible cases
precisely to show us that certain scenarios are not ruled out by the
structure of our concepts, and thereby that certain philosophical
theses are not analytically guaranteed?
Because of this, some naturalist philosophers have advocated a
revisionary attitude to philosophical method. Philosophy should turn
away from the method of possible cases, and instead engage directly
with proper empirical theorizing. The interesting questions are not
about our concepts of names, knowledge, persons and so on, but about
the worldly items, if any, that these concepts refer to (Kornblith
2002; Knobe and Nichols 2008).
However, it is not to be taken for granted that philosophical
thought experiments are solely of conceptual significance. Perhaps the
intuitions about possible cases are not just analytic consequences of
concepts, but substantial synthetic claims about the world. If this
were right, then they would be capable of challenging the kind of
synthetic theses that methodological naturalists take philosophy to
involve.
In support of this alternative, note that intuition arguably plays
a role in science as well as philosophy, in the form of scientific
thought experiments, like Galileo’s analysis of free fall, or
the Einstein’s argument against the completeness of quantum
mechanics. Here too the scientist imagines some possible situation,
and then makes an intuitive judgement about what would happen. But
here the theory at issue is not some conceptual claim, but rather an
eminently synthetic one—say, that heavier bodies fall faster. If
intuition is to falsify this, then it needs to tell us that there is a
naturally and not just conceptually possible situation that violates
this thesis—for example, if a big and small body are tied
together, they will be heavier than the big one, but will not fall
faster. This thought is clearly not guaranteed by concepts alone, but
by synthetic assumptions about the way the world works.
But this analogy[20]
now highlights a different worry about philosophical thought
experiments.  If the intuitions promoted by the thought experiments
are synthetic, what reason is there to trust them? As was observed in
the last section, there is no obvious reason to suppose that the
synthetic intuitions of philosophers are generally reliable, and
indeed some historical basis for thinking they are prone to
error. Given this, it scarcely seems sensible to assess philosophical
theories by their consistency with the immediate reactions of
philosophers to test cases.  Once more, methodological naturalism
would seem to require a revisionary attitude to philosophical
method.
However, there is a way of understanding the role of thought
experiments in philosophy that evades this worry. Instead of viewing
them as designed to elicit authoritative intuitions to which
philosophical theories must defer, they can instead be seen as devices
which help us to articulate our implicit assumptions when we are
threatened with paradox and have difficulty finding a solution.
Recall a point made at the beginning of our discussion of
methodological naturalism. Philosophical problems are typically
occasioned by some kind of theoretical tangle. Different but equally
plausible lines of though lead us to conflicting conclusions.
Unraveling this tangle requires that we lay out different theoretical
commitments and see what might be rejected or modified. A useful
heuristic for this purpose may well be to use intuitions about
imaginary cases to uncover the implicit synthetic assumptions that are
shaping our thinking. This can help us better to appreciate our
overall theoretical alternatives, and assess which gives the best
overall fit with the a posteriori evidence.
This perspective on philosophical thought experiments shows why we
should positively expect many of the intuitions they elicit to prove
wanting. Perhaps there are contexts outside philosophy where various
kinds of a priori intuitions can be relied upon. But if
philosophical problems typically arise because we are unsure about
what exactly is amiss in the overall set of synthetic claims we bring
to the world, then it would seem only to be expected that the fault
will often lie in the implicit assumptions behind our
thought-experimental reactions.
It is worth noting that this often happens with scientific thought
experiments too. Galileo’s intuition that light bodies fall as
fast as heavy ones was vindicated by subsequent physics. But the
verdict can also go the other way. For example, the assumption behind
the Einstein’s argument against the completeness of quantum
mechanics is nowadays rejected. But this certainly did not mean that
his thought experiment was worthless. On the contrary, it led J. S.
Bell to the derivation of the eponymous inequality whose experimental
confirmation ruled out local hidden variable theories.
It is not hard to think of similar philosophical cases. The worth
of philosophical thought-experiments does not always require that the
intuitions they elicit are sound. Consider the classic Lockean set-up
where someone’s memories are transferred to a new body. We all
have an intuition that the person goes with the memories, not the old
body, as evidenced by our reactions to the many fictions which trade
on just this kind of scenario. But few philosophers of personal
identity would nowadays hold that this intuition is decisive in favour
of Lockeanism. Again, consider the intuition that conscious properties
are ontologically distinct from physical ones, as displayed in our
immediate reaction to zombie scenarios. Here too, few would suppose
that these intuitions by themselves decide the case. Still, even those
who reject Lockeanism and dualism will allow that reflection on
memory-switching and zombie cases has played a crucial role in
clarifying what is at issue in the debates. The evocation of
intuitions by philosophical thought experiments is important, not
because they provide some special kind of a priori evidence,
but simply because they need to be made explicit and assessed against
the overall a posteriori evidence.
This perspective on thought experiments shows that there is a sense
in which recent developments within “experimental
philosophy” can be viewed as complementing traditional armchair
methods. In the previous section we saw that some of the findings of
experimental philosophy carry the implication that everyday intuitions
are not generally be reliable. But in addition to this
“negative” message, there is also room for experimental
philosophy to make a positive philosophical contribution, even in
cases where there is no variation in intuitions.
Careful experimental probing can helpfully augment traditional
armchair methods as a way of identifying the structure of implicit
assumptions that drive intuitive judgments about test cases.
Sometimes thought-experiments may be enough. But in more complicated
cases systematic questionnaires and surveys may well be a better way
of identifying the implicit cognitive structures behind our
philosophical reactions.
Note that experimental philosophy, even when viewed in this
positive light, is at most an addition to our philosophical armoury,
not a new way of doing philosophy. For once we have sorted out the
intuitive principles behind our philosophical judgements, whether by
armchair reflection or empirical surveys, we still need to assess
their worth.  Even if the claim that we think a certain way is
supported by hard empirical data, this doesn’t make that way
of thinking correct.  That can only be shown by subjecting that way
of thinking itself to proper a posteriori evaluation.
2.6 Mathematical, Modal and Moral Knowledge
Methodological naturalism fits more naturally with some areas of
philosophy than others. It is perhaps not hard to understand, at least
in outline, how work in areas like metaphysics, philosophy of mind,
meta-ethics and epistemology might be aimed at the construction of
synthetic theories supported by a posteriori evidence. But in
other philosophical areas the methodologically naturalistic project
may seem less obviously applicable. In particular it might be unclear
how it applies to those areas of philosophy that make claims about
mathematics, first-order morality or modality.
One possibility would be for methodological naturalists to make
exceptions for these areas of philosophy. It would still be a
significant thesis if methodological naturalism could be shown to
apply to most central areas of philosophy, even if some specialist
areas call for a different methodology.
This final subsection will address two issues raised by this
suggestion. First, is it reasonable to regard modal claims in
particular as comprising a specialism within philosophy? Perhaps
mathematical investigation and even first-order moralizing can be
regarded as marginal to the core areas of philosophy. But many will
feel that a concern with the modal realm is a characteristic feature
of all philosophy. Second, how far do methodological naturalists need
to allow that mathematics, morality and modality constitute exceptions
to their position in the first place?
On the first issue, Bertrand Russell said
 [A philosophical proposition] must not deal
specially with things on the surface of the earth, or with the solar
system, or with any other portion of space and time. … A
philosophical proposition must be applicable to everything that exists
or may exist. (1917: 110)
 However, one can agree with Russell that
philosophy automatically has implications for the modal realm
(“everything that … may exist”), without accepting
that the aim of philosophy is to explore the modal realm as such. We
need to distinguish here between an interest in claims which, as it
happens, have modal implications, on the one hand, and an interest in
those modal implications themselves, on the other.  It is
uncontentious that most of the claims of interest to philosopher have
modal implications. But it does not follow from this that most of
philosophy is interested in the modal realm itself.
Philosophy is largely concerned with claims about identity and
constitution, claims which as it happens will be necessary if they are
true. When philosophers ask about knowledge, names, persons,
persisting objects, free will, causation, and so on, they are seeking
to understand the identity or constitution of these kinds. They want
to know whether knowledge is the same as true justified belief,
whether persisting objects are composed of temporal parts, and so
on. And so any truths they might establish about such matters will
inevitably be necessary rather than contingent, and so carry
implications about a realm beyond the actual.
But the fact that p implies necessarily p does
not mean that anyone who is interested in the former must be
interested in the latter, any more than someone who is interested in
John’s age being 47 must be interested in its being a prime
number.
This makes room for methodological naturalists to insist that most
primary philosophical concerns are synthetic and a
posteriori, even if they imply additional modal claims which are
not. Natural science provides a good analogy here. Water is
H2O. Heat is molecular motion. Stars are made of hot
gas. Halley’s comet is made of rock and ice. Since all these
claims concern matters of identity and constitution, they too are
necessary if true. But science is interested in these synthetic a
posteriori claims as such, rather than their modal
implications. Chemistry is interested in the composition of actual
water, and not with what happens in other possible
worlds. Methodological naturalists can take the same line with
philosophical claims. Their focus is on whether knowledge is actually
the same as true justified belief, or whether persisting objects are
actually composed of temporal parts—issues which they take to be
synthetic and a posteriori—and not with whether these
truths are necessary—issues which may well have a different
status.
Let us now turn to the second issue flagged above. How far do
methodological naturalists in fact need to allow that
modality—and mathematics and first-order morality—do have
a different status from the synthetic a posteriori character
they attribute to philosophy in general?
The issues here are by no means clear-cut. In
sections 1.7 and 1.8 above
we saw how the arguments for ontological naturalism placed general
constraints on the epistemological options in these area. There is no
question of exploring these epistemological issues fully here, but
some brief comments will be in order.
For mathematics and modality, the epistemological possibilities
were restricted to irrealism and ontologically non-naturalist
realism. In the moral case, there were again irrealist options, and
also ontologically naturalist realisms that identified moral facts
with causally significant spatiotemporal facts.
For those who endorse irrealist options in any of these areas,
there would seem to be no tension with methodological
naturalism. After all, irrealist analyses deny that there is any
substantial knowledge to be had in mathematics, modality or morality,
and so will not think of object-level claims in these areas as
themselves contributing to philosophy. (This is consistent with
thinking that a meta-understanding of the workings of mathematical,
modal or moral discourse is important to philosophy; but then there
seems no reason why such a meta-understanding should be problematic
for methodological naturalism.)
Similarly, there seems no reason why the naturalist realist options
in the moral case should be in tension with methodological naturalism.
The details deserve to be worked through, but on the face of things we
might expect knowledge of causally significant spatiotemporal moral
facts to be synthetic and a posteriori.
This leaves us with non-naturalist realist accounts of mathematical
and modal knowledge. As we saw earlier, the best options here appeal
to the neo-Fregean programme of grounding knowledge of the
mathematical and modal realms in a priori analytic
principles. If this programme could be vindicated, then it would
indeed violate the requirements of methodological naturalism. But, as
observed earlier, it seems at best an open question whether analytic
principles have the power to take us to realist knowledge of the
mathematical and modal realms.