Nicolai Hartmann (1882–1950) was one of the leading German
philosophers of the first half of the twentieth century. While
Hartmann was in many respects a classic philosopher and wrote
book-length works scrutinizing and developing all the major fields of
philosophy, including the philosophy of history, ethics and
aesthetics, his leading interest was ontology. He systematically
developed a comprehensive and rich theory of categories, which set out
his thought on ontological modalities, the difference between the
spheres of real and ideal being, the fundamental categories of
reality, the ontological levels in which reality is structured, and
cosmological categories.
 
1. Introduction


Nicolai Hartmann (b. Riga, 1882, d. Göttingen, 1950; for
biographical information, see Harich 2000, Heiss 1961 and F. Hartmann
1978) was recognized in the first half of the twentieth century as one
of the leading German philosophers, on a par with Husserl or
Heidegger.  After the Second World War, Hartmann was elected President
of the German Philosophical Association for both the acknowledged
value of his philosophical ideas and his apparent lack of any improper
compromise with Nazism. The only paper in English published by
Hartmann during his lifetime appeared in Mind in 1949, and it
was written in his capacity as President of the German Philosophical
Association. Its purpose was to inform the philosophical community
about the results achieved by German philosophers in the years before
the Second World War. After Hartmann’s death in 1950, however, his
ideas attracted no further attention. The sixty years that have passed
since the war have seen waves of interest in a number of thinkers,
such as Brentano or Meinong, who have never been part of mainstream
philosophy. But Hartmann’s ideas have never again been a topic of
discussion. It is difficult to determine why things have gone this
way. Some aspects of Hartmann’s style may provide the beginnings of an
answer. He systematically adopted a non-speculative style of analysis,
admitting only the minimum of metaphysics needed to frame the problems
that ontology proves unable to address. His language was clear, and
his method was rigorous, almost pedantic, proceeding punctiliously
step by step, without anticipating solutions or taking anything for
granted.  His writings are so precisely organized that their reader is
held in check and feels unable to foresee the next step in the
argumentation.


Serious research is required to explain the neglect of Hartmann’s
thought. The recent establishment of the
 Nicolai Hartmann Society 
 has shown that scholars interested in Nicolai
Hartmann and his ideas are present everywhere, not only in North
America and Europe but also in South America and Asia. The proceedings
of the first international conference on Nicolai Hartmann (Poli,
Scognamiglio, Tremblay 2011) and this entry provide information on
Hartmann’s thought that may contribute to open evaluation of his
contributions to philosophy.


Thus far, only two book-length works by Hartmann have been
translated into English, the three volumes of the Ethics and
the short New Ways of Ontology. Two more books are presently
under translation: Possibility and Actuality and
Aesthetics (both are scheduled to appear in 2013, see
Hartmann 2013a,b). The translation of one of his papers has also been
completed and will soon be published (Hartmann 2012). English readers
can rely on only five book-length presentations of Hartmann’s
thought (two published in 2011): Poli, Scognamiglio and
Tremblay’s The Philosophy of Nicolai Hartmann (2011);
Kelly’s Material Ethics of Value—Max Scheler and
Nicolai Hartmann (2011); Werkmeister’s Nicolai
Hartmann’s New Ontology (1990), Cadwallader’s
Searchlight on Values: Nicolai Hartmann’s Twentieth-century
Value Platonism (1984), and Mohanty’s older
Nicolai Hartmann and Alfred North Whitehead. A Study in Recent
Platonism (1957).


In many respects, Hartmann was a classic philosopher: he wrote
book-length works scrutinizing and developing all the major fields of
philosophy. Plato’s Logic of Being (1909) paved the way
for his understanding of the sphere of ideal (or abstract) being, while
The Problem of Spiritual Being (1933), the three volumes of
Ethics (1926) and the Aesthetics (1953) delved into
the many intricacies of the spiritual stratum of reality (on which see
Section 6 below), an inquiry prepared for by his systematic analysis
of German Idealism (The Philosophy of German Idealism, 2
vols., 1923 and 1929). Hartmann addressed the problem of knowledge and
the connections between epistemology and ontology in
his Metaphysics of Knowledge (1921). His leading interest was
ontology, however. All his works—Ethics
and Aesthetics included—have an unmistakably
ontological bent. The overall architecture of his ontology was set out
in four books: Foundations of Ontology
(1935), Possibility and Actuality (1938),
The Construction of the Real World (1940), and
Philosophy of Nature (1950). New Ways of Ontology
(En. tr. 1953) is a simplified and highly compressed presentation of
the overall framework. Preliminary to the four-volume ontological set
is the already-mentioned Metaphysics of Knowledge. Put
briefly, Metaphysics of Knowledge discusses the interaction
between epistemology and ontology and the inevitable dependence of any
epistemology on ontology.

Foundations of Ontology paved the way for a systematic
treatment of ontology by introducing (1) the difference between modes
of being (the modalities of possibility, necessity and actuality),
spheres of being (real and ideal) and ways of being (Dasein
and Sosein), and (2) a treatment of emotional transcendent
acts as constituting the requisite pre-conceptual acquaintance with the
harshness of reality.


The main thesis put forward by Hartmann in the Foundations of
Ontology is that all ontological differences are articulations of
being, not differences between being and non-being. Parts and wholes
are both authentic aspects of being; independent and dependent entities
are similarly aspects of being; physical, biological, psychological and
spiritual types of being are all manifestations of being, and none of
them is “more being” than any other. From the point of view
of ontology, no part, aspect, or moment of reality is “more
being” than any other part, aspect or moment of it. The fact
that, say, the existence of biological entities depends on that of
physical entities does not imply that physics is “more
ontologically real” than biology. Existentially dependent
entities are as ontologically genuine as existentially independent
ones. All entities, whatever their type, demand the same careful
ontological scrutiny.


Hartmann’s analytic development of ontology begins with the
theory of ontological modalities elaborated in Possibility and
Actuality. The main purpose of this book is to demonstrate that
modalities ground the differences between the two principal spheres of
being (real and ideal) and the two secondary spheres of being
(knowledge and logic). Finally, The Construction of the Real
World and Philosophy of Nature present in detail the many
categories within the real sphere of being. This entry specifically
deals with (some parts of) the third and the fourth volumes of
Hartmann’s ontological quadrilogy, making no more than passing
mention of the first two volumes in the series. Since Possibility
and Actuality will soon be available in English, we
focus here on sources that are likely to be unavailable in English for a
substantial amount of time. Furthermore, towards the end of the entry,
there is a brief summary of Hartmann’s theory of values as
presented in his Ethics and Aesthetics. This entry
does not to discuss Hartmann’s historical works, such as his
innovative interpretation of Plato (Luchetti 2011), or his role in the
development of German Philosophical Anthropology (Fischer 2011).


Since Hartmann organized his bulky books into short chapters,
subdivided into sections usually no longer than one or two pages, we
follow his method of internal referencing by indicating the
relevant chapters and sections. The following abbreviations will be
used: E = Grundzüge der Metaphysik der Erkenntnis; S =
“Systematische Philosophie in eigener Darstellung”; ET2 =
Ethics. Vol 2. Moral Values; P = The Problem of Spiritual
Being; G = Zur Grundlegung der Ontologie; M =
Möglichkeit und Wirklichkeit; A = Der Aufbau der
realen Welt; N = Philosophie der Natur; W = New Ways
of Ontology; AE = Aesthetics. The chapters of
Introduction will be referred to as “Intro”.
Therefore “N.Intro5” and “N.3c” will
respectively refer to Section 5 of the Introduction and Chapter 3,
Section c of the Philosophy of Nature.
2. Preliminary sketches


This section summarizes some aspects of the theoretical background
to Hartmann’s analysis of ontological categories.
2.1 Philosophical method


According to Hartmann, an unbiased philosophical inquiry moves
through the three main stages of phenomenological, aporetic and
theoretical development. The first stage is descriptive and requires
the systematic collection of all the available evidence relevant to
whatever is under scrutiny. More often than not, descriptions end up in
conflicting theses, often in the form of aporias. More than anybody
else, Hartmann rehabilitates the value of aporias (for two recent
evaluations of Hartmann’s aporetic method see Schlittmaier 2011
and Rescher 2011). Aporias themselves are informative and should not be
forced to disappear by fiat decisions, such as an a
priori assumption on the overall consistency of reality or the
assumption that we have a direct, transparent access to reality. The
last phase of the philosophical method consists in using as few
metaphysical assumptions as possible for the systematic coordination of
the outcomes from the first two phases (E, S).


Metaphysical assumptions are necessary for the task of incorporating
aporias into a framework able to make sense of them. Since metaphysical
assumptions are not directly supported by descriptive data, it is
advisable to keep them to a minimum, or to assume the weakest possible
metaphysical assumptions.


An original way of distinguishing between ontology and metaphysics
underlies the third stage of theoretical development. Ontology, for
Hartmann, deals with what can be subsumed under at least partially
representable categories (see Section 3 below). Two main consequences
follow from this view of ontology: firstly, ontology is primarily a
theory of categories, in the sense that all ontological distinctions
have the form of categories (A.Intro1), and secondly, science in all
its branches is the most successful and powerful ally of ontology. More
precisely, for Hartmann science is ontological in all its ramifications
(G.37a). This is rather at odds with the mainstream view of science as
an eminently epistemological affair. This is one of the issues on which
Hartmann firmly departs from the Kantian—to be precise, the
Neo-Kantian—legacy. The claim that the main orientation of
science is ontological immediately entails that scientific categories
are further specifications and subdivisions of ontological categories.
In other words, the contact with science is a characteristic feature of
the theory of categories, and therefore of ontology (A.Intro1). The
philosopher’s task is to unfold the first and most general
articulations of the theory of categories, while scientists deal with
their subsequent further specifications.
2.2 Knowledge from an ontological standpoint


Ontology is knowledge of being, and knowledge is an epistemological
problem. In order to clarify the connection between the epistemological
problem of categories and the ontological problem of categories,
knowledge should be correctly defined. For Hartmann, the basic
ontological assumption concerning knowledge is that it does not create
or generate its objects. Ontologically speaking, knowledge grasps
objects. If knowledge does not generate its objects, objects
ontologically precede any effort to grasp them.


Objects are indifferent as to whether or not they are known. Whilst
knowledge is relevant for the knower, it is of no importance for the
object itself. Knowledge uncovers aspects, brings to light dimensions
and properties of objects. Knowledge introduces a divide between that
part of the object which has been captured by knowledge and that part
which remains to be known. The former is usually typified and then
represented by concepts. The divide between the full ontological object
and the part that has been apprehended shifts as knowledge
develops.
2.3 Being qua being


Ontology is the theory of being qua being, which results in
the difference between Dasein and Sosein. These two
terms can only imperfectly be translated as existence and
being-thus (or determination). All entities—either
real or ideal—have Dasein and Sosein, albeit
in different ways. For instance, real existence (i.e., the existence of
a real being) is a temporal determination, whilst ideal existence is
compossibility.


The difference between Dasein and Sosein—and
every other articulation that ontology is supposed to present—is
characterized categorially. As a matter of fact, categories are the
only tools available to an ontologist. Ontology, therefore, is a
thoroughgoing theory of categories.
3. Ontological categories


Hartmann’s theory of categories entirely breaks with
Kant’s or Hegel’s theories of categories by explicitly
denying that categories are concepts. While we need concepts in order
to refer to categories, concepts never capture categories entirely.


Categories deal with what is universal and necessary (A.Intro12).
Categories articulate in particular the Sosein of entities;
they specify configurations, structures and contents, not forms of
existence (A.Intro7). Categories specify the fundamental determinations
of being; they are principles of being (on principles see Section 4.1
below). As fundamental determinations of being, categories form the
interior of entities. In this sense, categories are immanent to the
world: they do not form a second world (A.16b). The categorial interior
of entities has a layered organization: the most fundamental categories
structure the innermost core of entities, while other categories, such
as scientific ones, add progressively more superficial layers.
Ontological categories are the lowest layer of being. They form the
network of internal, dynamic determinants and dependencies which
articulate the furniture of the world. One of the most interesting
aspects of the theory of categories is that categories do not form a
homogeneous continuum, but appear to be organized in groups (A.intro15;
see below for details). Some categories belong to all the spheres of
being, some to the entire real world, others to a specific level of
reality. The first group of categories is analyzed in detail in
Possibility and Actuality; the second group is analyzed
in The Structure of the Real World, while the third group is
analyzed in the Philosophy of Nature. The categories of the
first group are called ‘modal categories’, those of the
second group ‘fundamental categories’, and those of the
third group ‘special categories’. Fundamental categories
comprise (1) categories organized in pairs of opposites, such as
principle-concretum, mode-structure, and form-matter;
(2) level categories, such as those that distinguish
inanimate, living, psychological and spiritual beings; and (3) the
categories of intercategorial connections, or the group of
categorial laws, such as the laws of coherence,
stratification, and dependence among categories (see Section 6
below).


We come to know ontological categories through the objects that we
come to know. However, our knowledge of ontological categories is even
more provisional than our knowledge of objects. The difference between
knowing objects and knowing categories explains why ontological
categories are often confused with concepts. The problem is that
categories do not allow direct acquaintance as objects do. Concepts are
names of ontological categories, which implies that concepts are
partial, static, separate representations of items that in themselves
are both essentially dynamic and inseparable from other ontological
categories.


Like the knowledge of objects, the knowledge of ontological
categories also changes—when ontology develops, our
understanding of ontological categories develops as well, so that we
gain a deeper and better grasp of their articulation and subtleties.
Some categories have countless variations, others only a few minor
ones. The most general and schematic categories are those with the most
meager content, and they are therefore those that change less
(A.27b).


The two main aspects of categories are their generality and their
character of determination. The latter is the feature that makes them
principles. Principles exhaust themselves in this determining role.
Principles are nothing in themselves. They only exist for something
else; they are something only with respect to the concretum
that they determine and are in. Principles are nothing without
their concretum, and the concretum cannot exist
without its principles (A.1a; 6b; 16b; and elsewhere).


The ontological aspect of the categories consists in some kind of
determination of their concreta. It is apparent that
principles do not determine their concreta as causes, reasons,
or ends. Apart from denying these patently inadequate
characterizations, it is difficult to specify any positive feature of
the relation of determination, because it appears to be a sui
generis relation. A positive unfolding of the moments
characterizing the relation between principles and concreta is
a task still to be accomplished (A.5a).


Categories as principles are independent from their
concreta, not from other categories (A.11c). We will see that
principles imply one another, and that all the categories
characterizing a level of reality work together (A.15c; see Section 6
below).


Categories are far from being the only principles of entities. There
are also highly particular principles structuring specific domains of
being—such as natural laws or psychological laws—which
are concreta with respect to general categories (A.25f). There
is a gradation of principles from the most general categories to
specific real cases. Empirical laws are concreta with respect
to general principles, and they are principles with respect to
individual instances.
4. Paired categories


Paired categories are the most general structural elements
of being. As structural elements they have content, and there are
composite relations among them (A.23b). Hartmann organizes the various
pairs into two groups of six pairs, without implying that the list of
paired oppositions is definitive:

Group 1. Principle-concretum, structure-modus,
form-matter, inner-outer, determination-dependence,
quality-quantity.
Group 2. Unity-manifoldness, harmony-conflict,
opposition-dimension, discreteness-continuity, substratum-relation,
element-complex.



Neither the two groups nor their internal order constitute a
hierarchical order because there is no intrinsic order among the pairs
(A.24a). It is apparent that some of these are easier to grasp than
others. Apart from the relations within each categorial pair, there are
relations among the members of a pair and those of others (A.26a). The
collection of these external relations is also a constitutive element
of the categories, on a par with the relations internal to the
different pairs. Two cases are particularly relevant: the relation of
the different paired categories to their common concretum, and
the transverse relations among the contents of the different categories
(A.26a). To provide a sample of Hartmann’s analysis, we now
briefly describe some of the pairs (for more details see Werkmeister
1990, Poli 2011a).
4.1 The principle and its concretum

Concretum for Hartmann is what is determinate, that in
which categories are embedded as their determinations. The
concretum is not limited to real entities, but includes ideal
ones as well. Furthermore, the concretum for Hartmann is not
to be understood as limited to the individual instances of a principle
because there can be different levels of concreta. For
instance, level categories are concreta with respect to
general categories. Both the concretum and its principles are
categories.


Real categories contain all the universal determinations of their
concreta; they contain what is needed for the structure of the
concreta. A complete system of categories—not the
incomplete one we are able to grasp—completely determines its
concreta (A.4a). As natural laws exist only in the real
processes of nature and are nothing outside of them, so real categories
exist only as structural relations within the real world and are
nothing in themselves (A.16c).


The principle-concretum determination is only one among a
variety of types of determination, and in no way is it the most
relevant in the real world. In fact, each real level has its own
specific types of determination, such as the specific linear nexus
(causal, final, etc.) that unifies the phases of the processes that
unfold within a concretum. The following three moments
characterize the essence of principles, and the three corresponding
moments the essences of concreta:

The epistemological relation:
The principle is that through which the concretum is
grasped.
The first ontological relation:
The principle is the archè of the concretum,
the condition of its possibility or that on which the
concretum rests.
The second ontological relation:
The principle has unconstrained validity for all the concreta
that fall within its range (A.27c).

4.2 Modus and structure

Modus determines intermodal relations and in particular the
special form of Dasein; structure refers to the
Sosein and all the moments of its determination. All the
remaining twenty-two oppositions are articulations of structure. Like
the most general relations, the relation between principle and
concretum is a structural relation (A.24b).
4.3 Substratum and relation


All entities are determined by relations, both internal and
external. This is why every isolation is secondary and exclusively due
to acts of abstraction. Without relations, there is neither unity nor
multiplicity; form and quality depend on relations (A.28a). While
relations can have other relations as their arguments, at some point
the series of relations within relations within relations etc., must
end. Sooner or later, there must be a non-relational substratum, a
substratum that is not the result of a relational construction (A.25c).
A substratum, for Hartmann, is the argument of a possible relation. The
term ‘substratum’ implies that what is at stake is the
source or domain of an asymmetrical relation. Real categories are
constituted by material moments. Moments with the character of
substratum do not pertain to the mode of being of ideal entities
(A.4a).
4.4 Quality and quantity


The quality-quantity pair is one of those where the character of
opposition between the two constituting categories is less apparent.
Hartmann sees quantities as determinations of real being and qualities
as (within limits) determinations of the secondary sphere of knowledge
(A.39a). Three pairs of oppositions are included under quality
(positive and negative, general and individual, and identity and
difference) and three different pairs of oppositions are included under
quantity (one and many, part and whole, and finite and infinite).
4.5 Element and complex


Complexes are relational entities. (N.38c) explains that he prefers
the term ‘complex’ (Gefüge) to the
‘outworn’ (verbrauchten) term ‘system’
(System). The elements of a complex are its members, not
substrata. Elements are determined by the complex of which they are
members (A.25c). Complexes have their own type of determination; but in
each case, the determination extends across the complex’s
elements and transforms them. A complex of elements is always a complex
of relations and determinations. Elements are essentially determined by
the positions they occupy within the complex’s total series of
relations (A.33a). This explains why elements have functions within the
complex. Within a complex, what matters are not the elements, but the
relations that they maintain among themselves and with the complex.


The main difference between complex and class (Ganze; the
terms ‘whole’ and ‘totality’ are used for other
concepts, see Poli 2011a) is that a complex has some autonomy
vis-à-vis its members, while a class has no autonomy
vis-à-vis its parts. Classes depend on their parts,
while elements depend on their complex. The two dependence relations
proceed in opposite directions. This is not entirely correct, however.
To some extent, a complex depends on its elements as well. A better
formulation of the difference between classes and complexes runs as
follows: within limits, if a class loses one of its parts, the class
becomes different but the lost part remains the same; if a complex
loses one of its elements, the complex remains the same but the element
becomes different (A.33a).


An irregularly shaped stone, a grain of sand, a puddle, a mountain
are not independent complexes, but fragments and parts of much wider
formations that come into existence before them and within which they
exist as subordinate moments (A.33c).


All natural complexes are complexes of forces and processes. There is
no reason to view their elements as simple or as analogous to material
particles. If we assume that inorganic parts are elements of an
organism, this way of understanding an organism is radically different
from the idea that an organism is a dynamic complex able to survive
the continuous substitution of its elements (A.33d). The former idea
refers to a physical complex, while the latter refers to a biological
complex, and the two are authentically different complexes.  The
inside of the complex of processes that constitutes an organism is the
capacity of the complex to maintain its working conditions—what
Hartmann calls the self-determination of the organism (A.34c).
4.6 Inner and outer


Not everything has an inside, and not everything is what results
from its inner structure. Force does not need to be the exteriorization
of anything else, and effects do not need to be the exteriorizations of
causes. Only entities that have some ontic autonomy have an inside. In
nature, dynamic and organic complexes are the best-known cases. Outer
forces of lower-order entities are inner forces of higher-order
entities: for instance, outer forces of nuclei are inner forces of
atoms (A.34b). Determinations do not need to be internal to things (or
to constitute their interiors). Most real nexuses are external
determinations. Causality is the most obvious case (A.24e).


For all complexes, the inside of the complex is constituted by the
relations among its members, while the outside of the complex is
constituted by the relations between the complex and other complexes.
Every outside can become the inside of a higher-order complex
(A.25d).
5. Paired categories with positional value


We now turn from the many intricacies of paired categories to a patter
we extract that governs the behavior of most pairs.  We refer to this
as the ‘positional aspect’ of paired categories.
‘Positional’ refers to the fact that the two categories
composing a pair alternate with each other. It follows that some
aspects of the content of each category depend on the position that the
latter occupies with reference to its twin category. The simplest case
is the matter-form opposition. The guiding idea is that every form is
the form of some underlying matter, and it is the matter of some higher
form; similarly all matter is the matter of some higher form and the
form of some underlying matter (see Figure 1 below). This alternation
exemplifies the sense in which matter and form are
positional categories. Furthermore, matter and form enter into two
different ties: horizontally, matter and form are moments of an
individual being; vertically, matter and form connect different
individuals (as parts and wholes or members and collectives). Hartmann
generalizes this pattern and detects the occurrence of similar
alternations for other paired categories as well. Let us consider
Dasein and Sosein, which, as already said, can be
approximately understood as existence and determination. Here is how
Hartmann presents their positional alternation: The Dasein of
a tree is the Sosein of a forest (G.19a); without the tree the
forest would be different. Similarly, the Dasein of the branch
is the Sosein of the tree. The Dasein of the leaf is
the Sosein of the branch. The Dasein of the vein is
the Sosein of the leaf. Things can be inverted, too: the
Sosein of the leaf is the Dasein of the vein; the
Sosein of the branch is the Dasein of the leaf,
etc.


The fact that only a part of the Sosein of an entity
X contributes to the Dasein of a different entity
Y does not raise problems. The Dasein-Sosein
series has two limits: towards the first, original Dasein and
towards the last Sosein, the Sosein of the whole of
reality.


The mainstream interpretation of Dasein and Sosein
as entirely separate aspects of being depends on epistemological acts
of isolation. Only when moments are separated do independent substances
and dependent qualities appear, and it is for this reason that it seems
that qualities do not have any Dasein and, 
complementarily, that their bearers have no Sosein
(G.20c).


Figure 1.



The main difference between matter and form, on the one hand, and
Dasein and Sosein on the other, is that the latter
pair runs homogeneously through the whole of reality, while the
matter-form stratification does not run homogeneously from the bottom
to the highest layers of reality. Matter and form are always relative
to a substrate, and the matter-form stratification stops when a new
substratum appears (the section on levels of reality will explain why
this is so).
6. Levels of reality


The next group after that of paired categories is the group of the
categories of levels of reality. Like everything else, levels of
reality are characterized (and therefore distinguished) by their
categories. By definition, the categories characterizing levels of
reality are not general, in the sense that they do not pertain to
reality in its entirety, but only to specific families of real being.
On the other hand, fundamental categories are the most general and
simple categories, and for this reason they are contained in the
special categories of levels of reality (A.21b). Levels are the true
constructive framework of the real world. Whilst the latter has unity,
its unity is the unity of neither a principle nor a center. The unity
of the real world is instead provided by the order of the levels of
reality (A.52a).


Four main levels of reality are distinguished by Hartmann: the
inanimate, the biological, the psychological and the spiritual. This
last includes all historical realities (history, language, customs,
law, art, etc.). The underlying intuition is as follows: whilst the
structure and the laws of history and other spiritual processes are
different from the structure and laws of, say, inanimate beings, the
former are not in any way less real than the latter (A.20a). The same
intuition applies to the other levels as well: biological and
psychological processes are as real as any other process, and they have
their own specific groups of categories.


One of the most intriguing aspects of Hartmann’s theory of
levels of reality is the question of what kinds of relation connect the
levels to each other. From a categorial point of view, however, the
problem of what relations connect levels can be easily solved. Leaving
general categories aside, two main categorial situations can be
distinguished: (a) Being A and B are categorially different because the
categories upon which the former is founded are partially different
from the categories upon which the latter is founded, in the sense that
the latter is founded on new categories (which implies that the latter
includes at least a novum, a new category not present in the
former); (b) Being A and B are categorially different because the
categories upon which the former is founded and those upon which the
latter is founded form two entirely different (disjoint) groups of
categories. Following Hartmann, the two relations can be termed
respectively relations of super-formation (Überformung)
and super-position (Überbauung) (A.51f).


Super-formation (the type (a) form of dependence) is weaker than
super-position because it is partly grounded on already actualized
categories, those of the level below. Suffice it to consider the
super-formation between molecules and cells, i.e., between the physical
and the biological levels of reality. In this regard, one can mention
that even if organisms are unquestionably more complex than mechanisms,
the behavior of organisms is in conformity with laws of mechanics
(A.51b).


On the other hand, the psychological and spiritual levels are
different, because they are characterized by an interruption in the
categorial series and by the onset of new categorial series (relative
respectively to the psychological and spiritual levels). The relations
between the biological level and the psychological level, on the one
hand, and the relation between the psychological level and the
spiritual one, on the other, are both relations of super-position. By
way of example, the group of categories embedded in psychological
entities is different from the group of categories embedded in
biological entities. Similarly, the group of categories embedded in
spiritual entities is different from the group of categories embedded
in psychological entities.


The category of the spirit is divided into personal, objective and
objectivated spirit. Personal spirit is the spirit of the individual;
objective spirit is the living spirit of communities; and objectivated
spirit characterizes the products of spirit. The categorial moments of
personal spirit are consciousness, will, foresight and teleological
activity, liberty. None of them pass to objective spirit. There is no
consciousness apart from individual consciousness, and the same applies
to the other moments.


There are laws that are valid for all the levels: higher levels rest
on lower ones; the lower level is the conditioning one; the higher
level is independent from the lower one as to its conformation and its
laws.


When the connecting relation is a relation of super-formation, some
categories of the lower level return in the higher one. Returning
categories interact with the categories of the higher level and are, so
to speak, contaminated by them; some of their moments become different.
Higher levels are never characterized by returning categories.


Each level has its novum, the category or group of
categories that distinguish the level from the lower ones. The
novum does not derive either from the elements of the level or
from their synthesis (A.53c).


Each of the four levels of the world contains other levels,
organized according to a variety of patterns. The sublevels of the main
levels may present their own types of gradation and may work one next
to the other or one above the other as the case may be. As soon as we
pass from the four levels to their internal divisions, things become
more complex. The nexuses of determination working within the
intermediate sub-levels are even less well known than those working for
the levels. From a categorial point of view, the differences among them
may not be as rigorous and clear as the difference distinguishing the
four main levels of real being (A.20e).


Two aspects characterize super-position relations: firstly, the
categories embedded in the entities of the connected levels are
entirely different; secondly, a relation of existential dependence
links the higher level to the lower one. This latter aspect organizes
the order of the levels, so that the spiritual level is founded on the
psychological level, which in its turn is founded on the biological
one. Conversely, the biological level is the bearer of the
psychological level and the latter is the bearer of the spiritual
level.


Not all the levels are equally well-known. Indeed, for most of the
levels we know only some of their elements, possibly not the most
important ones. In fact, we do not know the central categories of the
biological level (A.51c); the same applies to the psychological and the
spiritual levels. This lack of knowledge has dramatic consequences on
our capacity correctly to grasp the concreta of the higher
levels. To see what this means, consider the case of physical
concreta, those that we know best.


The group that includes time, space, process, causality and
substance, together with the effects that they mutually exert on each
other, determines physical entities. A physical concretum
cannot be temporal without being spatial, nor can it present any of the
other determinations without being a process. A process cannot exist
without a substantial basis, and space and time are impossible without
process. Again, none of them can exist without being causally
conditioned. All the determinations that pertain to a level work
together, and together they constrain the concreta of the
level (A.46b). Nothing like this can be repeated for any of the other
levels.


The categories of higher levels have nothing to do with the
concreta of lower levels; the categories of lower levels are
not principles of the categories of higher levels (A.56c). Lower levels
are the bases of higher levels, but the categorial essence of the
former does not consist in their being the basis of the latter (A.57a).
Lower levels are stronger, their laws cannot be modified by the laws of
the higher levels (A.56b). Higher levels have richer structure and
contents. While higher concreta cannot modify the laws of
lower ones, they can use them for their own purposes. Human beings are
the most vulnerable entities, the most conditioned and dependent; but
they have knowledge, they can consciously adapt, and they can use other
entities for their own purposes (A.56b; d; 60a). This means that causal
processes can be modified, which in turn implies that categorial
structures can accept extra-causal determinations. We will say that
categorial nexuses can be super-formed (A.60f).


Hartmann acknowledges that the distinction between the psychological
and the spiritual levels is problematic (Scognamiglio 2011). However,
it appears that science provides some help here, especially with the
distinction between the objects of psychology and the objects of the
sciences of the spirit (linguistics, law, social and historical
sciences). If we look at present-day sciences, the situation appears
even clearer than in Hartmann’s time. Hartmann’s position,
however, in this case is far from being crystal-clear. Two obvious
problems arise from his analyses. Firstly, Hartmann accepts only
psychological acts and does not consider the possibility of social
acts. Furthermore, he maintains that contents as correlates of acts are
always spiritual. “Psychological” contents form personal
being; “social” contents form objective being.


Hartmann vacillates as to the delimitations of what is properly
psychological. He assigns language, consciousness, and foresight
alternatively to the psychological level or to the personal level of
the spirit. He even claims that the same acts of consciousness pertain
to both psychic and spiritual being and that only an exact
clarification of the phenomenon of acts may solve the aporia.
Two developments never considered by Hartmann are (1) the distinction
between individual and collective forms of intentionality, and (2) a
principled distinction between the complexes that are individual human
beings and the complexes that are collectivities. 


Hartmann specifies analytically the laws that govern the various
levels of reality and their connection (for a short introduction see W;
for a summary of the laws, see Poli 2011a).
7. Cosmological categories


The fourth volume of Hartmann’s quadrilogy, Philosophy of
Nature, analytically presents the categories characterizing the
two basic levels of reality (the inanimate and the animate). Today we
would say that this is more a book of philosophy of science than
ontology (it should be remembered, however, that for Hartmann science
is ontological in all its ramifications, see the Introduction above).
In the words of Hartmann, “philosophy of nature is not a
metaphysics,” in the sense that “the problems of the
philosophy of nature cannot be addressed without contact with the
results of natural science” (N.Prologue). What is even more
interesting is that the ontological theory of categories makes explicit
the limitations of the scientific understanding of reality for at least
two different reasons: firstly, because categories such as those of
space and time are not limited to physics alone (N.Prologue); secondly,
because at least some of the categories that apply to the lowest level
of the real world—such as space and time—share the
categorial moment of dimensionality, the categorial precondition for
measurement. In fact, dimensionality—and its subsequent
measurement—is the condition that makes natural science
possible. To further indicate the difference between the scientific and
the philosophical understanding of reality, Hartmann adds that
“mathematical physics deals with reality qua measurable, not with
reality as such” (N 24).


The categories of the lower stratum of real being are called
cosmological categories. We have already seen that the group including
time, space, process, causality and substance (together with the
effects that they mutually exert on each other) determines physical
entities. To give the reader an idea of Hartmann’s analysis of
cosmological categories, we summarize his treatment of space,
leaving aside the other cosmological categories. As a category, space
presents the general features characterizing every other ontological
category: to wit, it is a principle. As a principle, it does not exist.
It is therefore mandatory to distinguish the category of space from the
entities that are characterized by space as (one of) their
precondition. As a category, space does not have any kind of existence
independently of the things and processes of which space is a real
dimension (N.1c; 7d, 11b and elsewhere). Existence is a determination
that applies to things, substances, or living beings. It is things in
space that exist, not space itself (N.6a). If real space were to exist,
it would exist as a thing together with other things. Space is (one of)
the general principles of things and other existing entities. Only what
is extended in space exists spatially (N.4a). To repeat, space is not a
‘thing’ (entity, object, process), but a principle.
7.1 Categories and their basic determinations


In order to demonstrate the difference between a principle and its
instances, Hartmann introduces the distinction between space and
spatiality. While ‘space’ is the name of the category with
the same name, ‘spatiality’ is the name of the basic
determination of the entities that are in space. Things have
spatiality and are in space, they do not have space (N.7a,
N.12a).


The underlying idea is that space as a category is not a property of
things, whilst spatiality is indeed a property of things. Real space is
a categorial precondition of things. The claim that space categorially
depends on things, masses, or forces is false. If anything, things,
masses and forces categorially depend on space.


As already said, Hartmann sharply distinguishes the category of
space from what is in space. The moments characterizing space
are different from the determinations of the entities that are in
space. The attribution to space of determinations that pertain
exclusively to what may eventually be in space is a serious
category error.


Whereas things are extended in space, space in itself is neither
extended nor has extension. Space is the medium in which what is
extended extends itself (N.4a). For instance, position, distance,
movement, length, width, and height are spatial determinations. They
are in space, but space itself has no position, distance, movement,
length, width or height (N.4a). It is not space that is extended;
rather, distances are extended in space (N.4c). Extension is not a
determination of a dimension, but a determination of the entity that is
extended in a given dimension. For space, only what is extended is
properly real (N.12d).


One further issue concerning space should be mentioned, namely the
question of the curvature of the dimensions of space. What is the
essential nature of a curvature? Not dissimilarly from either Brentano
or Whitehead, Hartmann answers that the essence of a curvature is the
collection of dimensions “in which” the curvature bends. If
space dimensions bend, there must be other dimensions in which the
former dimensions bend. Mathematically speaking, however, things can be
different. From a mathematical point of view, one can introduce a
measure of curvature without resorting to other, underlying dimensions.
The internal consistency of mathematical formulas is sufficient for
mathematics. Ontology requires more (N.5b).


The problem lies deeper than the difference between Euclidean as
opposed to non-Euclidean spaces. In fact, the very distinction between
straight and curved is secondary and can itself exist only within a
dimensional framework. The real ontological issue is that dimensions
themselves are neither straight nor curved. Even more generally,
dimensions do not have spatial determinations. Dimensions, if anything,
are the categorial preconditions of all possible spatial
determinations. In this sense, dimensions are the lowest substrates of
all extensions and measures. In themselves, dimensions are neither
measures nor measurable, neither extensions nor extended (N.5b).
7.2 On the variety of spaces


Three articulations of the category ‘space’ are needed.
We shall distinguish among ‘real space’, ‘ideal
space’ (the space of geometry), and ‘intuitive space’
(the space of perceptions and cognitions). Real space is different from
both the multiplicity of ideal spaces and from intuitive space. Two
different criteria of distinction are at work here: (1) the difference
between real and ideal space follows the deeper distinction between the
spheres of real and ideal being; (2) the distinction between real and
intuitive spaces lies entirely within the sphere of real being and
concerns lower as opposed to higher strata of reality, in the sense
that real space primarily categorizes the inanimate level of reality
and intuitive space categorizes (aspects of) the psychological level of
reality. This immediately raises the question of whether other regions
of real space should be distinguished, such as biological and spiritual
(e.g., historical) spaces.


The simplest way to analyze the analogies and differences among the
three just-mentioned spaces is to proceed in the following order: ideal
space → real space → intuitive space.


A general thesis propounded by Hartmann is that ideal being is
incomplete being, and for this reason it is more general than real
being (G.38; A.31a). It immediately follows from this thesis that ideal
space is more general than real space (N.6b). It is therefore
convenient to start by presenting the main features of ideal space, and
only subsequently analyze the features of real and intuitive
spaces.


The following are the main properties of ideal space (N.5d):

Ideal space is a system of (extensive)
dimensions. Dimensions do not have space.
Ideal space is homogeneous; it is not a
system of positions. Positions are related to what occupies them in
space.
Ideal space is continuous; therefore, it
is infinitely divisible. The limit of the division of space is what
lacks extension, the point. Points are unextended; they do not occupy
space, but have positions in space. Although unextended, points are
legitimate spatial entities.
Ideal space is boundless.
Ideal space is neither finite nor
infinite. It does not have magnitude. Only something in space can be
finite or infinite. Spatial magnitudes are not magnitudes of
space, but magnitudes in space.
For this reason, there is no limit to
space, but only limits in space.
Ideal space does not possess a unit of
measurement. Only what is extended can be measured and may have units
of measurement. Units of measurement depend on the nature of the
dimension.


The first point above is the only one directly referring to
dimensions. The following aspects clarify the nature of dimensions
(N.5e):

The dimensions of ideal space are
homogeneous. Dimensions do not refer to a pre-established system of
coordinates. From the point of view of space, every system of
coordinates is arbitrary and extrinsic.
Ideal space is isometric. A geometric
figure can move and rotate without losing its shape.
Dimensions can be characterized as
reciprocally orthogonal.
The system of dimensions of ideal space
is not a system of coordinates. The latter system has its point zero,
the origin of the coordinates. A system of dimensions does not have a
point zero. Furthermore, ideal space has neither privileged direction
nor privileged points.

Point 2 above hints at a possible shortcoming in Hartmann’s theory,
in the sense that isometry is a rather strong constraint and surely
not all mathematical spaces are isometric. Furthermore, while real and
intuitive spaces may indeed be unique, the ideal declination of space
is surely plural. Furthermore, we will see that the claim at point 4
is not valid for intuitive space, which does indeed have both
privileged points and directions.


The most important outcome of the analysis of ideal space is
possibly the explicit difference between dimensions and coordinates.
Coordinates form a system of fundamental lines in space that enable the
determination of the position of points and other spatial entities. In
this sense, coordinates organize spatiality. Dimensions instead are
internal constraints of space, for they are constitutive categorial
moments of space. Distances refer only to coordinates, not to
dimensions.


As already anticipated, some of the features of ideal space pertain
to real space as well. The following are the most relevant (N.5f).
Geometry has been often construed in stages in which lines result from
the movement of points; surfaces from the movement of lines; and
volumes from the movement of surfaces. Further iterations evade our
capacity for visualization. While this dynamic image of the iteration
of movements one over the other is acceptable, it is far from being
acceptable as a description of the categorial genesis of space because
it does not respect the internal dependences of space as a category.
The real issue is that it is wrong to assume that points precede lines,
or lines surfaces, etc. Categorially speaking, what comes first is the
entire system of dimensions. Consequently, what come first are the
moments that present the same number of dimensions as the whole
dimensional system. For a three-dimensional space, volumes are
categorially first. They are the reference entities. Volumes have
position in space, surfaces have positions in volumes, lines in
surfaces, and points in lines. One can obviously abstract from these
categorial dependences and see surfaces, lines and points as directly
positioned in space. In so doing, however, it is space as a whole that
is implicitly assumed to be an overall body, which is another
categorial error. For both ideal and real (three-dimensional) space,
the correct categorial dependence is therefore volume → surface
→ line → point. We shall call this question the problem of
extension. In short, the problem of extension claims that
n-dim extended entities categorically precede n−1-dim
extended entities.


Direction is the second categorial moment of space. Everything
extended in space can extend in different directions. Here
Brentano’s concept of plerosis may help. According to
Brentano, a point within a body can move in every direction while
remaining within the body. It is therefore said that the point has full
plerosis. On the other hand, a point of the boundary of a body presents
only a partial plerosis (Brentano 1981; for a reconstruction of
Brentano’s theory of categories see Poli 2004; for a general
reconstruction of Brentano’s philosophy see Albertazzi 2005).


Thirdly, the infinity of directions implies a continuous transition
from one dimension to the next. One may call this rotation. Extension
and direction are characterized by mutually irreducible types of
magnitude and subsequent measurement. Measuring angles is different
from measuring lengths. To this difference corresponds the presence in
space of two different types of partial identity, namely identity and
similarity of figures, or identity of shape vs. identity of angles. The
former case concerns the identity of both shape and angles, while the
latter concerns the identity of angles only.


Finally, while lengths have arbitrary units of measurement, angles
have a natural unit of measurement. The change of direction in space
has its natural basis of measurement: while the subdivisions into
quadrants and the internal subdivision of a quadrant may be arbitrary,
the basis provided by the full circle is fixed.


The ontological nature of points requires some attention. Two
determinations are needed for something to be spatially real: being
in space and being extended in space. Points are in
space, but they are not extended in space. Therefore, since geometrical
points are not extended in space, they fail to be ‘real’
spatial entities. Things are more intriguing than they appear, however.
Recent mathematical developments show that the old idea of
infinitesimals still has a role to play. In fact, synthetic
differential geometry, also known as smooth analysis, shows that points
defined as nilpotent entities respect the two categorial determinations
mentioned above. A nilpotent entity x is an entity that is
something (i.e. x ≠ 0) but such that all its powers are 0
(i.e., xn = 0, for all n > 1) (for
a philosophically informed introduction to smooth analysis see Bell
1998).


Hartmann also notes that the claim according to which quantum
mechanics implies that quantum processes are discontinuous confuses
space with energy. Since the categories of space and energy are
different, the problem of spatial quanta does not arise. Furthermore,
the cosmos should not be confused with cosmic space. Space neither
augments nor diminishes. Here Hartman treats physicists rather harshly,
claiming that “physics has the guilt for all these incoherencies,
because it ignores the fundamental categorial relations”
(N.6d).


Real space has no magnitude, neither finite nor infinite (N.6e). If
space were extension, it would either be finite or infinite. But space
is not extension. If anything, it is the system of dimensions “in
which” something has extension. It is not space that is extended;
bodies, masses, distances and fields of force are extended, not space.
Similarly, space has no magnitude; only what is in space has magnitude
(N.6e).


Most of these discussions—whether space is finite or infinite,
whether it is or it is not void, whether its dimensions are straight
or curved, whether there are minimal spatial units—almost
invariably result in serious categorial errors because space is
usually imagined as if it were a spatial thing (N.6e, note).


As far as ideal space is concerned, there is no need to think that
the various spatial formations are in different parts of space:
geometrical bodies penetrate one another without resistance. Real
bodies, though, cannot penetrate one another. This is, however, a law
of matter, not a law of space. Impenetrability may be a property of
what is extended in space, not of the system of dimensions that
constitute space. This does not imply that real space has the character
of Newtonian space. Real space is not determined by what is in space.
Real space determines only the species of what is singularly spatial,
not the ontological moment of singularity (N.7c).


Finally, space is not the union of what is in space. Behind this
issue there lies the idea of viewing space as if it were time,
interpreting spatial coexistence as contemporaneity. This is inexact
because space is neither the being outside one another nor the union of
the entities that are in space; space is their shared dimensional
condition (N.5g).


The following moments specify the main aspects of the dimensions of
real space (N.6g):

The dimensions of real space are
homogeneous.
Real space is isometric. Magnitudes move
from one dimension to the next without alterations.
Dimensions are orthogonal. Through their
orthogonality, dimensions are connected together.
Real space is not a system of
coordinates, because it is neither a system of places nor a system of
dimensions. Space is that in which dimensions and places are.


So far we have dealt with preliminary, descriptive, clarifications.
We shall now address the basic problem of space as a category. The
following are the basic moments of real space (N.6d):

Real space is homogeneous.
Real space is continuous.
Real space is infinitely divisible.
Real space is boundless without being
extended. Only what is in space can have extension.

Furthermore, the following are the main properties of being
determined in space (N.7c):

Space has neither magnitude nor measure.
Similarly, space is neither big nor small. Distances between nebulae
are not big, nor are the distances between atomic nuclei small.
Physical orders of magnitude are neither big nor small. The relativity
of magnitudes concerns what is spatial, not space itself.
Real space lacks a basis to which the
positions of bodies can make reference. In real space there are neither
absolute positions nor absolute places. All the positions and all the
places are relative to each other. If space had limits, it would have a
centre and the latter could become the zero point of a system of
coordinates.
Every direction in real space is relative
to other directions.


Movement in real space follows the same criteria. If space were a
system of coordinates, movement would be absolute. A few
‘simple’ relativity issues ensue from the categorial nature
of space (N.7d):

Direction and velocity are spatially
relative.
The same body simultaneously moves in
different directions and with different velocities; these different
movements are authentically spatial movements and do not depend on our
perceptions.
What applies to straight movement is
valid for rotation too.


By way of a summary, real space is a condition of movement, but not
a determination of movement as to either its direction or velocity.


Besides the categorial errors already seen in regard to ideal and
real spaces, the understanding of intuitive space suffers from further
errors of this kind. The first major issue to be addressed is the
tension between the non-spatial nature of consciousness and the
possibility itself of intuitive space. Intuitive space is a space of
consciousness, which in itself is a non spatial entity (N.7f; 8b).
Mental imagery is not spatial, but space is in the images of mental
imagery. While contemporary cognitive science knows the problem well
(Tym 1990), Hartmann’s capacity clearly to see the problem long
before the birth of cognitive science is remarkable. His analysis of
the problem follows the same basic categorical distinctions that we
have already seen: properly speaking, what is intuitive is not space
but rather the objects in it. Intuitive space is the form of contents,
the way in which external objects are presented to the mind (N.8a).
Contents are intuitive, not (real) objects. Furthermore, space as a
form of intuition has many variations connected to the variations of
the knowing consciousness. It follows that intuitive space is not a
kind of real space, but a category of the contents of consciousness
(N.8d). The following summary lists the most important aspects shared
by real and intuitive space (N.9a).

Both real and intuitive space are unique.
Intuitive space is unequivocally Euclidean. Non-Euclidean space is not
intuitive and can be thought only in abstracto.
Intuitive space is three-dimensional.
Dimensions of intuitive space have the
character of substrates. In the end, they are substrates of extensive
magnitudes.
Intuitive space is neither the substance
nor accident of intuited objects; it is what in which intuited objects
appear extended, configured and localized.
Dimensions are orthogonal to each
other.
The magnitude of extension and the
magnitude of the angle cannot be reduced to each other.
Intuitive space represents in the
clearest way how spatial objects are external to and connected with
each other.


Today, the claim that intuitive space is “unequivocally
Euclidean” (repeated in N.5b) is much less clear than it was at
the time when Hartmann wrote Philosophy of Nature. Very recent
experimental results raise doubts about the Euclidean characterization
of intuitive space, at least as far as visual space is concerned; see
Koenderink et al. 2010 for details.


The following are the main differences between real and intuitive
space:

Intuitive space is not as homogeneous as
real space. The position occupied by the subject makes a difference
(N.9b).
Intuitive space is not continuous
(N.9b).
Intuitive space is not bounded by limits
that can be indicated. All the limits that can be indicated are limits
within space, not limits of space. The best we can say is that
intuitive space is finite within evanescent limits. Thinking can
proceed to the infinite, but only in abstracto (N.9c).
Intuitive space always has a horizon
(9c).
Intuitive space always has a particular
finite magnitude (9d). This latter moment is in patent contrast with
real space, which has neither limits nor magnitudes. From this follows
an explicit categorial incongruence of intuitive space, which is both a
spatial principle and a spatial sector (9c).


Furthermore (9e):

The homogeneity and isometricity of
intuitive space is not absolute. Visual space, for instance, shows that
there are differences between vertical and horizontal extensions. This
is a datum well known from perception studies, see Ebbinghaus 1902;
Jäger and Grasso 1991; Albertazzi 2006.
Intuitive space has a system of natural
coordinates. The subject is the natural center of intuitive space.
Whilst every change in real space is
relative, the same is not true of intuitive space. Similarly, while in
real space magnitude, position, distance and direction are relative, in
intuitive space they are all connected to movement, to both the
movements of objects and the movements of the subject.



The thesis has frequently been propounded that there are different
types of space: the space of physical forces, the vital space of
organisms, and the space of historical events (N.3d). Here Hartmann
denounces the occurrence of a major ontological error.


In fact, for Hartmann the above-mentioned spaces are not different
species of the genus space but domains
internal to the unique real space. The source of the error is the
attribution to space of properties that characterize spatial entities.
It is the entities that are physical, biological, or social, not space
that is separated into different subspecies (N.3d). Levels of reality
have their own categories, and a general category, within the various
levels, interacts with different groups of level categories (Poli
2011a). This applies to space as well (N.7e). However, it should be
borne in mind that the source of the variation lies primarily in the
concreta. The variation is first of all a variation of
spatiality, not of space itself. Real space—with all its
fundamental categorial moments—remains the same.


The case of the space of concepts is different from the other
mentioned subdomains of space because conceptual spaces pertain to
intuitive space, which is not a subdomain of real space (N.3d).
Relevant in the case of intuitive space are not the dimensions of
things, but the dimensions of representations of things.
8. On the variety of determining moments


There are many real moments without corresponding ideal moments. The
most obvious case is represented by causality. If causality were
nothing more than a law, it would be entirely legitimate to view the
law of causality as an essence and therefore as an ideal entity.
According to Hartmann, however, causality is the nexus that connects
the phases of a process, the dynamic series of the production of the
stages one from the other within the unity and the irreversibility of
the process. Whatever kinds of determination and dependence are valid
for ideal entities, causality is not one of them (A.4b).


The real sphere contains two different types of determinations: the
hierarchical type of determination—the genus-species
structure—is shared with the ideal sphere, while the horizontal
type of determination connects individuals with individuals and in
particular the successive stages of real processes one to another. All
the moments resulting from the hierarchical nature of
categories—including their moments having the character of
substratum and all the dimensional moments—will never exhaust
the fullness of an individual being. A second series of moments is
needed: the
horizontal series articulating the totality of the actual
reality (A.31b). This implies that the principle-concretum
type of determination is far from being the only determination shaping
the whole of reality; a second type of determination—of a
non-categorial nature—should be included: a determination of
the concretum-concretum type (A.6b, 44c). The ideal
sphere does not contain the latter type of determination.


The various causal chains do not unfold as isolated and mutually
irrelevant processes. On the contrary, they influence each other in the
totality of the transversal nexus that connects them.


Substance is another case of a real determination without
corresponding ideal moments. Hartmann views substance as that which
remains constant through changes, what in the flow of events resists
their succession. It follows that only in the real world can there be
substances. Even more importantly, the category of substance
presupposes time and the dynamic flow of events. Again, ideal being
does not contain any of this. In short, temporality is what radically
distinguishes real categories from ideal categories. The interplay of
change and persistence, causing and being caused by, exists only within
the flow of time.


Apart from time, individuality is the second moment distinguishing
real being from ideal being. Everything ideal is general, and
everything real is individual. The latter must be assumed in the most
rigorous sense: everything real is unique and it exists only once.
There are things that we are unable to discern. We may not be able to
distinguish one real entity from the next, but it would be an error to
take the limitations of our perceptual and cognitive capacities as if
they were universal laws of the sphere of real being.


The general in reality is real only “in” individuals
(A.37e). While the general is a dominant category in the ideal sphere
and a subordinate category in the sphere of the real, individuality is
a category of the sphere of real being only. In the realm of essences
there is no individual.
9. Hartmann’s Ethics


Hartmann’s ethics includes both a general theory of values and a
penetrating description of the experience of values. Below, we
summarize some of the basic aspects of Hartmann’s ethical theories,
namely (1) the use of ontology as a device for understanding values;
(2) the two-dimensional structure of values; (3) values as demand; and
(4) the structural articulation of character. The recent Kelly 2011a,b
and Kinneging 2011 discuss further aspects of Hartmann ethics.
9.1 Ontology and ethics


Values, for Hartmann, are ideal entities. Given the thesis that
there are at least two main types of ideal entities, namely
mathematical entities and values, the question arises: what else, apart
from atemporality, is shared by the entities included in the sphere of
ideal being. In fact, it does not seem at first sight that sets and
values have much in common, apart from their both being atemporal
entities. On closer inspection, however, something further emerges.
Hartmann consider the following three general features.

The overall geography of both mathematical entities and values is
unknown. The constant efforts of the best minds and the accumulated
experience of humankind have been able to explore some of their
territories, and partially to map their landmarks. The overall shape of
mathematics and the overall shape of the territory of values, however,
are far from being charted.
Both the region of mathematical entities and the region of values
extend beyond the boundaries of real being. Many mathematical
structures are far from being exemplified in reality and some will
never be. The same patently applies to values.
Both mathematics and ethics claim universality. This is part of
their nature as ideal beings. On the other hand, neither mathematics
nor ethics are able to capture—from their own point of
view—the whole of reality. There is no single mathematical model
of the world, and there are no good reasons to believe that there will
ever be one. Similarly, there is no single ethical understanding of
the whole of human experience and there are no good reasons to believe
that there will ever be one. This last issue is of especial importance
from an ontological point of view, because it shows that the
universality of both mathematics and ethics is different from the
universality of ontology (Poli 2009a,b).

9.2 The two-dimensional structure of values


Values belong to different families, and not just in the sense that,
say, aesthetic values are different from ethical values. A number of
further subdivisions can be made within each family.


As to the organizing principles of values, two of them seem of
especial importance: that of strength and that of height. The strength
of a value indicates the gravity of its violation. The height of a
value expresses the merit deriving from its fulfillment. These two
principles operate in opposite directions: the strongest values are
also the lowest values, whilst the highest values are the least strong
ones. Usually, lower values are simpler (that is, they possess less
intuitable content) while higher values are more complex.


The laws of strength and height have significant consequences, the
two most important of which are the following:

Violating a lower value
is a more serious evil than violating a higher value.
Fulfilling a higher
value is a greater good than fulfilling a lower value.

In Hartmann’s words, “Sinning against lower values is
ignominious, shameful, revolting, but their fulfillment only reaches
the level of decency, without rising above it. Offending against higher
values, by contrast, does indeed have the character of moral failure,
but nothing of the directly degrading, while fulfillment of these
values may have something uplifting, liberating, indeed thrilling about
it” (ET2.28e). By way of example: “heroism warrants
admiration, but a lack of heroism arouses neither contempt nor
indignation”. On the other hand, whilst trustworthiness warrants
respect, “a lack of trustworthiness warrants contempt or even
indignation” (ET2.63d).


Offending against life is a grave offence, whilst respecting it has
very little merit. But the fulfillment of spiritual goods is a merit
much greater than the merit corresponding to respect for more
elementary goods. Those who violate lower goods are wicked; but the
reverse does not hold: a person who violates higher goods, someone who
fails to fulfill them, “is not on that account a bad man; his
conduct threatens no one; it merely lacks the higher moral
content” (ET.63f).


It is also well known from basic moral experience that respect for
more elementary goods is often the condition for acceding to higher
goods.


Structuring by levels is important, not only because it furnishes us
with the tectonic laws governing values, but also because it provides
us with criteria with which to distinguish, at least in some cases,
authentic values from bogus ones. If the architecture of values is
based on levels of dependence, then the authentic elevation of value is
also divided into levels; it develops through intrinsic stages from the
lower values to the higher ones. Although the situation may still lack
full theoretical analysis, it is well known in practice. A person whose
behavior is oriented to a higher value, but who does not simultaneously
respect the values that support it, is structurally discordant. The
higher values to which s/he refers are not credible. Loving with
distrust or giving with cowardice are not authentically virtuous
behaviours (ET2.63f). Values are constructed step by step from the most
elementary levels upwards.
9.3 Values as Demands


Values as ideal entities do not change. What may change is our
access to values. The individual capacity to “see” values
changes with age and axiological maturity. Groups and communities
change by following different guiding values. This latter case shows
how historical and social conditions are at work in shaping the
territory of accessible values.


The interplay between individuals and the groups to which they
belong finds moments of stability in the mutually adjusted selection of
shared values. This is one of the reasons why the firmament of values
“cannot be peopled by passing meteors, whose place and brightness
changes rapidly: its contents must be constant, and must have
registered themselves slowly on an exposed sensitive
plate” (Findlay, 1961, p. 209).


Repeated acts of valuation tend to produce stable or fixed orders of
individual and social preferences, whose guiding values press to be
realized. These values have the ontological nature of demands. They do
not work as laws of reality, which in fact comprises both values and
disvalues. The demands made by values work in a twofold manner
according to the already mentioned laws of the strength and height of
values. New visions and corresponding behaviors can be and usually are
rejected, or they may occasionally be accepted and contribute to
behaviors shaped by different values.


A more developed understanding of values may require consideration
of further laws besides those of the strength and height of values. We
find higher forms of value difficult to achieve. They resist our
efforts. As far as values are concerned, Christianity’s most
important result has possibly been the discovery that the path to the
highest values entails frustration and pain.


Providing that this understanding of values is correct, the
consequences that derive from it are of the utmost importance. If the
path to the highest values does indeed entail frustration and pain,
this means that the empirical realization of higher values is flanked
by disvalues as one of its structural features.


The possible presence of disvalues embedded in the empirical
realization of values (at least of the highest ones) immediately
requires specification of the correct proportion between values and
implied disvalues. By way of example, there is neither merit nor
justification in risking one’s life to rescue a lady’s
pocket-handkerchief (the example is Meinong’s). More seriously,
for each value, the proportion between values and implied disvalues
constrains the degree of disvalue that can be accepted as correct.
There are cases in which “it is more meritorious to realize a
lower value at a given level of difficulty … than to realize a
higher one” (Findlay, 1961, p. 381).
9.4 The structural articulation of character


It is widely agreed that values are accessed through emotional or
egological acts. These are structured in levels of depths, ranging from
acts conveying more superficial information to ones conveying more
intimate information. Phenomenologists distinguish three different
levels (Poli 2009a,b). The most external (superficial) layer concerns
information about how we sense our body. Feeling cold,
warm, just ok are some of the most typical cases. Let
us call them sensorial feelings. The next layer comprises
information about our moods. Feeling bored, excited,
relaxed, angry, and exhausted make up only a
tiny section of the rich and highly articulated field of moods.
Feelings pertaining to this second group are typically twofold: they
have a more bodily-oriented side and a more psychologically-oriented
one. By default, they merge, but they may diverge and their
manifestation may follow different routes according to a variety of
conditioning factors, from social to individual. Let us call this
second group of feelings mood feelings. The third and
deepest-lying layer is our personal style, the way in which we react to
what happens to us. Suppose that something hurts you. You may
resist the pain, tolerate it, combat it,
accept it, or even enjoy it. Let us denote this third
group of feelings with the term character.


A character is defined by a number of different parameters, each of
which ranges from a maximum to a minimum (ET2.36):

The first dimension
varies from activity to passivity. By ‘activity’ is meant
stance-taking or commitment; by ‘passivity’, indifference,
inertia or apathy.
The second dimension centres on the opposition between a
person’s strength and weakness. Strength and activity are not
synonymous: also passivity may be strong. The stance-taking associated
with activity may be strong or weak; and inertia may be strong in the
sense of stubborn.
The third dimension ranges from the capacity to suffer to the
incapacity to suffer. The positive valence assigned to the capacity to
suffer is signaled by the patent negativity of the incapacity to
suffer. The former consists of resistance against the adversities of
life, the tempering of a person’s character through suffering;
the latter consists of inner fragility.
The fourth dimension is anticipation: a more or less broad vision of
the future to which the person may accede. In this case, the opposition
takes the common-sense form of the difference between a broad and
narrow outlook on the future.
The fifth dimension is the ability to select goals and to find the
means with which to achieve them. We may call this ability
“purposefulness”.



Put slightly differently, and by way of summary:

Openness/closure towards the environment
and other agents (no agent can be either entirely closed or entirely
open, for the agent has a more or less porous boundary; openness means
taking a stance or being committed; closure means indifference,
inactivity or apathy).
Self-modification (capacity of the agent
to modify its own settings; an agent may be open and have a very low
capacity for self-modification, or vice versa; 1 and 2 are different
dimensions).
Other-modification (capacity of the
environment or other agents to modify the setting of the agent; having
a character means that one’s modification by others should be
infrequent).
Horizon (having broad or narrow views;
the window an agent has upon his future can be more or less wide).
Purposiveness (ability to set oneself
purposes, to choose goals and find the means to achieve them).


A character is defined by the position it assumes along each of
these dimensions. Each dimension consists of a continuum ranging from
an extreme of value to an extreme of disvalue. Furthermore, each
dimension also has points of breakdown where values change directly
into disvalues (different from disvalues as complements). Consider the
capacity to suffer. It is true that suffering tempers the character, so
that the person is able to achieve higher thresholds of value. However,
if the suffering exceeds the ability to withstand it, the person is
destroyed and the suffering changes directly into disvalue. Note that
the various dimensions are different but not orthogonal: indeed, a
modification in one dimension may reverberate on the other
dimensions.


Furthermore, behind the structure just outlined there lies the
choice of certain values that orient the person from within. These
choices concern, for instance, the options between altruism and egoism
or between individualism and solidarism.


The two laws of the height and strength of values work together and
constrain the relation of preference. The expanded version of the
relation of preference is then: A is preferable to B as to their
heights, or as to their strengths. The asymmetry between strength and
height results in two different articulations of the relation of
preference, which we can respectively distinguish as the SH-kind of
preference (Strength first, Height after) and the HS-kind of preference
(Height first, Strength after). SH-preference states: for values at a
given level of strength, it is correct to prefer those that are higher.
HS-preference states instead: for values at a given level of height, it
is correct to prefer those that are stronger. Furthermore, if the third
dimension represented by the effort or pain involved in achieving a
value is included, the degree of effort involved for each of the two
articulations of the relation of preference should be considered, and
the appropriate balance should be sought between levels of effort and
the height of the value pursued.
10. Aesthetics


Hartmann discusses aesthetic issues in different places (including P
and G) and was working on his masterly Aesthetics (AE) during
the last years of his life. As with the case of ethics, one of the main
features of Hartmann’s aesthetics is the close interplay with
ontology. In particular, levels of reality have a bearing on the
problem of the levels of a work of art too. The theme of the aesthetic
object is a particular subdivision of ontology—a subdivision,
moreover, which may shed light on several aspects of ontology. In the
Introduction to Foundations of Ontology, Hartmann asserts that
“the problematic [of art] belongs to the area of problems in
which the ontological problem is rooted.”


Hartmann intentionally focuses his aesthetics on the problem of the
aesthetic object. He sets aside investigation of the correlated acts.
In his words, “the aesthetics of today still concentrates mainly
on analysis of the act, and this is why the stratification
relationship, although it has often been noted, is not yet familiar to
it” (P.47a). Keeping the focus on the object is therefore
mandated by the theory of levels of reality (see Section 6 above).


Hartmann distinguishes two levels in the aesthetic object, which he
calls the foreground level and the background level. The foreground
level comprises the real, concrete and sensible dimensions of the
object, everything that is independent of the presence of a subject
who addresses the object and seeks to understand it. The background
levels vary with the kinds of content the foreground level lets
appear. The background level exists only for the subject who grasps
it. This level is typically organized into many distinct
sub-levels. Following Hartmann, we may therefore state that
“according to its manner of being, the artistic object
necessarily has two levels” (those of foreground and
background), while “according to the overall structure of its
content—that is to say, according to its inner form (i.e. the
background level)—it has many levels” (AE; Poli 1998). A
theory of this kind obviously has two critical points: first, the
problem of how the relationship between the two levels is articulated;
second, the problem of how the relationship among the sublevels of the
background level is articulated. In the former case, Hartmann talks of
a “relationship of manifestation” on the basis of
which—as has been pointed out on innumerable occasions—the 
foreground (i.e. the matter of the object) imposes constraints on
the background.


More interesting is that part of the theory which concerns the
typical stratification of the background. Different aesthetic objects
display different articulations of the background level. In the case of
literary works, for example, Hartmann distinguishes at least six
different levels for more sophisticated genres like epic narratives or
novels, while other genres have fewer levels. This applies to lyrical
poems, for example, whose expressiveness is articulated into fewer
levels because of the constraints imposed on the admissible expressive
forms.


Hartmann cites the portrait as an example of a visual aesthetic
object. He distinguishes the following levels in its background level:
the three-dimensional space in which the subject of the portrait and
some elements of the setting appear; the movement of the
subject’s apparent corporeality; the subject’s character;
his or her individual idea, or the idea that the person portrayed has
of him/herself; the symbolic, or the universal content manifested by
the portrait.
11. Conclusion


This entry has only scratched the surface of Hartmann’s theory of
categories. Even from such a preliminary and mainly reconstructive
presentation of his theory, however, it is evident that it is a
comprehensive and rich theory of categories. To conclude, we
note some of the problems that require discussion.


The overall architecture of the theory of levels of reality, or the
question of the relations among the biological, the psychological and
spiritual levels requires closer examination. Put briefly, if the
psychological level ends up including what psychology and cognitive
sciences acknowledge as psychological phenomena, the dividing line
between the psychological and the spiritual levels should be located
elsewhere, and what Hartmann calls personal spirit will become the
higher layer of the psychological level. Three comments are in order:
first, this way of addressing the issue is entirely concordant with
Hartmann’s constant respect for what science can teach a
philosopher; second, the reorganization of the boundary between the two
levels does not raise major problems because all the relevant relations
are of the super-position type; third, the reorganization suggested
enables construction of an entirely different architecture of the three
levels, one that passes from a strictly linear organization (one level
after the other) to a non-linear architecture such as the one suggested
by application of the one-many dichotomy: the (newly defined)
psychological and spiritual levels super-pose together from their
underlying existential basis; furthermore, they super-pose each other.
This triangular architecture is a major departure from
Hartmann’s original framework.


The question of ‘complex formations’. Whilst Hartmann
asserts that human beings, collectivities and history are stratified
formations (e.g., A.55a), he never discusses the nature of these
complex formations in detail. Indeed, the multidimensional, rich
categorial framework discussed by Hartmann does not appear to have a
proper place for the category of whole—what he calls
‘formation’. Complex wholes are complex (or stratified)
formations. In this regard, Hartmann’s ontology is in need of
further developments. He acknowledges that formations are the real
furniture of the world, and he occasionally interprets levels through
them. For instance, he does so when he claims that psychological life
is not to be understood as the internal conscious and unconscious world
together with its acts and their contents, but that it should rather be
seen as a single complex together with corporeal life and the physical
conditions of life. The same is true for the spiritual level: the life
of spirit is not only ethos, language, art, knowledge, etc.;
it is also a single complex possessing the psychological life of acts,
organic life, and the physical conditions within the individuals that
are its subjects. Hartmann also states that higher levels do not
present themselves as soul and spirit, but as human being and
collectivity, or as human being and history (A.52c). To emphasize the
importance of these passages, Hartmann adds that “This vision is
absolutely necessary”. On the other hand, however, Hartmann is
unclear about how complex formations should be categorized. On
occasion, he denies that defining levels according to the complex
formations in which they appear is the correct strategy, because the
essences of levels are different from the essences of formations, and
the limits of levels and formations would collide with each other
(A.20c). Hartmann also emphasizes that working with formations, rather
than with categories, fails properly to articulate the differences
among the levels of being (A.55a). While these latter claims are
entirely acceptable, the problem is why formations should not have
their own categorial moments. Furthermore, while the categorial study
of levels is needed for analytical distinctions among their moments and
the relations among them, the categorial study of formations helps us
understand how complex formations are synthetically constituted. The
theory of categories is, for Hartmann, restricted to the relations of
stratification and to the levels of being as such. It does not deal
with the gradation of the total formations of thing, living being,
human being, and collectivity. Hartmann’s attitude oscillates
between the hope that the problem of complex formations will be solved
once the theory of categories has been completed, and the fear that the
problem of how heterogeneous levels can be so tightly connected within
a human being—or within a collectivity, a people, or history,
or works of art—is a major metaphysical problem that will
forever escape ontology’s capacity to solve it (A.52c). As a
matter of fact, he developed the first parts of a theory of complex
formations in the final chapters of his Philosophy of Nature
and returned to the topic in the Aesthetics, his last book,
left unfinished and published only posthumously. From these analyses it
emerges that room should be created, within the categorial framework of
a well-elaborated ontology, for the category of complex formations or
wholes—as I prefer to call them—and that specification
should be made of types of wholes and the forms of synthesis that
operate on them. In fact, Hartmann did some preliminary work in this
direction with his category of complex. From the unfinished state of
the theory of complexes it is difficult to see whether the category of
complex formations should be treated on a par with all the many other
categories or assume a role as important as the one performed by the
theory of levels of reality.