Omnipotence is maximal power. Maximal greatness (or perfection)
includes omnipotence. According to traditional Western theism, God is
maximally great (or perfect), and therefore is omnipotent. Omnipotence
seems puzzling, even paradoxical, to many philosophers. They wonder,
for example, whether God can create a spherical cube, or make a stone
so massive that he cannot move it. Is there a consistent analysis of
omnipotence? What are the implications of such an analysis for the
nature of God?
 
1. Introductory Preliminaries

Philosophical reflection upon the notion of omnipotence raises many
puzzling questions about whether or not a consistent notion of
omnipotence places limitations on the power of an omnipotent agent.
Could an omnipotent agent create a stone so massive that that agent
could not move it? Paradoxically, it appears that however this
question is answered, an omnipotent agent turns out not to be
all-powerful. Could such an agent have the power to create or overturn
necessary truths of logic and mathematics? Could an agent of this kind
bring about or alter the past? Is the notion of an omnipotent agent
other than God an intelligible one? Could two omnipotent
agents coexist? If there are states of affairs that an omnipotent
agent is powerless to bring about, then how is the notion of
omnipotence intelligibly to be defined? Moreover, an obstacle to
traditional Western theism arises if it is impossible for God to be
morally perfect and omnipotent. If an omnipotent God is powerless to
do evil, then how can he be omnipotent? Rational theology seeks an
analysis of the concept of omnipotence that resolves the puzzles and
apparent paradoxes that surround this concept. If the notion of
omnipotence were found to be unintelligible, or incompatible with
moral perfection, then traditional Western theism would be false.

According to some philosophers, omnipotence should be understood in
terms of the power to perform certain tasks, for instance, to
kill oneself, to make 2+2=42+2=42+2=4, or to make oneself non-omniscient.
However, in recent philosophical discussion, omnipotence has been
analyzed in terms of the power to bring about certain possible
states of affairs, understood as propositional entities which
either obtain or fail to obtain (Rosenkrantz & Hoffman 1980; Flint
& Freddoso 1983; and Wierenga 1989). Because we believe that it
can yield an adequate analysis of omnipotence, we take this latter
approach in what follows.

One sense of ‘omnipotence’ is, literally, that of having
the power to bring about any state of affairs whatsoever,
including necessary and impossible states of affairs. Descartes seems
to have had such a notion (Meditations, Section 1). Yet,
Aquinas and Maimonides held the view that this sense of
‘omnipotence’ is incoherent. Their view can be defended as
follows. It is not possible for an agent to bring about an
impossible state of affairs (e.g., that there is a
shapeless cube), since if it were, it would be possible for an
impossible state of affairs to obtain, which is a contradiction (see
Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, Ia, 25, 3; and Maimonides,
Guide for the Perplexed, Part I, Ch. 15). Nor is it possible
for an agent to bring about a necessary state of affairs
(e.g., that all cubes are shaped). It is possible for an
agent, aaa, to bring about a necessary state of affairs,
sss, only if possibly, (1) aaa brings about sss,
and (2) if aaa had not acted, then sss would have failed
to obtain. Because a necessary state of affairs obtains whether or not
anyone acts, (2) is false. As a consequence, it is impossible for an
agent to bring about either a necessary or an impossible state of
affairs. Many philosophers accept the principle that if an agent has
the power to bring about a state of affairs, then this
entails that, possibly, the agent brings about that state of
affairs. If this principle is correct, then the foregoing
absolute sense of ‘omnipotence’ is incoherent.
Among contemporary philosophers, Earl Conee (1991) rejects this
principle in order to defend the view that an omnipotent being would
have the power to bring about any state of affairs whatsoever.

A second sense of ‘omnipotence’ is that of
maximal power, meaning just that no being could
exceed the overall power of an omnipotent being. It does not follow
that a maximally powerful being can bring about any state of
affairs, since, as observed above, bringing about some such states of
affairs is impossible. Nor does it follow that a being with maximal
power can bring about whatever any other agent can bring
about. If aaa can bring about sss, and bbb
cannot, it does not follow that bbb is not overall
more powerful than aaa, since it could be that bbb can
bring about more states of affairs than aaa can, rather than
the other way around. For the remainder of this entry the discussion
concentrates on this comparative sense of
‘omnipotence’ as maximal power. Within the context of that
discussion, it will be assumed that it is not possible for an
agent to have the power to bring about any state of affairs
whatsoever.

That a being is omnipotent just provided that its overall power is
not possibly exceeded by any being may be adopted as the most
general definition of omnipotence in this sense (Hoffman &
Rosenkrantz 2010). Still, the availability of a more fine-grained and
informative analysis, directly applicable to the full range of problem
cases, is highly desirable. A number of prominent proposals for such a
more fine-grained and informative analysis of omnipotence will be
discussed later. 

Power should be distinguished from ability. Power is
ability plus opportunity: a being which has maximal ability but which
is prevented by circumstances from exercising those abilities would
not be omnipotent. Nothing could prevent an omnipotent agent from
exercising its powers, if it were to endeavor to do so.

In the light of the foregoing, is it possible that there be a
plurality of coexistent omnipotent agents? Among contemporary
philosophers of religion, Richard Swinburne (2008) holds that a
plurality of coexistent omnipotent agents is possible.

If a plurality of coexistent omnipotent agents were even possible,
then possibly, at a time, ttt, some omnipotent agent,
xxx, while retaining its omnipotence, endeavors to move a
feather, and at ttt, another omnipotent agent, yyy,
while retaining its omnipotence, endeavors to keep that feather
motionless. Intuitively, in this case, neither xxx nor
yyy would affect the feather as to its motion or rest. Thus, in
this case, at ttt, xxx would be powerless to move the
feather, and at ttt, yyy would be powerless to keep the
feather motionless! But it is absurd to suppose that an omnipotent
agent could lack the power to move a feather or the power to keep it
motionless. Therefore, neither xxx nor yyy is
omnipotent. This line of reasoning appears to reduce the notion of a
plurality of coexistent omnipotent agents to absurdity. If such a
reductio ad absurdum is sound, then a plurality of coexistent
omnipotent agents is impossible.

It might be replied that while neither of the omnipotent agents in
question brings about what it endeavors to bring about, each of them
can do so, since each of them has the ability to do
so; they fail to bring about what they endeavor to bring about only
because they lack the opportunity to do so. But earlier
observations about the difference between power and ability and how
each of them is related to omnipotence entail that omnipotence should
be understood in terms of the ability plus opportunity sense
of ‘can’. If those earlier observations are correct, then,
since neither of the omnipotent agents under discussion can
do [in the ability plus opportunity sense] what it endeavors to do,
the possible reply under discussion does not succeed.

Or it might be replied that the possible pair(s) of coexistent
omnipotent agents would necessarily avoid stalemates of the
foregoing sort in virtue of the members of each pair resembling one
another in some respect. This reply seems suspiciously ad
hoc. It appears that the members of any possible pair of
genetically identical human twins could be stalemated, e.g., in an
arm-wrestling match. Why would not the same be true of a pair of
similar coexistent omnipotent agents? It might be answered that each
of the members of any possible pair of coexistent omnipotent agents
would be necessarily omniscient and necessarily morally perfect.
Moreover, if two omnipotent agents are necessarily
omniscient, they won’t disagree about any
fact, and if they are necessarily morally perfect, they
won’t disagree about what is morally required
or about whether they want so to act. It might then be
inferred that any states of affairs that a pair of coexistent
omnipotent agents would endeavor to bring about at a given time are
compatible. In the literature, the controversial social
trinitarianism of Richard Swinburne (2008), implies that the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are a trio of coexistent
omnipotent agents each of whom is necessarily omniscient and
necessarily morally perfect.

However, one might object to the preceding reply on the grounds that
if there is a pair of coexistent necessarily omniscient and
necessarily morally perfect omnipotent agents, then there is a pair of
incompatible contingent states of affairs each of which is
morally optional for these agents, that is, neither morally
prohibited nor morally required for them. The objection then proceeds
as follows. It may be assumed that that the feather moves at
t and that the feather remains motionless at t are a
pair of states of affairs of the sort in question. Apparently, also,
possibly, under such circumstances, the state of affairs that the
omnipotent agents in question are stalemated in their endeavors to
affect the feather as to its motion or rest at t is morally
optional for those agents. Analogously, in an arm-wrestling match
between A1&A2A1&A2A_1 \amp A_2,
possibly, the states of affairs that A1A1A_1 wins
the match, that A2A2A_2 wins the match, and
that A1&A2A1&A2A_1 \amp A_2 are stalemated in the
match are morally optional for A1A1A_1 and
A2A2A_2. In the light of the foregoing observations, it
appears that if it is possible that there are omnipotent agents of the
sort in question, then possibly, one of them endeavors to make the
feather move at ttt, while the other endeavors to keep it
motionless at ttt, even given their hypothesized necessary
areas of epistemic and moral agreement. The foregoing defense of
the possibility of a plurality of coexistent omnipotent agents is
persuasive only if there is a cogent reply to this objection.

Would it strengthen such a defense to further require that the
coexistent omnipotent agents are necessarily aesthetically
perfect, and hence, won’t disagree about what
is aesthetically required or about whether they want so to
act? It appears not. After all, there appear to be incompatible,
contingent, aesthetically optional states of affairs, i.e.,
states of affairs which are neither aesthetically required nor
aesthetically prohibited for some agent, and considerations parallel
to those adduced above apply. Moreover, it is not clear that
futile striving necessarily has negative aesthetic
value, witness, e.g., Camus’s The Myth of Sisyphus, and
in any case, it can be argued plausibly that the equipoise of
opposing forces possibly has positive aesthetic value,
implying that opposed volitional activities of coexistent omnipotent
beings would not necessarily be futile.

Further doubts about the possibility of a plurality of coexistent
omnipotent beings are raised by considerations outlined below which
seem to show that if some possible world is maximally good,
in other words, is a best possible world, then no
possible world is [uniquely] the best possible world, and
likewise with respect to a possible world that is second best, third
best, and so on.

Here it is assumed that if there is a best possible world, then there
is at least one such possible world containing contingently existing
individual substantial individuals. A parallel assumption is made
about any possible world good enough to be actualized by an
omnipotent, omniscient, morally perfect, aesthetically perfect being,
e.g., by a maximally great divinity such as God. But, with respect to
any possible world containing contingently existing substantial
individuals, it appears that there is another possible world
exactly resembling it but populated by different
contingently existing substantial individuals. It further appears that
the value of one of these worlds is equal to the value of another of
these worlds. So, it appears that if one of these possible worlds is
best, second best, third best, etc., then there is another possible
world of the ordinal rank in question.

Moreover, different possible goods combined in different possible ways
may constitute different, logically independent, possible total goods
of the same value. The following simple example illustrates this
point. Let it be assumed that the pleasure which would be produced by
John’s eating a mushroom pizza for dinner tonight and the
pleasure that would be produced by John’s eating a garlic pizza
for dinner tonight are logically independent possible goods of the
same value. All other things being equal, a possible world containing
John’s eating a mushroom pizza for dinner tonight and
John’s not eating a garlic pizza tonight, and a possible world
containing John’s eating a garlic pizza for dinner tonight and
John’s not eating a mushroom pizza for dinner tonight,
constitute different possible goods of the same value. Generalizing
from examples of this kind, it appears that if some possible world is
best, second best, third best, and so on, then there are
other possible worlds, not exactly resembling them,
which are best, second best, third best, and so on.

So, for any possible pair of coexistent God-like omnipotent agents, it
appears that one member of that pair could endeavor to
actualize a different, equally good, world than the other member
of that pair, even given their hypothesized necessary epistemic,
moral, and aesthetic perfection. In the light of the reductio ad
absurdum presented earlier, it appears to follow that such pairs
are impossible.

Leibniz argued that there is a uniquely optimal possible world by
appealing to the Principle of Sufficient Reason and the
Identity of Indiscernibles, notoriously concluding that the
actual world is the best of all possible worlds. Among
contemporary philosophers, both the Principle of Sufficient
Reason and the Identity of Indiscernibles are
controversial.

Another possible defense of the possibility of a plurality of
coexistent omnipotent agents appeals to quantum mechanics. Quantum
entanglement seems to be a unique physical phenomenon whereby
concurrent activities of diverse contingently existing substantial
individuals are directly coordinated in virtue of a necessary linkage
of some sort between those substantial individuals. By drawing an
analogy with this phenomenon, one might argue that there could be
coexistent omnipotent agents who necessarily avoid stalemates. Quantum
mechanics implies that there exist pairs of entangled micro-particles
such that it is causally necessary that one member of the pair is
spin up if and only if the other member of the pair is
spin up, independently of the locations of those
micro-particles. Albert Einstein skeptically described the theoretical
phenomenon of entanglement as “spukhafte Fernwirkung,”
that is, as “spooky action at a distance.” Nowadays,
however, entanglement is an experimentally confirmed part of physics.
Arguably, by analogy with entanglement, if a plurality of coexistent
omnipotent agents is possible, then there could be
“entangled” omnipotent agents, A1A1A_1 and
A2A2A_2, such that it is metaphysically necessary that
A1A1A_1 endeavors to bring about a certain state of
affairs if and only if A2A2A_2 endeavors to bring about
the same state of affairs. But quantum mechanics further implies that
there are entangled pairs of micro-particles such that it is causally
necessary that one member of the pair is spin up if and only
if the other member of the pair is spin down. The properties
of being spin up and being spin down are contraries.
Thus, if the analogy with quantum entanglement is taken seriously,
then by parity of reasoning, one should conclude that if a plurality
of necessarily cooperating coexistent omnipotent agents is possible,
then possibly, there are “entangled” omnipotent
agents, A1A1A_1 and A2A2A_2, such that
it is metaphysically necessary that A1A1A_1 endeavors
to act in some way if and only if A2A2A_2 endeavors to
act in a contrary way. Given this conclusion, and in the
light of the reductio ad absurdum of the possibility of a
plurality of coexistent omnipotent agents presented earlier, an
argument in favor of such a possibility by analogy with quantum
entanglement undermines itself, thereby reinforcing that
reductio. So, one cannot credibly defend the metaphysical
possibility of a plurality of coexistent omnipotent agents by drawing
an analogy with the phenomenon of quantum entanglement.

Finally, could one credibly defend such a metaphysical possibility via
the hypothesis that it is metaphysically possible for there to be a
plurality of necessarily indiscernible omnipotent God-like beings (in
the Leibnizian sense of indiscernible)? Because a plurality
of necessarily indiscernible objects is of dubious
intelligibility, such a defense would not be credible. Doubts about
the intelligibility of such a plurality arise because of perplexities
concerning the individuation and separation of any pair of necessarily
indiscernible objects, and because positing the existence of a
plurality of such objects is metaphysically extravagant and
gratuitous. Indeed it seems that there is just as much reason to posit
indefinitely many objects of the sort in question as there is to posit
a pair of them, whereas the intelligibility of a necessarily
self-indiscernible object is not in doubt. A representative
example of a hypothetical plurality of necessarily indiscernible
objects is a plurality of necessarily coincident geometrical
points. In addition to the perplexities concerning the individuation
and separation of any pair of such points, the assumption that it is
metaphysically possible for there to be a plurality of necessarily
coincident points is metaphysically frivolous. Post-Scholastic
ridicule of the sort that was directed at the alleged ontological
excesses of the Schoolmen, e.g., the query “How many angels may
fit upon the point of a needle?”, is quite appropriately
directed at metaphysical hypotheses of this sort. For these reasons,
the intelligibility of a plurality of necessarily coincident
geometrical points is suspect; the same is true of the intelligibility
of a plurality of necessarily indiscernible omnipotent God-like
beings.

Could an agent be accidentally omnipotent? At first glance, this
appears possible, but there is the following argument for the opposite
view. On the assumption that God exists, he has necessary existence,
is essentially not temporally limited, and is essentially omnipotent.
But there could not be two coexistent omnipotent agents. Thus, on the
assumption that God exists, an accidentally omnipotent being is
impossible.

This argument against the possibility of accidental omnipotence
presupposes traditional Western theism. However, traditional Western
theism is highly controversial, and neutrality about whether
God exists has some advantages. If one is neutral about whether God
exists, then omnipotence should not be assumed to be
attributable only to the God of traditional Western theism or
only to an essentially omnipotent being.
2. The Scope of Omnipotence

The intelligibility of the notion of omnipotence has been challenged
by the so-called paradox or riddle of the stone. Can an omnipotent
agent, Jane, bring it about that there is a stone of some mass, mmm,
which Jane cannot move? If the answer is ‘yes’, then there
is a state of affairs that Jane cannot bring about, namely,
(S1) that a stone of mass mmm moves. On the other hand, if
the answer is ‘no’, then there is another state of affairs
that Jane cannot bring about, namely, (S2) that there is a stone
of mass mmm which Jane cannot move. Thus, it seems that whether
or not Jane can make the stone in question, there is some possible
state of affairs that an omnipotent agent cannot bring about. And this
appears to be paradoxical.

A first resolution of the paradox comes into play when Jane is an
essentially omnipotent agent. In that case, the state of
affairs of Jane’s being non-omnipotent is impossible. Therefore,
Jane cannot bring it about that she is not omnipotent. Since,
necessarily, an omnipotent agent can move any stone, no matter how
massive, (S2) is impossible. But, as we have seen, an omnipotent agent
is not required to be able to bring about an impossible state of
affairs.

If, on the other hand, Jane is an accidentally omnipotent
agent, both (S1) and (S2) are possible, and it is
possible for some omnipotent agent to bring it about that (S1) obtains
at one time, and that (S2) obtains at a different time. Thus,
there is a second solution to the paradox. In this case, Jane’s
being non-omnipotent is a possible state of affairs; thus, we may
assume that it is possible for Jane to bring it about that
she is non-omnipotent. So, Jane can create and move a stone,
sss, of mass, mmm, while omnipotent, and
subsequently bring it about that she is not omnipotent and
powerless to move sss. As a consequence, Jane can bring about
both (S1) and (S2), but only if they obtain at different times. 

It might now be conjectured that omnipotence can be analyzed simply as
the power to bring it about that any contingent state of
affairs obtains. However, the following list of contingent states of
affairs shows that there can be contingent states of affairs that an
omnipotent agent is powerless to bring about, and hence that this
simple analysis is inadequate:

that a raindrop fell;
that a raindrop falls at ttt (where ttt is a past
time);
that Parmenides lectures for the first time;
that the Amazon River floods an odd number of times less than
four;
that a snowflake falls and no omnipotent agent ever exists;
and
that Plato freely decides to write a dialogue.


Note that (a) is a past state of affairs. Presumably, it is not
possible for an efficient cause to occur later than its
effect. However, an agent’s bringing about a state of affairs is
a kind of efficient causation. Therefore, it is not possible for an
agent to bring about anything that is in the past. In other
words, it is impossible for any agent to have power over what
is past. Hence, no agent, not even an omnipotent one, can bring it
about that (a) obtains. Likewise, despite the fact that (b) can be
brought about prior to ttt, the impossibility of an
agent’s having power over what is past implies that after
t even an omnipotent agent cannot bring it about that (b)
obtains. In the case of (c), prior to Parmenides’s first
lecture, an omnipotent agent can bring about (c). But once Parmenides
has lectured, even an omnipotent agent cannot bring it about that (c)
obtains. As for (d), prior to the Amazon’s third flooding, an
omnipotent agent can bring it about that (d) obtains, while after the
Amazon’s third flooding, even an omnipotent agent cannot bring
it about that (d) obtains. (e) introduces a special difficulty.
Although it is obvious that (e) could not be brought about by
an omnipotent agent, it can be argued plausibly that it is
possible for a non-omnipotent agent to bring about (e) by causing a
snowflake to fall, provided that no omnipotent agent
ever
 exists.[1]
 But, as we argued earlier, a maximally powerful being need not have
the power to bring about every state of affairs that any other being
could. Lastly, while if the libertarian theory of free will is
correct, an omnipotent agent (who is, of course, other than
Plato) cannot bring about (f), apparently a non-omnipotent agent,
namely, Plato, can bring it about that (f) obtains.

Consequently, a satisfactory analysis of omnipotence ought not to
require that an omnipotent agent have the power to bring about (a),
(b), (c), (d), (e), or (f), if it is assumed, arguendo, in
the case of (f), that libertarianism is true.

Because of the wide disparity among contingent states of affairs,
(a)–(f), one might despair of finding an analysis of omnipotence that
both deals satisfactorily with all of these states of affairs and
implies that an omnipotent being has, intuitively speaking, sufficient
power. Is such pessimism warranted, or is omnipotence analyzable?

There are at least two approaches to analyzing omnipotence that hold
out some hope of success. The first utilizes the notion of an
unrestrictedly repeatable state of affairs, and the second
utilizes the notion of two worlds sharing their histories up to a
time. Although these approaches to analyzing omnipotence differ
in important ways, they are in broad agreement on the leading idea
that maximal power has logical and temporal limitiations, including
the limitation that an omnipotent agent cannot bring about, i.e.,
cause, another agent’s free decision in the libertarian sense.
In the following two sections, some recent instances of these
approaches are set forth and compared.
3. Omnipotence and Unrestricted Repeatability

One attempt to analyze omnipotence in terms of unrestricted
repeatability is the account of Hoffman and Rosenkrantz. According to
their approach, by identifying certain features of (a)–(f), we
can find a feature that none of them possesses, and in terms of which
an analysis of omnipotence can be stated. To begin, unless it is
possible for some agent to bring about a given state of
affairs, an omnipotent agent ought not to be required to be able to
bring about that state of affairs. But (a) is not possibly brought
about by any agent.

Next, while (b) and (c) are possibly brought about by some agent, they
are not repeatable: it is not possible for either one of them
to obtain, subsequently fail to obtain, and then obtain again. Note
that if, because (a) is not possibly brought about by someone, an
omnipotent agent is not required to be able to bring about (a), then
for the same reason, that agent is also not required to be able to
bring about impossible or necessary states of affairs. Moreover, if,
because (b) and (c) are not repeatable, an omnipotent agent is not
required to bring about (b) or (c), then for the same reason, that
agent is also not required to be able to bring about impossible or
necessary states of affairs. These reasons for not requiring an
omnipotent agent to have the power to bring about impossible or
necessary states of affairs cohere with our earlier independent
arguments for these restrictions.

Third, while (d) is repeatable, it is not
unrestrictedly repeatable, that is, it cannot obtain, then
fail to obtain, then obtain again, and so on, eternally.

Fourth, while (e) is unrestrictedly repeatable, it is a
complex state of affairs, namely, a conjunctive
state of affairs whose second conjunct is not repeatable.
These examples suggest a hypothesis about repeatability and its
relation to power, namely, that an omnipotent agent should
not be required to have the power to bring about
either a state of affairs that is not unrestrictedly
repeatable, or a conjunctive state of affairs one of whose
conjuncts is not unrestrictedly repeatable.

Lastly, although (f) is unrestrictedly repeatable, (f) is
another type of complex state of affairs. In particular, it is
identifiable with or analyzable as a conjunctive state of affairs.
This state of affairs has three conjuncts, the second of which is not
possibly brought about by anyone. The conjunctive state of affairs in
question can be informally expressed as follows: Plato decides to
write a dialogue; and there is no antecedent sufficient
causal condition of Plato’s deciding to write a dialogue; and
there is no concurrent sufficient causal condition of Plato’s
deciding to write a dialogue. Because it is impossible for an agent to
have power over what is past, the second conjunct of this
state of affairs is not possibly brought about by anyone. Thus, an
omnipotent agent ought not to be required to have the power to bring
about a state of affairs that is identifiable with or analyzable as a
conjunctive state of affairs one of whose conjuncts is not possibly
brought about by anyone.

According to the account of Hoffman and Rosenkrantz, incoporating
these ideas, omnipotence can be analyzed in terms of the following
three definitions.

(D1)

The period of time ttt is a sufficient interval for s=dfss=dfss =_{df} s is a state of affairs such that: it
is possible that sss obtains at a time-period which has the
duration of ttt.


For example, any period of time with a duration of 7 seconds is a
sufficient interval for the state of affairs that a ball rolls for
7 seconds.

(D2)

A state of affairs, sss, is unrestrictedly repeatable
=df=df=_{df} sss is possibly such that:
∀n∃t1∃t2∃t3…∃tn[(t1<t2<t3<…<tn∀n∃t1∃t2∃t3…∃tn[(t1<t2<t3<…<tn\forall n\exists t_1\exists t_2\exists t_3 \ldots \exists t_n [(t_1 \lt t_2 \lt t_3 \lt \ldots \lt t_n are periods of time which are
sufficient intervals for s&ss&ss \amp s obtains at
t1&st1&st_1 \amp s doesn’t obtain at
t2&st2&st_2 \amp s obtains at
t3&…&st3&…&st_3 \amp \ldots \amp s obtains at
tn)tn)t_n) if and only if nnn is
 odd].[2]



For instance, the state of affairs that a ball rolls for 7
seconds is unrestrictedly repeatable.

(D3)

xxx is omnipotent at t=df∀st=df∀st =_{df} \forall s(if it is possible for some agent to bring
about sss then at ttt xxx has it within his power
to bring about s)s)s).



In (D3), xxx ranges over agents, and sss over
states of affairs that satisfy the following condition:

(C)

(i) sss is unrestrictedly repeatable, and of the form
‘in nnn minutes, ppp’, & (p(p(p is
a complex state of affairs →→\rightarrow (each of the parts of ppp is
unrestrictedly repeatable & possibly brought about by someone)),
or (ii) sss is of the form ‘qqq forever
after’, where qqq is a state of affairs which satisfies
 (i).[3]



In applying (D3) to states of affairs like (e) and (f) it
should be observed that a conjunct of a conjunctive state of
affairs is a part of such a complex state of
 affairs.[4]
 (C) (ii) refers to a state of affairs of the form ‘qqq
forever after’, where qqq is a state of affairs
satisfying (i). An example of a state of affairs of this kind is
in two minutes, a ball rolls forever after. Two situations in
which this state of affairs may obtain are, first, that the ball will
start rolling in two minutes, and then continue to roll forever after,
and second, that the ball will start rolling earlier than that, for
instance, two minutes earlier, will be rolling in two minutes, and
will continue to roll forever after.


As intended, (D3) does not require an omnipotent agent to have
the power to bring about either impossible or necessary states of
affairs, or states of affairs such as (a)–(f). Furthermore,
(D3) does not unduly limit the power of an omnipotent agent,
since an agent’s bringing about a state of affairs can always be
“cashed out” in terms of that agent’s bringing about
an unrestrictedly repeatable state of affairs that it is possible for
some agent to bring about. That is, necessarily, for any state of
affairs, sss, if an agent, aaa, brings about sss,
then either sss is an unrestrictedly repeatable state of
affairs which it is possible for some agent to bring about, or else
aaa brings about sbysbys by bringing about
qqq, where qqq is an unrestrictedly repeatable state of
affairs which it is possible for some agent to bring about. For
instance, an omnipotent agent can bring about the state of affairs,
that in one hour, Parmenides lectures for the first time, by
bringing about the state of affairs, that in one
hour, Parmenides lectures, when this lecture is
Parmenides’s first. And although the former state of affairs is
a nonrepeatable one that (D3) does not require an
omnipotent agent to be able to bring about, the latter state of
affairs is an unrestrictedly repeatable state of affairs that
(D3) does require an omnipotent agent to be able to
bring about.
4. Omnipotence and the Shared Histories Approach

The alternative approach to analyzing omnipotence in terms of two
worlds sharing their histories up to a time is exemplified by the
accounts of Flint and Freddoso, and Wierenga. As we shall see,
although these two accounts are similar, they differ in certain
significant respects.

Flint and Freddoso’s account of what it is for an agent
SSS at a time ttt to be omnipotent in a possible world
WWW is formulated as follows.


SSS is omnipotent at ttt in WWW if and only if for any state of
affairs ppp and world-type-for-SSS LsLsLs such that ppp is not a
member of LsLsLs, if there is a world W∗W∗W^* such that


LsLsLs is true in both WWW and W∗W∗W^*, and
W∗W∗W^* shares the same history with WWW at ttt,
and
at ttt in W∗W∗W^* someone actualizes ppp, then
SSS has the power at ttt in WWW to actualize
ppp (Flint & Freddoso 1983, p. 99).



The notion of a world-type-for-SSS LsLsLs is to be
understood in the following way. A world-type is “a set
which is such that for any counterfactual of freedom, i.e.,
any proposition which can be expressed by a sentence of the form
‘If individual essence PPP were instantiated in
circumstances CCC at time ttt and its instantiation were
left free with respect to action AAA, the instantiation of
PPP would freely do AAA’—either that
counterfactual or its negation is a member of the set” (Flint
& Freddoso 1983, p. 96). It may also be stipulated “that for
any two members of the set, the conjunction of those two members is a
member of the set as well” (Flint & Freddoso 1983, pp.
96–97). Moreover, “a world-type is true just in
case every proposition which is a member of it is true” (Flint
& Freddoso 1983, p. 97). In addition, it is presupposed that
“for any free agent xxx, there will be a set of all and
only those true counterfactuals of freedom (or true negations of such
counterfactuals) over whose truth-value xxx has no
control” (Flint & Freddoso 1983, p. 97). A set of this kind
is referred to as the world-type-for-x. Finally,
‘LxLxLx’ designates the
true-world-type-for-xxx.

The notion of actualization employed in this account of omnipotence
calls for some explanation. If an agent, SSS, brings about a
state of affairs, ppp, then SSS actualizes ppp.
However, this account presupposes that an agent may [weakly]
actualize another agent’s making a free decision
without bringing about or causing that decision. In
particular, it is assumed that an agent may weakly actualize a
decision that is free in the libertarian sense by bringing about the
antecedent of a true “counterfactual of freedom.”

The basic idea of this account of omnipotence is that an agent is
omnipotent just when he can actualize any state of affairs that it is
possible for someone to actualize, except for certain
“counterfactuals of freedom”, their consequents, and
certain states of affairs that are “accidentally
impossible” because of the past.

With respect to so-called counterfactuals of freedom, this account
presupposes that some of them, for example,

If Jessica were offered the grant, then she would freely decide to
accept it,


are true. Some philosophers hold the contrary view that a
subjunctive conditional of this kind is necessarily
false. Why do these philosophers reject the claim that some
“counterfactuals of freedom” are true? Presumably, what
distinguishes a subjunctive conditional from a corresponding material
conditional is that only the former expresses a strong or necessary
connection of some sort between the conditions specified by the
antecedent and the consequent. Seemingly, the only kinds of strong or
necessary connections available in this case are relations [broadly
speaking] of either causation or entailment.
Consequently, it appears that the subjunctive conditional under
discussion is necessarily false, since if Jessica freely
decides to accept the grant [in the relevant libertarian sense], then
her making that decision is neither caused nor
entailed by her being offered the grant. If the foregoing
line of reasoning is correct, then the notion of a true
“counterfactual of freedom” is incoherent. Since Flint and
Freddoso’s account of omnipotence presupposes that there are
such “counterfactuals of freedom,” it can be argued that
this account is incoherent.

Moreover, it can be argued that a state of affairs discussed earlier
provides a counter-example to Flint and Freddoso’s account of
omnipotence, namely:

(e)

A snowflake falls and no omnipotent agent ever exists.



A non-omnipotent agent can bring about or actualize (e) by bringing it
about that a snowflake falls when in fact no omnipotent agent ever
exists. But, it is clear that an omnipotent agent cannot bring about
or actualize (e). For although an omnipotent agent can bring it about
that a snowflake falls, surely, an omnipotent agent cannot bring it
about that no omnipotent ever exists, nor would this conjunct
of (e) obtain if there were an omnipotent agent. Moreover, we may
assume that there are possible worlds, WWW and W∗W∗W^*,
such that WWW and W∗W∗W^* share the same history up to a
time ttt, no omnipotent agent ever exists in W∗W∗W^*, and a
contingently omnipotent agent, Oscar, is omnipotent for the first time
at ttt in WWW. We may also assume that W∗W∗W^* is a
world in which at ttt some non-omnipotent agent actualizes (e).
On the other hand, evidently, if in WWW, Oscar is omnipotent at
ttt, then at ttt Oscar cannot actualize (e). Note that
since the second conjunct of (e) is not unrestrictedly repeatable,
this is consistent with Hoffman and Rosenkrantz’s account of
omnipotence; their account does not require an omnipotent agent to be
able to bring about a conjunctive state of affairs one of whose
conjuncts is not unrestrictedly repeatable. On the other hand, Flint
and Freddoso’s account of omnipotence implies that in
WWW, at ttt Oscar has the power to actualize (e). This
implication holds for the following reasons. First, (e) is not a
member of a world-type-for-Oscar, inasmuch as (e) is neither a
“counterfactual of freedom,” the negation of one, nor a
conjunction of such “counterfactuals of freedom.” Second,
we may assume that a world-type-for-Oscar is true in both W∗W∗W^*
and WWW, since the assumption that an agent is not omnipotent
in one possible world, and is omnipotent for a time in another
possible world, does not necessitate any difference in the world-type
for that agent which is true in those worlds. Third, it is possible
for someone at ttt to actualize (e) in a world, W∗W∗W^*,
that has the same history up to ttt as
 WWW.[5]
 Thus, arguably, Flint and Freddoso’s account of omnipotence
requires that in WWW an omnipotent agent, Oscar, at ttt
has the power to actualize (e), when Oscar lacks this power. If this
is right, then their account does not provide a logically necessary
condition on
 omnipotence.[6]

A counter-example of this kind assumes that an analysis of omnipotence
should allow for the possibility of an omnipotent agent other than
God. Given this assumption, (e) seems to provide a counter-example to
Flint and Freddoso’s account of omnipotence, but not to the
account of Hoffman and Rosenkrantz.

Let us now turn to Wierenga’s account of omnipotence. The basic
idea of Wierenga’s account of omnipotence is that an agent is
omnipotent if and only if he can do anything that it is possible for
him to do, given the past. According to this account, we can analyze
what it is for an agent, AAA, to be omnipotent at ttt in
a world WWW in terms of what it is possible for A to
strongly actualize at ttt in worlds having the same history as
WWW up to ttt.

Wierenga’s account of omnipotence, like Flint and
Freddoso’s, relies on the intuitive idea that two possible
worlds can share the same past or history up to a certain point in
time, and then diverge. According to Wierenga’s account, two
worlds of this kind share an initial segment, where
S(W,t)S(W,t)S (W, t) is an initial segment of a
possible world WWW up to a time ttt (Wierenga 1989, pp.
18–20). Unlike Flint and Freddoso’s account,
Wierenga’s account is not stated in terms of what an agent can
actualize, but rather in terms of the narrower notion of what an agent
can strongly actualize. An agent, AAA, strongly
actualizes just those states of affairs that AAA brings about
directly or those actions that AAA does not do
by doing something else (Wierenga 1989, pp. 20–23). Of
course, an agent may actualize a state of affairs indirectly
by strongly actualizing another state of affairs.
Wierenga’s account of omnipotence is formulated as follows.

A being xxx is omnipotent in a world WWW at a time
t=dft=dft =_{df} In WWW it is true both that
(i) for every state of affairs AAA, if it is possible that both
S(W,t)S(W,t)S (W, t) obtains and that xxx
strongly actualizes AAA at ttt, then at t,xt,xt,
x can strongly actualize AAA, and (ii) there is some
state of affairs which xxx can strongly actualize at
ttt. (Wierenga 1989, p. 25)


This account of omnipotence may be vulnerable to a counter-example of
the following kind. Arguably, there could be an agent, xxx,
such that: xxx has a wide range of powers, xxx is
essentially limited to these powers, and xxx essentially lacks
a power, PPP, which an omnipotent agent ought to possess. Of
course, xxx would not be omnipotent. Yet, Wierenga’s
account of omnipotence paradoxically implies that xxx would be
omnipotent. Hence, it can be argued that Wierenga’s account does
not provide a logically sufficient condition for omnipotence. The
assumption that there could be a non-omnipotent agent that is
essentially limited in its powers can be defended as follows. An
omnipotent agent has the power to overrule (or supersede) any law of
nature (a mere physical necessity). For example, God
has the power to overrule the law of gravity by bringing it about that
a mountain floats in midair without any physical cause. Yet, arguably,
it is possible for there to be a non-omnipotent agent who essentially
lacks the power to overrule any law of nature. For example, it can be
argued that there could be a physical or material agent who is
essentially subject to certain laws of nature. Surely, such
an agent would lack the power to overrule any law of nature, and so
would not be omnipotent.

A similar, though weaker, sort of objection concerns McEar, a
hypothetical agent who essentially has the power to do only
one thing, namely, scratch his ear. It may be objected that
Wierenga’s analysis of omnipotence falsely implies that McEar
would be omnipotent. But it might be replied that an agent such as
McEar is impossible. It can be cogently argued that, necessarily, if
McEar has the power to scratch his ear, then he also has the
power to move a part of his body to scratch his ear, for instance, his
arm (Wierenga 1989, pp. 28–29). So, it appears that there could
not be an agent that has the power to do only one thing. In reply to
the stronger sort of objection discussed earlier, it may be suggested
that, necessarily, for any power, if an agent lacks that
power, then an omnipotent being could give that agent that power
(Wierenga 1989, p. 29). The difficulty with such a reply is that there
could be a non-omnipotent agent who essentially lacks the
power to overrule any law of nature, and hence that not even an
omnipotent agent could give this non-omnipotent agent that power.
5. Omnipotence and Divine Moral Perfection

It has been argued that the traditional God has incompatible
attributes, namely, necessary existence, essential omnipotence,
essential omniscience, and essential moral perfection (Pike
 1969).[7]
 The contention has been that it is impossible for God to have the
power to bring about evil, while non-omnipotent (and morally
imperfect) beings may have this power. The precise form of such an
argument varies depending on what precisely the relation between God
and evil is assumed to be. However, generally speaking, it is argued
that divine moral perfection and omnipotence are incompatible because
divine omnipotence entails that God has the power to bring about evil,
whereas divine moral perfection entails that God is powerless to bring
about evil.

One can respond to arguments of this kind as follows. Assume that if
God exists, then this is a best possible
 world.[8]
 In that case, if God exists, there could not be an evil unless it
were necessary for some greater good, in which case any state of
affairs containing evil incompatible with there being a maximally good
world is impossible. But it be may be assumed that it is not
possible for any agent to bring about an impossible state of
affairs. Thus, if God exists, any moral evil, that is, any evil
brought about by anyone, and any natural evil, or any evil which has
an impersonal, natural cause, must be necessary for some greater
good.

Suppose that God exists and that some other person, for example, Cain,
brings it about that an evil, EEE, exists. There are two
possibilities that need to be considered here. The first is that
Cain’s decisions and actions are causally determined, as are all
occurrences in the created universe. Then, given our assumptions,
since Cain’s bringing it about that EEE exists is
necessary for some good which more than compensates for
EEE’s existence, it is consistent with God’s moral
perfection that God [remotely] brings it about that Cain brings it
about that EEE exists.

The second possibility is that Cain’s decision to do evil is
uncaused by anything other than Cain and free in the libertarian
sense. In that case, God did not [remotely cause Cain freely
to] bring it about that EEE exists, while [let us assume] Cain
did freely bring it about that EEE exists. If so, then
it must be the case that God’s creating Cain and permitting Cain
freely to do what he chooses to do [in the context of the entire
creation] brings about more good than his not creating Cain
and thus not permitting him freely to do what he chooses to
do. It might be objected that if Cain can bring about a state of
affairs that God cannot, namely, that E exists, then God is
not omnipotent. But, as we have seen, an agent’s being
omnipotent does not require of that agent that it be able to bring
about every state of affairs which any other agent
can bring about. It does, of course, require that an
omnipotent agent have more power than any other agent. And God, of
course, would have more power than Cain, even though Cain
could bring about something that God could not. For there are many
more states of affairs that God could bring about and that Cain could
not, than vice versa. At this point, it might further be
objected that an omnipotent agent, one that was morally imperfect, who
could bring it about that EEE exists, as well as all
the other states of affairs that God could bring about, would be more
powerful than God. But recall that if God exists, then he exists
eternally in every possible world. Recall, too, that apparently there
cannot be more than one omnipotent agent. Thus, it appears that if God
exists, then an omnipotent agent who is morally imperfect is
impossible. Thus, this second objection is based on an
assumption that seems to be impossible, namely, that if God exists
there could exist another omnipotent agent who is morally imperfect
and who is therefore more powerful than God.

Of course, if God exists, then any evil state of affairs, sss,
which is incompatible with a maximally good world is
impossible. And if sss is impossible, then neither God
nor any other agent has the power to bring it about that sss
obtains. God would lack the power to bring it about that sss
obtains because of his moral perfection, and any created agent would
lack the power to bring it about that sss obtains either
because (i) God would not create an agent who had the power to bring
it about that sss obtains, or (ii) God would not permit any
created agent to bring it about that sss obtains. Thus, to the
extent indicated, if God’s attributes impose moral restrictions
on the nature of the universe and on what he can bring about, then
they impose parallel restrictions on what any other agents can bring
about.

The foregoing line of reasoning implies that God’s moral
perfection and omnipotence are not
 incompatible.[9]

This argument about God and the possibility of evil has been disputed
by theists such as Alvin Plantinga, who do not hold that God’s
existence implies the existence of a maximally good world, but do hold
that God seeks to create as good a world as he
 can.[10]
 Theists such as Plantinga allow for there to be evil that is
unnecessary for any greater good that outweighs it. An evil
of this kind involves free decisions of non-divine agents, which God
does not prevent, but which these other agents can prevent. Plantinga
contends that God is not wrong to permit an evil of this kind, since
God cannot bring about a vital good, the existence of free human
agents, without there being such an evil. Alternatively, it might be
argued that God does no wrong in this sort of case, because he does
not know how to do better (knowledge of the future free actions of
created agents being impossible). However, as an omnipotent God is
not required to have power over the free decisions of
non-divine agents, it follows that on these views, his omnipotence and
moral perfection are compatible, roughly to the extent indicated
earlier in our discussion of the view that God’s existence
implies a maximally good world. Of course, nothing that has been said
here answers the question of how much, if any, evil is compatible with
the existence of the traditional God. This question is central to the
problem of evil for theism.