Ontological dependence is a relation—or, more accurately,
a family of relations—between entities
or beings (onta in Greek,
whence ontological). For there are various ways in which one
being may be said to depend upon one or more other beings, in
a sense of “depend” that is
distinctly metaphysical in character and that may be
contrasted, thus, with various causal senses of this word.
More specifically, a being may be said to depend, in such a sense,
upon one or more other beings for its existence or for
its identity. Some varieties of ontological dependence may be
analyzed in modal terms—that is, in terms of distinctly
metaphysical notions of possibility and necessity—while
others seem to demand an analysis in terms of the notion
of essence. The latter varieties of ontological dependence
may accordingly be called species of essential
dependence. Notions of ontological dependence are frequently called
upon by metaphysicians in their proposed analyses of other
metaphysically important notions, such as the notion
of substance.
 
1. Varieties of ontological dependence
A crucial notion in metaphysics is that of one entity depending
for its existence upon another entity—not in a merely
causal sense, but in a deeper, ontological sense. The kind of
dependence in question must also be distinguished from any kind
of logical dependence, because logical relations, strictly
speaking, can obtain only between propositions, not between concrete
objects, nor between abstract objects that are not propositional in
nature. We should also distinguish ontological dependence, broadly
conceived, from what is usually considered a stricter type of
metaphysical dependence, namely metaphysical grounding. The
link between ontological dependence and metaphysical grounding (or
simply “metaphysical dependence”, as it is sometimes
called, see Rosen 2010 and the separate entry on
 metaphysical grounding;
 see also Trogdon 2013 for discussion) will be
discussed below, but this entry concerns a somewhat broader family of
relations of dependence.
It is not uncommon to see the notion of ontological dependence used
in a rather coarse-grained manner, given that it encompasses a family
of relations. For instance, we often see claims such as:

(1)“Sets
ontologically depend on their members.”
(2)“Electricity
ontologically depends on electrons.”
(3)“God
doesn’t ontologically depend on anything.”

While all of the above no doubt express some important type of
dependence relationship, they are also clearly quite different from
each other. In (1), we mean that a set
{x, y, z} could not exist if its members,
namely x, y, z, did not exist. The type of
dependence in question is rigid existential dependence, to be
clarified in a moment. (In fact, there is another sense of dependence
at work in (1) as well, namely identity-dependence, but we
will return to this example later on.) In (2), we seem to have in mind
a more general kind of dependence: there could not be electricity, now
or ever, if there were no electrons. So existence of electricity
depends on the existence of a very specific kind of particle, the
electron. This second type of dependence is also existential, but to
separate it from the rigid dependence in (1), we may call
it generic existential dependence. In (3) we are instead
referring to the ontological independence of God. Presumably,
God does not depend for her existence on anything, by her very
nature. In other words, it is part of the essence of God that she is
ontologically self-sufficient. We might call this essential
independence, in contrast to essential dependence.
A family of notions is beginning to emerge. However, we should
formulate each notion somewhat more precisely. The first thing to note
in defining ontological dependence is the modal-existential
element in dependence claims. For instance, we’ve said that a
set cannot exist unless its members do. So there is a sense
in which the existence of a set necessitates the existence of
its members. Indeed, it is common to talk about, e.g., rigid
existential necessitation as synonymous with rigid existential
dependence. Typically, statements of ontological dependence are
thought to refer to metaphysical modality (rather than, say,
conceptual or logical modality), primarily because they concern
matters that are broader than just conceptual or logical; the
ontological independence of God being a case in point. Besides
God, substances are often considered to be entities that
do not depend for their existence upon anything else. For
example, Descartes asserts that
by substance we can understand nothing
other than a thing which exists in such a way as to depend on no other
thing for its existence. (The Philosophical Writings of Descartes: vol. I, p. 210)
(See also Lowe 1998: ch. 6.)
2. The modal-existential analysis of dependence
In this section we will focus on the modal-existential analysis of
ontological dependence, which has until recently dominated the
discussion. We will return to essential dependence later on. Let us
start from (1); how should this relationship of existential dependence
be defined? An obvious proposal would be to say, quite simply:

(EDR)x
dependsR for its existence upon y =df
Necessarily, x exists only if y exists.

The subscript “R” is used here because it seems
appropriate to call this species of existential dependence of one
object upon another rigid existential dependence. Why
“rigid”? Because there is no flexibility here: the
existence of a given x requires the existence of that
very y. It could not be something a little bit
like y, something falling roughly in the same category, for
instance; it must be y. The definiens in
(EDR) is equivalent to “Necessarily, if x exists,
then y exists”, so that according to (EDR) the
existential dependenceR of x upon y
amounts to the strict implication of y’s
existence by x’s existence. We have mentioned one
example of rigid existential dependence, namely, sets ontologically
depending on their members (more precisely, a set depends rigidly on
the very members it has, i.e., any change in a set’s members
will change the set itself). Another, although more controversial,
example is a particular person depending for her existence on her
parents, or, more precisely, on the particular sperm and egg that she
originates from. This example is of course related
to the essentiality of origin (as discussed in
Kripke 1980).
We can express (EDR) in a more compact manner by resorting to
further formalization (the following notation is used e.g., in Correia
2008). We can use the sentential operator “□” for
metaphysical necessity, the one-place predicate
“E” for existence, and the two-place sentential
operator “→” for material implication. Following this
notation, we can formalize rigid existential dependence as follows:
“□(Ex → Ey)”, which can be
read as “x rigidly depends for its existence
on y”, or alternatively “x rigidly
necessitates y”. Note that (EDR), somewhat
controversially, implies that everything dependsR for its
existence upon itself. It would, of course, be easy enough to
modify (EDR)’s definiens to read “y is
not identical with x and, necessarily, x exists only
if y exists”, but that would have the disadvantage
of precluding anything from dependingR for its
existence upon itself.
We can quite naturally contrast rigid existential
dependence as defined by (EDR) with what might appropriately be
called non-rigid existential dependence, defined as
follows:

(EDN) x
dependsN for its existence upon the F
=df Necessarily, x exists only if the F
exists.

The thought here is that—to use the language of
“possible worlds”—“the F” in
any instance of (EDN) might well denote different entities in
different possible worlds. So, for example, it might be said that a
material object x dependsN for its existence
upon the matter composing x, even though it might
have been composed of different matter, because in every possible
world in which x exists the matter
composing x in that world exists in that world.
On the face of it, (EDR) seems to capture precisely one strongly
intuitive notion of existential dependence. For example, when it is
said that a particular event, such as the assassination of Caesar,
depends for its existence upon Caesar, (EDR) seems to explicate this
appropriately in terms of the fact that the assassination could not
have existed if Caesar had not existed to be
assassinated. Some other assassination, we may suppose, could
have existed at that very time and place, but for that very
assassination to have existed, Caesar himself had to exist.
However, there are clearly cases in which (EDR) fails to capture
the intuitive sense of dependence at hand. Consider a living
organism. A living organism would appear to depend for its existence
upon its parts, such as cells. But we also know that a living organism
may survive a change of any of its cells, provided that the change is
effected in a non-disruptive manner. It is true, of course, that such
an organism must have parts such as cells if it is to exist,
but which objects those parts are is inessential—and
consequently it is not the case that it depends for its existence, in
the sense defined by (EDR), upon any one of those parts. But it is
possible to define another sense of existential dependence in
which it is true to say that a composite object depends for
its existence upon its proper parts; a generic notion of
existential dependence, defined as follows:

(EDG) x
dependsG for its existence upon Fs =df
Necessarily, x exists only if some F
exists.

Composite objects are existentially dependent objects in the sense
of (EDG), since they require the existence of proper parts
(set F as “proper part of x” in
(EDG)). Using the previous formal notation, we could express (EDG) as
“□(Ex → ∃yFy)”. Here we
have added the existential quantifier “∃” as well as
the general term “F” to express the thought that
“x generically depends for its existence on something
being an F”, or alternatively “x
generically necessitates F”. The important difference
between the rigid and the generic cases is that (EDR) refers to a
specific object whereas (EDG) only requires that at least
some Fs exist. Another example, mentioned earlier, where
(EDG) would seem to capture the correct sense of dependence is (2),
“Electricity ontologically depends on electrons”. More
precisely, we could say that electricity dependsG for its
existence upon electrons.
We would now have the tools to formalize most of the mentioned
examples, but note that there are cases where further tools are
required. Consider:

(4) “Children
ontologically depend on their parents.”

On the face of it, what we mean in (4) is that if
parents x and y had not existed, then their
child z could not have come into existence. This looks like a
case of rigid existential dependence, but it is clear that once
z has been born, her parents can go out of existence without any
effect on her own existence. At that point, there is
only past rigid existential dependence. For cases such as
this, we would require temporally relativized versions
of (EDN) and (EDG), but we will
omit these complications here (see Thomasson 1999: 24–34 and
Correia 2005, 2008 for some versions of temporally relativized
ontological dependence).
Note, incidentally, that generic existential dependence as
defined by (EDG) above is very close to a pluralised form
of non-rigid existential dependence, as defined by (EDN). We
could call this plural non-rigid existential dependence,
definable as follows:

(EDP) x
dependsP for its existence upon the Fs
=df Necessarily, x exists only if the Fs
exist.

The similarity between (EDG)
and (EDN) is apparent: saying—for
example—that a composite object x dependsG
for its existence upon proper parts of x is very close indeed
to saying that x dependsP for its existence
upon the existence of the very kinds of proper parts
that x has.
2.1 Some problems for the modal-existential analysis
An important group of problems for the modal-existential analysis
of ontological dependence emerges from essential properties (at least
if they are considered as distinct from modal properties, as argued in
Fine 1994a). What could be a plausible example of an essential
property of an individual object, say, Socrates? Let us assume that
properties are to be conceived of as property instances, such
as the particular redness of a certain apple. Of course, an apple can
change its colour, so that this is not an example of
an essential property of the apple. But what about—in
the case of Socrates—his humanity (as it were, his
particular being human)? Certainly, if there is such a thing
as the particular humanity of Socrates, he cannot lose it without
ceasing to exist. Perhaps we can deny that Socrates’s particular
humanity is anything distinct from Socrates himself: after
all, its existence necessarily coincides with his. Properties are
commonly said to depend for their existence upon the entities that
possess them. One might propose to state this in the form of a
principle, with the help of (EDR), as follows:

(PROP-DEP) If x is a property and y is
an entity possessing x, then x dependsR
for its existence upon y.

Now, substituting the definiens of (EDR) into (PROP-DEP) gives
us:

(PROP-NEC)If x is a property and y is
 an entity possessing x, then, necessarily, x
 exists only if y exists.

Note that (PROP-NEC) is not intended to apply to properties
understood as universals, but only to particularized properties
(otherwise variously known as property instances, individual
accidents, tropes, or modes). These are items exactly like the
particular redness of a particular apple mentioned above, conceived of
as an object distinct from the redness of any other apple, no
matter how well matched in colour to the first. On this
interpretation, (PROP-NEC) has some plausibility, complying as it does
with the intuition that particularized properties cannot
“migrate” from one object to another. (Actually,
(PROP-NEC) itself does not quite imply this, although it does imply
that a particularized property cannot migrate from one object to
another when the first object ceases to exist.)
A line of argument that could be developed on this basis suggests
that if indeed there are such things as essential particularized
properties that are “possessed” by composite objects, then
they are in fact to be identified with those objects. But it
would require a further argument to say, quite generally, that
wherever items x and y are mutually existentially
dependent as defined by  (EDR), they are
identical. For instance, consider the relationship between Socrates
and the temporally extended event or process that was his
life. Clearly, in terms of (EDR), Socrates’s life
dependsR for its existence upon Socrates—but so,
plausibly, does his existence upon it: it is, for Socrates, what we
might call an inalienable event. And yet there are things
true of the life of Socrates that are not true of him and vice
versa (for example, that it was so many years long, and that he
weighed so many pounds)—so there is no question of their being
identical.
But it could be disputed whether Socrates is existentially
dependentR upon his life—whether he
necessarily would not have existed if it had not—for it
may be urged that he might have had or led a different life.
Now, it is true enough that his life might have
been qualitatively different in many ways, but what is
currently at issue is whether he might have had a numerically
different life—and it is hard, perhaps, to see how he could. For
if it is accepted that lives dependR for their
existence upon the persons whose lives they are, then,
necessarily, x’s life exists only if x
exists. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that Socrates could have
had a numerically different life: then it would still have been a life
which could only have been Socrates’s—no one other than
Socrates could have had that “other” life. But then what
could underpin the supposition that it is indeed a life
“other” than the life he actually had (except
qualitatively)? Other possible worlds clearly do contain lives that do
not exist in the actual world, insofar as they contain people
who do not exist in the actual world: but there seem to be no strong
grounds to suppose that they do so other than for that reason. It
seems thus that there are certain difficult questions which the
modal-existential analysis may not fully address, at least not in the
form that we have presented it until now. We will continue to discuss
these issues in sections 3
and 4.
3. Asymmetrical existential dependence
Where does the above analysis of existential dependence lead us?
The case of Socrates’s life demonstrates
that (EDR) permits the possibility
of mutual existential dependenceR between
non-identical things. But this implication does not seem to be
acceptable in every context. Take, again, the relationship between
Socrates and his life. According to (EDR), Socrates is quite as much
existentially dependentR upon his life as his life is upon
him. And yet there is a strong intuition that, in another and perhaps
more important sense, Socrates’s life is the
truly dependent object here, while Socrates is, in some
sense, an independent existent. We might say that
Socrates’s life exists only because Socrates does,
whereas it would be putting the cart before the horse to say that
Socrates exists because his life does. Now, it appears that
the conjunction “because” must be asymmetrical,
because it expresses an explanatory relationship and
explanation is asymmetrical. Plausibly, two distinct states of affairs
cannot explain each other. There may, quite
conceivably, be self-explanatory states of affairs, so we
should only want to urge that non-identical states of affairs
cannot be mutually explanatory. Technically, this means that we should
strictly describe explanation as an “antisymmetric” rather
than as an asymmetric relation. The asymmetry of explanation is, of
course, intimately related to the unacceptability of circular
arguments. It is also closely linked to recent discussions
regarding metaphysical grounding, to which we will return
later, in section 5.
One upshot of all this is that, for the purpose of defining
ontologically independent existents (if there are
any), (EDR) should be replaced, at least to a first
approximation, by something like:

(EDX) x
 dependsX for its existence upon y =df
 Necessarily, x exists only because y
 exists.

We use the subscript “X” because, in line with
foregoing remarks, it seems appropriate to call this species of
ontological dependence eXplanatory existential
dependence. (We shall need the subscript “E” for another
use later.) Here it is important to note that the presence of the word
“only” in (EDX)’s definiens should not be
understood as implying that an object x may not
dependX for its existence upon two (or
more) different things, y and z. Thus the
particularized relation of Mary’s loving Tom—supposing
such an object to exist—plausibly exists only because Mary
exists, but plausibly also exists only because Tom
exists. Furthermore, we may assume that it is not an
implication of (EDX) that a composite object dependsX for
its existence upon its proper parts, that is, that it is not
the case that it “exists only because they exist”—on
the grounds that it could still exist in the absence of those
particular parts, provided suitable alternative parts were substituted
for them. Thus (EDX) is quite unlike (EDG) in its
implications for part-whole dependence relations, as far as composite
objects are concerned. For the same reason, we may assume that (EDX)
does not imply that an “Aristotelian” universal
dependsX for its existence upon its particular
exemplars. Indeed, we may take it that the definiens of (EDX)
entails the definiens
of (EDR)—although not vice versa, of
course—so that the following is a principle that one could
accept:

(BECAUSE-NEC) If, necessarily, x exists
 only because y exists, then,
 necessarily, x exists only if y
 exists.

However, despite these clarifications, it must be conceded that the
locution “x exists only because y
exists” is hardly very perspicuous, either as to its logical
form or as to its exact meaning. Moreover, precisely because we have
introduced the conjunction “because” as
an explanatory conjunction, it may be felt that it is not
well-suited to the ontological role now being devised for it (for one
of the many recent attempts to specify the explanatory role of
“because”, see deRosset 2013). There are perhaps two
sources of worry here: first, that this approach invites a confusion
between metaphysics and epistemology; and secondly (but relatedly)
that contexts governed by the conjunction “because”
are opaque (in the technical sense of the term, in which it
implies the non-applicability of Leibniz’s Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles).
Some of these worries can perhaps be allayed by resorting to the
recent work on metaphysical grounding, which presents a much more
rigorous analysis of non-causal, metaphysical explanation of this type
(see especially the articles in Correia and Schnieder (eds.)
2012a). So we should perhaps accept that (EDX) as
it stands does not really constitute a satisfactory definition of a
species of existential dependence, conceived as an objective
metaphysical relation between entities, because it is insufficiently
perspicuous. In any case, the fact that (BECAUSE-NEC) but not its
converse holds some appeal indicates that what we should be trying to
frame is a perspicuous definition of a species of ontological
dependence that is a relation between x
and y stronger than (entailing but not entailed by)
“necessarily, x exists only if y
exists”. This should moreover be (for reasons discussed earlier)
an asymmetrical relation—or, more accurately,
an antisymmetric relation, that is, a relation R
such that if xRy and yRx, then x
= y. This is to allow that in principle an object may, in the
anticipated sense, depend ontologically upon itself.
As we shall see in a moment, a relation that may be of some
assistance in spelling out the relevant sense of dependence is the
relation of identity-dependence, to be explained below. But
first we should digress for a moment to note that
the one-sided holding of the relation defined
by (EDR) is unlikely to do the job. According to
this suggestion, we have:

(EDA) x
 dependsA for its existence upon y =df
 (i) necessarily, x exists only if y exists and
 (ii) it is not the case that, necessarily, y
 exists only if x exists.

Notice that the relation thus defined is asymmetric
(rather than antisymmetric): it doesn’t permit any
object to be existentially dependent upon itself. Indeed, we
have chosen to use the subscript “A” here because the
relation in question may aptly be called asymmetrical rigid
existential dependence.  One might think that this is at it should be,
as on the face of it the idea of something existentially depending on
itself appears very strange. There is of course an obvious theological
candidate that may violate this condition, namely God, so perhaps we
should not rule out the possibility outright. But there may be
slightly less controversial candidates as well, for it could be
suggested that there are fundamental entities that
existentially depend on themselves (rather than on nothing). At any
rate, if anything of the sort is possible, we better not rule it out
by definition, as (EDA) does.
Perhaps more importantly, an appeal to (EDA) does not seem to help
to resolve the difficulty raised by the example of Socrates’s
life. For neither Socrates nor his life is
existentially dependentA on the other, since in neither
case is clause (ii) of (EDA) satisfied. But we were looking for a
sense of “ontologically dependent” in which it
is true to say that Socrates’s life is ontologically
dependent upon him, but not vice versa.
4. Essential dependence and identity-dependence
4.1 Why essential dependence?
Until quite recently, it was common to think that ontological
dependence can be fully characterized in modal-existential terms, as
we have seen above. One obvious reason for this is that if one adopts
the usual “modalist” analysis of essence,
essential dependence will collapse into a form of modal-existential
dependence (one classic defence of the “modalist” analysis
is Marcus 1967). But it seems clear already starting from Aristotle
that there is an alternative way to formulate (some varieties of)
ontological dependence if essence is not analyzed in modal terms (as
Fine 1994a and especially those working in the
“neo-Aristotelian” tradition would have it). However, this
is not to suggest that Aristotle did not rely on the modal-existential
notion of ontological dependence. Rather, there are reasons to think
that Aristotle’s understanding of dependence
encompasses both the modal-existential notion and the
essentialist notion to be described below (for historical details and
further discussion, see Corkum 2008, Koslicki 2013, and Peramatzis
2011).
One motivation for developing a non-modal conception of
ontological dependence is that the modal-existential analysis appears
to be too coarse-grained for some cases. We have already discussed
some of these cases, but the most well-known examples have been made
famous by Fine (e.g., 1994b). Consider, for instance, what the
modal-existential account entails in the case of necessary existents.
Take Socrates and the number 2, for example. Given that numbers
necessarily exist, it is necessarily the case that 2 exists if
Socrates does. But presumably we do not want to say that Socrates
depends upon the number 2, or indeed on most necessary existents that
you might put in the place of 2. So the modal-existential account
makes everything depend upon every necessary existent, which seems
like the wrong result.
Admittedly, those who defend a modal-existential analysis of
ontological dependence could insist that it applies only
to contingent objects (cf. Simons 1987: 295). Simons makes
this type of qualification by focusing on concrete entities,
hence excluding necessary existents by definition; he also excludes
self-dependence. Simons calls the resulting notion of
dependence weak rigid dependence, but a stronger
notion, strong rigid dependence (Simons 1987: 303) is also
defined—the latter is a special case of the former. One example
of weak rigid dependence as defined by Simons would be a particular
water molecule depending for its existence on a particular oxygen
atom. In the case of strong rigid dependence, the dependent object
cannot be a proper part of the object it depends upon. So
object x is strongly rigidly dependent on object y
if x depends for its existence on y and y
is not a proper part of x. One example of strong rigid
dependence defined thus would be a trope (or mode) depending for its
existence on a substance. In addition to these rigid notions, Simons
defines corresponding notions of (weak and strong) generic
dependence.
While it is possible to avoid some of the challenges
raised for the modal-existential account with these qualifications,
they do nevertheless leave room for an alternative account of
ontological dependence that could also be applied to necessary
existents. Alternatively, a proponent of the modal-existential account
could simply bite the bullet and insist that every contingent
entity does rigidly depend for its existence on necessary
existents. One reason to do so would be the ability to get by with a
sparser battery of formal ontological tools—a consideration
motivated by parsimony.
The modal-existential analysis of ontological dependence can thus
be developed further and it can perhaps overcome some of the problems
that were pointed out earlier. But there are areas where a more
fine-grained notion would seem to be of use and there is also a
historical precedent (e.g., in Aristotle) for such a notion. It should
be noted though that much of the contemporary literature in defence of
a non-modal, fine-grained analysis (such as Fine 1994b and Koslicki
2012), operates in a “neo-Aristotelian” framework which
typically assumes some “non-modalist” version of
essentialism. Accordingly, there is an obvious rift between the
modal-existential analysis and the essentialist analysis—one
that we cannot fully bridge here. In any case, it is good to keep in
mind that the notion of ontological dependence itself does not
immediately force one to make a commitment in this regard, even though
some of its applications may entail such a commitment.
4.2 Identity-dependence
As a point of entry to the idea that there could be notions of
dependence not easily analysable in terms of the modal-existential
account, consider the fact that not all forms of dependence seem to
involve a requirement for existence at all. Indeed, as we
already saw in the case of (3), “God
doesn”t ontologically depend on anything’, it seems that
something beyond mere existential independence is being
expressed. Instead, one might say that God would not be the being that
she is if she were not ontologically independent, by her very
nature. The notion of essential dependence, which involves
requirements for identity or essence, may better
express what God’s supposed ontological independence is
about. In other words, it is an essential property of God
that she is ontologically independent. Recall that a similar issue
seemed to arise with regard to the possibility of composite objects
having essential proper parts. We will now consider a more
systematic method for dealing with cases of dependence involving the
essences or essential properties of objects.
It is not quite straight-forward to define essential dependence,
although a formal definition will be given below. Before that, we
ought to get a better picture of what it means to say that an object
depends upon something for its identity, that is, we should
clarify the relation of identity-dependence. Note that the
notion of “identity” at play here is not the one
symbolized with the “equals” sign, i.e.,
“=”. Rather, we mean “identity” in the sense
of what a thing is, or which thing of a certain kind
a thing is. Informally speaking, to say that the identity
of x depends on the identity of y—or, more
briefly, that x depends for its identity
upon y—is to say that which thing of its
kind y is fixes (or at least helps to fix) which
thing of its kind x is. By “fixes” in this
context is meant metaphysically determines. For instance,
then, the identity of a set is fixed by the identities of its
members, as was hinted already in section
1. Likewise, the identity of an assassination is (at
least partially) fixed by the identity of the person
assassinated. These relationships of identity-dependence are direct
consequences of the identity-criteria governing the kinds of which the
items thus related are instances. (For further discussion on
identity-criteria and identity-dependence, see Lowe 1989, 2009: ch. 2,
and 2012.)
Note that we are here concerned with identity in the sense
of individuality rather than the relation of
identity.  In other words, identity-dependence expresses the
determination of the individuality of objects in terms of the
individuality of other objects. Thus, the identity-dependence of a set
upon its members is a consequence of the fact that the Axiom of
Extensionality functions as the criterion of identity for sets. The
set’s members determine the individuality of the
set—they individuate the set.  Notice, here, that we
allow that x may be said to depend for its identity
upon y even in cases in which the identity
of y alone does not suffice to fix the identity
of x. So, for example, a set with two or more members depends
for its identity upon each of them, although its identity is
only completely fixed by the identities of all of
them.
Now, although we have not yet presented a formal definition of
identity-dependence, it might well seem that a consequence of any such
definition should be the following principle:

(ID-NEC)If x
depends for its identity upon y, then there is a
function f such that x is necessarily identical
with f(y).

(Note: “f(y)” here may be pronounced
“the f of y”.) For example: because the
identity of a marriage depends on the identities of the two people
being married, if x is a marriage and y
and z are the two people in question, (ID-NEC) is satisfied
in respect of x and y in virtue of the fact
that x is necessarily identical with the marriage of y
with z—so that in this case the required function is
the marriage with z function from persons to
events. (We here ignore the complications created by the fact that,
under some legal systems, the same two persons may be married to one
another more than once.) However, (ID-NEC) turns out to be
unsatisfactory as a definition, because it can be regard as trivially
true, given standard set theory, that any x and y
that may be connected with a function will satisfy the consequent of
(ID-NEC). So we better find a more satisfactory definition of
identity-dependence.
Evidently, it would not do simply to replace the conditional
connective in (ID-NEC) with a biconditional connective and
thence attempt to turn it into a definition of
identity-dependence, unless at the same time one could impose some
suitable restriction on the kind of function involved. One possibility
would be to exclude any function f which is not such that it
is part of the essence of x that it is
the f of y. But since it would appear strange to say
that essences quite generally involve anything
about functions, we might be better off with a definition
using an appropriate predicate that would do the same job
instead, arriving at the following definition of
identity-dependence:

(ID) x
depends for its identity upon y =df There is a
two-place predicate “F” such that it is part of
the essence of x that x is related
by F to y.

We can exemplify (ID) by letting x be {z}
and y be z, in which case we have, as is intuitively
correct, that {z} depends for its identity upon z,
because there is a two-place predicate—namely, “being a
member of the singleton set” (also known as the unit
set function)—such that it is part of the essence of
{z} that it is the singleton set of z.
Building on this example, we can see that x is necessarily
identical with the sole member of {x} and hence we can arrive
at a principle not unlike (ID-NEC). However, even though x is
necessarily identical with the sole member of {x}, it is
plausibly not part of the essence of x
that x is the sole member of {x} (cf. Fine 1994a:
4–5; see also Fine 1994b for a related discussion of the notion
of essence and essential dependence).
But, of course, for the foregoing strategy to work and thus for
(ID) to be fully vindicated, a perspicuous account of the notion of
“essence” would be required—and that is a large task
which cannot be undertaken here. However, various attempts to
construct such an account have been made, for instance by Fine (1995)
and Lowe (2008). In this sense, a thing’s essence may be said
to constitute its identity, when one uses the word
“identity” in this distinctive manner to speak of a
thing’s identity, rather than using it to speak of the
identity relation. Seen in this light, identity-dependence as
defined by (ID) is simply a species of essential dependence,
that is, a way in which the essence of a certain thing is determined
by a relation in which it stands to another thing.
Although the above account of identity-dependence is not entirely
uncontroversial, there are some interesting applications of it in the
literature. One of these applications concerns a version of Ontic
Structural Realism (OSR), which claims that objects depend for their
identities on the structures to which they belong (ID-OSR) (see French
2010 for one version). However, in a recent discussion of (ID-OSR),
O’Conaill (2014) proposes that (ID-OSR) is concerned, not with
individuality as (ID) is, but with
the identity-relation. Yet, as we indicated in the beginning
of this section, we have understood identity-dependence to concern
“identity” in a rather different sense.
For illustration, we may take a case of two electrons in an
entangled state. Normally, we would distinguish two entities based on
their intrinsic properties. If there is no difference in the intrinsic
properties of two entities, then, in accordance with Leibniz’s
Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles, we would conclude that
the two entities are in fact identical. However, it turns out,
according to the received view of quantum theory, that two electrons
in an entangled state are indiscernible in just this
sense. We end up with a dilemma: either the individuality of the
electrons must be explained in terms of haecceities
or bare particularities, or the electrons lack individuality
altogether (in fact, there are other options as well, but we will set
them aside for simplicity; for further discussion, see the separate
entry on
identity and individuality in quantum theory).  
The upshot is that we should not focus on the individuality issue, but
rather develop a structural account, such as Ontic Structural Realism
(see for instance Ladyman 1998), which can accommodate the idea of
non-individuality emerging from quantum theory in terms
of relations. But as O’Conaill points out, the various
attempts to apply (ID) to (OSR) (such as French 2010) do not always
make it clear whether identity is to be understood as
individual essence or as the relation of identity.  French’s
(2010: 105) version of (ID) is as follows:

(IDphys)
fundamental physical objects depend for their existence on the
relations of the structure = necessarily, the identity of such objects
is dependent on the identity of these relations.

The question which O’Conaill poses is whether, on
French’s characterization, the identities of the relations are
to be understood as individual essences or as the relation of identity
applied to each of the (structural) relations. His suggested answer is
that the latter interpretation would fit ID-OSR more naturally. We do
not have to take a stand on these issues here, but it is worth
emphasizing that these different conceptions of identity may produce
very different results.  (See also Lowe 2012 for a challenge regarding
individuation in structuralist ontologies.)
At this point, two principles concerning identity-dependence, as
defined by (ID), may be proposed. First:

(ID-EX) If x
depends for its identity upon y, then,
necessarily, x exists only if y exists.

And second:

(ID-NEX) If x
is not identical with y and x depends for
its identity upon y, then y does not depend
for its identity upon x.

An immediate implication of (ID-EX) in conjunction
with (EDR) is that if x depends for its
identity upon y, then x is rigidly
existentially dependent upon y (although not
necessarily vice versa, of course). These two principles are,
it seems, quite plausible. As for (ID-EX): surely, x cannot
exist unless everything upon which x’s identity depends
also exists. Thus an assassination cannot exist unless the person
assassinated exists, and a set cannot exist unless its members exist.
Indeed, it would seem that we can derive (ID-EX) with the aid
of (ID).  For suppose that x depends for
its identity upon y.  Then, by (ID), there is a
predicate F such that x is related by F
to y. Given, however, that the relevant F cannot
exist unless y exists—because a relation can obtain
only between entities all of which exist—it follows
that x likewise cannot exist unless y exists. As for
(ID-NEX), this seems to follow from the requirement
of non-circularity which is a condition on the adequacy of
any criterion of identity. For example, given that unit sets are not
to be identified with their members, we cannot say both that
the identity of a unit set depends upon the identity of its
member and that the identity of that member depends upon the
identity of that unit set, for this would engender a vicious circle
which would seem to deprive both unit sets and their
members of well-defined identity-conditions.
Note that it may be urged, with some plausibility, that every
object x trivially depends for its identity
upon itself.  And, certainly, (ID) has this
implication, because for any object x, there is a two-place
predicate—namely, identity—such that it is part
of the essence of x that x is the object identical
with x. But we must be very careful to distinguish between
the claim that an object depends for its identity upon itself and the
claim that an object depends for its identity solely upon
itself. For even if the former claim is trivially true of all
entities, the latter claim is certainly not.
4.3 Essential dependence
Having defined identity-dependence by (ID) as a
species of essential dependence, we are now in a position to
identify other species of essential dependence, the most obvious being
what may aptly be called essential
(existential) dependence, which can be defined as
follows:

(EDE) x
dependsE for its existence upon y =df
It is part of the essence of x that x exists only
if y exists.

Note that, whereas—assuming the truth
of (ID-NEX)—two distinct entities cannot
be identity-dependent upon each other, it very
plausibly is possible for each of two distinct entities to
dependE for its existence on the other. For
example, consider a solid sphere. Let us assume for the purposes of
this example that the solid sphere is a substance, a kind of
basic, ontologically independent entity
(see section 6.3 for further discussion). If we
think of the top and bottom “halves” of a solid sphere as
being geometrically defined entities whose boundaries are
specified by reference to the whole sphere of which they equal
subdivisions, it seems plausible to say that it is part of the essence
of each such hemisphere that it exists only if the other does. (These
“halves”, it should be emphasized, must not be confused
with the portions of matter “filling” them at any given
time, and hence should not be thought of as “parts” of the
sphere of which it is materially composed.) At the same time,
each hemisphere depends for its identity upon the whole
sphere—one being identified as the top half of that sphere and
the other as the bottom half—whereas the sphere itself does not
likewise depend for its identity upon either of these halves, given
that we have assumed that it is a substance in its own right. Note
also that, very plausibly, if x dependsE for its
existence upon y, then x also dependsR
for its existence upon y: essential existential
dependence entails rigid existential dependence—but
not, of course, vice versa.
We can find slightly different formulations of essential dependence
in the literature. For instance, on Kathrin Koslicki’s (2012:
190) re-construal of Fine’s essentialist account, we get:

(EDC) An
entity x ontologically depends on an entity (or
entities), y, just in case y is a constituent (or
are constituents) in x’s essence.

This account relies on the notion of constitutive essence,
which is developed in Fine’s work (1994b, 1995). As Fine puts
it:
we may take x to depend upon y
if y is a constituent of a proposition that is true in virtue
of the identity of x or, alternatively, if y is a
constituent of an essential property of x. (Fine 1994b:
275)
It should also be noted that even though the notions of essential
dependence defined above are no doubt more fine-grained than the
modal-existential notions, there may be reasons to think that even
they are not sufficiently fine-grained for all purposes (as argued in
Koslicki 2012). To illustrate, consider Fine’s well-known
discussion of Socrates and the singleton set that has Socrates as its
sole member. To use Fine’s terminology, we could say that it is
part of the constitutive essence of Socrates’s singleton set
that it has Socrates as its sole member, whereas it is not
part of the constitutive essence of Socrates to be the sole member of
Socrates’s singleton set.  But as Koslicki (2012: 195) points
out, this is really just to say that Socrates’s singleton set
ontologically depends on Socrates whereas Socrates does not
ontologically depend on Socrates’s singleton set. The relevant
notion of dependence appears to be built into Fine’s notion of
essence and, similarly, the notion of essence assumed by Fine (and
many other “neo-Aristotelians”) is already built into
(EDC).
Before we conclude our discussion of essential dependence, a major
issue in the literature concerning ontological dependence should be
mentioned. For it appears that those who are willing to buy into a
suitably fine-grained notion of essence, popular in the
“neo-Aristotelian” tradition, will find the
modal-existential account of ontological dependence far too
coarse-grained. Yet, those who are not sympathetic to the
“neo-Aristotelian” notion of essence but would rather
analyze essence in terms of modality would insist that the
modal-existential analysis is quite sufficient, and indeed that
essential dependence collapses into modal-existential dependence. The
recent literature has perhaps been dominated by the
“neo-Aristotelian” line (although one does not, of course,
need to be “neo-Aristotelian” to accept the notion of
essential dependence or the “non-modalist” analysis of
essence), but this is indeed only a relatively recent phenomenon. A
further issue is that there is some disagreement about how the
relevant notion of essence is to be constrained amongst those who
think that a more fine-grained analysis than the modal-existential
account is needed. For instance, Koslicki (2012: 196 ff.) regards
Fine’s propositional notion of essence according to which there
is little or no distinction between essence and real
definition as overly restrictive. She identifies the source of
this restrictive conception of essence, which is also present in
Lowe’s work, to be the focus on essences as
individuating—this is the type of view regarding essential
dependence, namely identity-dependence, which we have here been
focusing on. On Koslicki’s alternative picture, essences
must do more than individuate the entities whose
essences they are; and real definitions must do more than state
conditions which uniquely identify and delineate the entities under
consideration at every time and in every world in which they
exist. (Koslicki 2012: 200, fn. 13) 
5. Ontological dependence and metaphysical grounding
The notion of “ground” stormed into contemporary
analytic metaphysics in the beginning of the 21st century,
but the roots of the notion go back to Aristotle (for an overview, see
Fine 2012). At its simplest, grounding may be understood as
“metaphysical explanation”. To be more precise, when
some x is grounded in some y, it is usually thought
that y explains x. Moreover, the status
of y is generally thought to be somehow prior to
that of x—grounding is typically understood to express
priority between things. For instance, we might say that the members
of a set are prior to the set itself; the existence of the set is
grounded in its members. Or to take a more concrete example, the
existence of any given composite object is grounded in the existence
of its parts. For instance, we might suggest that the existence of any
given water molecule is grounded in the existence of hydrogen and
oxygen atoms.  Somewhat more controversially, we might also say that
mental states are grounded in physical states. In each of the
mentioned examples there appears to be an ontological dependence
relation between the grounded entity and the grounding entity or
entities. In fact, we have already discussed some of these examples in
terms of ontological dependence above. This naturally leads one to
question whether grounding just is (a variety of) ontological
dependence. One motivation for finding a systematic link between
ontological dependence and grounding is that it would be more
parsimonious than having two primitive notions (for discussion, see
Correia and Schnieder 2012b).
An initial reason to distinguish ontological dependence and
metaphysical grounding is that the latter is a much stricter notion.
Consider the idea that ontological dependence could be reflexive:
there is nothing in theory that rules out a relation of ontological
dependence obtaining in such a way that a given object is dependent on
itself. It is of course controversial whether there actually are any
such entities, but this is not enough to consider irreflexivity as a
necessary requirement for ontological dependence. In contrast,
metaphysical grounding is usually considered to be necessarily
irreflexive (but see Jenkins 2011).
At the outset, we can assume that if grounding were to be
understood as a type of ontological dependence, it would be some sort
of explanatory dependence. The idea that whatever does the
grounding also somehow explains what is being grounded is a
crucial part of the notion’s appeal. Relations of ontological
dependence often seem to have a similar type of explanatory role, but
the link to explanation is weaker: even though the existence of water
depends on the existence of hydrogen and oxygen, it does not seem to
be the case that the existence of hydrogen and oxygen explain
the existence of water. Rather, what explains the existence of water
is the ability of hydrogen and oxygen atoms to form molecules (even
though this is rather simplified). So it seems that not all relations
of ontological dependence can be grounding relations in the usual
sense.
We need something stricter than just “an explanatory
role” to identify grounding – otherwise we would end up
with a much too liberal notion, for we may regard a number of loosely
connected things explanatory in some very loose sense. For instance,
we might say that the fact that Smith murdered Jones is explained by
certain events in Smith’s childhood, but a more direct
explanation might be Smith’s desire to rob Jones. Certain events
in Smith’s childhood may help us understand why Smith
has murderous desires, but it’s not clear that they serve to
ground the fact that Smith murdered Jones.
One suggestion that may help to make grounding more precise would
be to focus on priority. To reiterate an example used above,
if the members of a set are prior to the set itself, then the
existence of the set is grounded in its members. So the grounding
entities are prior to—or more fundamental
than—the grounded entities.  Metaphors abound, but a typical way
to express the idea is to say that x is fundamental or
ontologically independent in this sense if and only if nothing
grounds x (Schaffer 2009: 373). This is another sense in
which grounding would seem to come apart from certain types of
ontological dependence, as a purely modal-existential understanding of
dependence in the lines of (EDR), without any claim
to priority, is also possible. This is of course the sense which we
defined above in terms of necessitation: even if x rigidly
necessitates y that does not entail that y must be
ontologically prior to x. At any rate, it would be odd to say
that parents are more fundamental than their children, even
if there is a (temporally relativized) rigid existential dependency
between parents and their children.
All this would appear to suggest that it isn’t
straightforward to define grounding simply as a variety of ontological
dependence. In any case, even if we could define one notion in terms
of the other, it seems that there are aspects of ontological
dependence that are not captured by all accounts of grounding as well
as aspects of grounding that are not captured by all accounts of
ontological dependence.  Accordingly, for the time being, it is
advisable to keep the notions apart, especially since there are some
further, formal differences that need to be taken into account. In
particular, grounding is most commonly understood as a strict
partial order (see Raven 2013), which entails irreflexivity,
transitivity, and asymmetry. If this is correct, grounding could only
capture a very specific variety of ontological dependence, as we have
seen that there are varieties of ontological dependence that violate
these formal features. Some have also argued that grounding itself
violates all or some of these formal features, so it is not entirely
uncontroversial that grounding truly is a strict partial ordering (for
discussion, see Jenkins 2011, Schaffer 2012, and Tahko 2013). Given
this, the exact link between grounding and ontological dependence
remains open, subject to further specification of the formal features
of ground.
6. Applications and other related notions
In addition to the previous discussion regarding metaphysical
grounding, there are numerous applications of ontological dependence
as well as closely related notions that we could discuss. It will not
be possible to do justice to all of them, but we will mention a few of
the most important ones (many of these and further applications are
discussed in Hoeltje, Schnieder and Steinberg (eds.) 2013).
6.1 Supervenience
The notion of supervenience is covered in more detail in the
separate entry on
supervenience,
but a brief mention is in order here, as supervenience is clearly a
type of dependence. It is a more difficult question just what type of
dependence it is, but, quite generally, when we assert that A
supervenes on B, we would also say that A-properties
ontologically depend upon B-properties. Take the typical
example of the beauty of a work of art and the physical manifestation
of that work of art. It would seem that if you wish to change the
aesthetic properties of an artwork, you will also have to manipulate
its physical manifestation. As a first pass, it looks as if the
dependence at work here is generic existential dependence as defined
by (EDG), so the aesthetic A-properties
dependG for their existence upon some
physical B-properties. However, supervenience in general is
not so easily analyzed, as at least on one usual conception,
supervenience is not irreflexive and hence not asymmetric (see
Steinberg 2013). In other words, we can at least say that
supervenience, as opposed to grounding, is not a strict partial order
and hence not a relation of ontological priority. There are various
ways to further specify the formal features of supervenience, but this
is not a task that we can undertake here.
6.2 Truthmaking
The connection between ontological dependence and truthmaking is of
a more general type. On many construals, the core of truthmaker theory
is considered to be the idea that truth
depends—or supervenes—on being (Bigelow
1988: 133; see also Armstrong 2004, Schaffer 2010a, and Liggins
2012). Recently, some have resisted this idea (e.g., Merricks 2007),
but it does remain popular among truthmaker theorists (for discussion,
see the separate entry on
truthmakers).
Moreover, the connection between truthmaking and ontological
dependence has been a part of truthmaker theory from the very
beginning; Mulligan, Simons, and Smith (1984: 294) rely on
Husserl’s work on ontological dependence in their introduction
of the idea of truthmaking (for further discussion of Husserl’s
work regarding dependence, see Simons 1982).  More precisely, it seems
there must be some way in which the world is in virtue of which true
propositions are true, but the world itself is not symmetrically
dependent on truth; there is an asymmetric dependence
relation between truth and being. However, popular though it is, this
view is not entirely uncontroversial. For instance, MacBride
(2014) argues that there is no need to appeal to truthmaking to
explain this type of asymmetric dependence between truth and being. In
fact, there are reasons to think that truthmaking cannot
explain the asymmetry, at least not on the basis of the idea that
truth supervenes on being. Part of the confusion here seems to
surround the relevant notion of supervenience. On Armstrong’s
(2004: 8) construal, the relevant notion of supervenience is
symmetric: truth supervenes on being, but being also supervenes on
truth. So it appears that the required asymmetry cannot arise from
supervenience itself (see also Rodriguez-Pereyra 2005). While these
problems must be settled elsewhere, it suffices to say
that some variety of ontological dependence is no doubt at
work in truthmaker theory—there is an on-going debate as to how
truthmaking should be specified. One recent suggestion that may have
some mileage is that the relevant asymmetry could be recovered if
truthmaking is understood as truth-grounding, that is, some
entity x grounds the truth of some proposition p
if p is true in virtue of the existence of x (see
Tahko 2013 for discussion).
6.3 Substance
One important application of ontological dependence is the analysis
of the notion of “substance”—a basic or fundamental
entity which possess at least some degree of ontological independence
(for discussion on the various uses of “substance” in
philosophy, see the separate entry on
substance).
If the idea of ontological independence is somehow associated with
“substance”, then it seems that some account of what the
relevant dependence amounts to will be required. In fact, those
familiar with Lowe 2010 (an earlier version of the present entry), will recall that the discussion was entirely focused on
finding the most plausible account of ontological dependence for the
purposes of analysing the notion of substance (this discussion
originates from Lowe 1998: ch. 6). This also ties in with a more
general application of ontological dependence, namely, the study of
formal ontological relations obtaining between ontological categories,
of which substance is a prime example (see also Hoffman and
Rosenkrantz 1994, Schaffer 2009 and Nolan 2011). So how should we
define “substance” given the various notions of
ontological dependence that we have at our disposal? It will be
recalled that one particularly powerful notion of ontological
dependence is the notion of identity-dependence, which we arrived at
when looking for an asymmetrical—or, at least,
an antisymmetrical—relationship of ontological
dependence.  It seems that if substances are considered as
ontologically independent entities, then an asymmetric
relation is required.  One possibility for defining substance, which
relies on (EDR) is the following:

(SUB-1) x is a
substance =df x is a particular and there is no
particular y such that y is not identical
with x and x dependsR for its existence
upon y.

(SUB-1) could be seen to follow the precedent of Aristotle,
who—in the Categories—admitted
only particulars as “primary” substances, while
allowing some universals (the species and genera of primary
substances) the status of “secondary” substances (see
Aristotle, Categories: ch. 2). However, (SUB-1), because it
relies on (EDR), will be unsatisfactory for those
who are convinced that the modal-existential analysis of ontological
dependence is not sufficiently fine-grained. We know already that it
won’t do to replace the notion of existential dependence
employed in (SUB-1) by appealing instead to the relation
of essential existential dependence, as defined
by (EDE), because the latter is neither an
asymmetrical nor an antisymmetrical relation. Indeed, this is one
lesson of the example of the sphere’s two hemispheres discussed
immediately after the definition for (EDE) was given. For, whereas
the whole sphere might well be taken to qualify as a
substance, neither of its “halves” plausibly can, because
they lack the requisite kind of ontological independence. But, while
(SUB-1) reinterpreted in terms of (EDE) does indeed have the
implication that neither of the hemispheres is a
substance—because each dependsE for its existence on
the other and hence on a particular distinct from itself—it also
has the unwanted implication that the whole sphere is not a
substance for the same reason, because it clearly seems to be part of
the essence of the sphere as a whole that it exists only if each of
its hemispheres exists. However, an obvious remedy is at hand. We can
simply replace the appeal to any species of existential
dependence in a definition on the pattern of (SUB-1) by an appeal to
the relation of identity-dependence, as defined
by (ID), to give:

(SUB-2) x is a
substance =df x is a particular and there is no
particular y such that y is not identical
with x and x depends for its identity
upon y.

Composite substances appear to comply with (SUB-2): for, plausibly,
although they possess proper parts, they do not depend for
their identity upon those parts, since which objects
those parts are does not help to determine of which
substances they are parts (the same objects being capable of becoming
parts of many different substances). Moreover, substances quite
generally do not depend for their identity upon their (accidental)
particularized properties, if such exist, nor upon the events in which
they participate, nor upon the places they occupy, nor upon other
substances. The particularized properties (i.e., tropes or modes) of
substances and the events in which substances participate—that
is, items such as the particular redness of this apple and the
assassination of Caesar—would appear to depend for their
identity upon those substances, which precludes the reverse
relationship from obtaining, on pain of circularity. (However, see
Keinänen and Hakkarainen 2014 for discussion; in particular, they
propose a strategy for identifying tropes that does not entail
circularity in the individuation of tropes.) As for places, although a
physical substance must indeed occupy some
place, which place it occupies does not
determine which substance it is, since substances may
exchange places.
One motivation for rejecting the appeal to (EDR)
in the analysis of substance is that it permits two different entities
to be existentially dependentR upon one
another—entities such as Socrates and Socrates’s
life. As we have seen, (ID) precludes any analogous
symmetry where identity-dependence is concerned: indeed, it
delivers the intuitively correct verdict that it
is Socrates’s life that is, in this sense,
ontologically dependent upon Socrates, rather than vice
versa. For Socrates’s life is an extended event or process
in which he participates—and which person Socrates is
partially determines which event this is, but not vice
versa. Or, to put it another way—one which should by now be
familiar—it is part of the essence of Socrates’s
life that it is the life of Socrates, but it is not
part of the essence of Socrates that he is the person who lived that
life. Of course, we can still acknowledge that the relation defined
by (EDR) does hold mutually between Socrates and
his life and we can still call this relationship a type
of existential dependence—namely, “rigid”
existential dependence. Similarly, we can recognize as other species
of existential dependence the “generic” existential
dependence defined by (EDG), the
“asymmetrical” rigid existential dependence defined
by (EDA) and the “essential”
existential dependence defined by (EDE).
The key point is simply that, in the sense of “ontological
dependence” which fits quite naturally with the
“neo-Aristotelian” account of substances
as ontologically independent objects, the relationships
defined
by (EDR), (EDG), (EDA)
and (EDE) will not serve the purpose,
whereas that defined by (ID) will. On this
view, the sense in which a substance is an entity which does not
depend “ontologically” upon anything other than itself is
exactly the sense in which it does not depend for
its identity upon anything else. This still leaves many
interesting questions concerning ontological (in)dependence
unanswered, notably the question of whether there is a fundamental
level or layer of reality, consisting of one or more
entities upon which all other existing entities depend ontologically
in one way or another (for discussion, see Lowe 1998: 154–73;
Schaffer 2003; Cameron 2008 and Paseau 2010).

6.4 Fundamentality
It seems plausible that at least in some cases where one entity is
more fundamental than another one, it is because the less
fundamental is ontologically dependent on the more fundamental. Much
of the recent discussion involving ontological dependence has focused
exactly on the question of fundamentality and especially the question
mentioned above, namely, whether there is something that is entirely
fundamental, ontologically independent—is there an ontological
“bottom level”? Hence, there are two senses in which a
clearer understanding of ontological dependence may help: we can
specify in what sense fundamental entities are ontologically
independent as well as how other entities may be ontologically
dependent on the fundamental entities, thus gaining further
understanding of the supposed “hierarchy” that terminates
in the bottom level.
The bottom level is usually thought to be at the
smaller end of the spectrum: the atomistic view suggests that
certain subatomic particles are fundamental. But this does not mean
that the fundamental level must necessarily be at the bottom—the
fundamental end could also be at the top, i.e., the universe as a
whole could be considered fundamental—a substance in its own
right (see Schaffer 2010b). Each of these views is a type
of metaphysical foundationalism, which suggests that chains
of ontological dependence must come to an end, at least at the
dependent end. In other words, metaphysical foundationalism asserts
that chains of asymmetric ontological dependence must terminate, they
must be well-founded. The idea is typically formulated in
mereological terms, as the reference to atomism suggests: there is an
asymmetric ontological dependence relation from one end of the
mereological scale to the other. It is the direction of this
dependence which divides proponents of fundamentality
into pluralists and monists (one form of such monism
is defended in Schaffer 2010b; see also Trogdon 2009).
However, there have been some speculative suggestions according to
which chains of ontological dependence could go on ad
infinitum, and hence violate the requirement of well-foundedness
(for discussion, see Bliss 2013, Morganti 2014, and Tahko 2014). The
resulting view would appear to be some sort of metaphysical
infinitism as opposed to metaphysical foundationalism. One
version of such a view, if combined with the idea that the direction
of dependence is towards the smaller, is a “gunky”
ontology, whereby matter is infinitely divisible “gunk”
and objects or matter have no smallest parts. But as interesting as
these views and the discussion surrounding fundamentality are,
discussing them in detail here would take us too far from our original
topic.