“Panentheism” is a constructed word composed of the
English equivalents of the Greek terms “pan”, meaning all,
“en”, meaning in, and “theism”, meaning God.
Panentheism considers God and the world to be inter-related with the
world being in God and God being in the world. It offers an
increasingly popular alternative to both traditional theism and
pantheism. Panentheism seeks to avoid either isolating God from the
world as traditional theism often does or identifying God with the
world as pantheism does. Traditional theistic systems emphasize the
difference between God and the world while panentheism stresses
God’s active presence in the world and the world’s
influence upon God. Pantheism emphasizes God’s presence in the
world but panentheism maintains the identity and significance of the
non-divine. Anticipations of panentheistic understandings of God have
occurred in both philosophical and theological writings throughout
history (Hartshorne and Reese 1953; J. Cooper, 2006). However, a rich
diversity of panentheistic understandings has developed in the past
two centuries primarily in Christian traditions responding to
scientific thought (Clayton and Peacocke 2004a). While panentheism
generally emphasizes God’s presence in the world without losing
the distinct identity of either God or the world, specific forms of
panenethism, drawing from different sources, explain the nature of the
relationship of God to the world in a variety of ways and come to
different conclusions about the nature of the significance of the
world for the identity of God.
 
1. Terminology

Because modern “panentheism” developed under the influence
of German Idealism, Whiteheadian process philosophy, and current
scientific thought, panentheists employ a variety of terms with
meanings that have specialized content.

Theological terms as understood by panentheists:

1. Classical Theism
 The understanding that ultimate reality is a being which is
distinct from the world and any other reality. This distinction at
times develops into an ontological separation between God and the
world that makes any interaction between God and the world
problematic.
2. Pantheism
 A type of theism that stresses the identity of God and the world
ontologically. This identity is expressed in different manifestations
so distinctions can be made, but the distinctions are temporary. There
is often a strong sense of necessity in God’s creation of the
world so that God as God must express deity in creation.
3. Transcendence
 Generally, God’s externality to the world so that God is
unlimited by any other being or reality. Hegel and then Hartshorne
understand transcendence as including all that is in order to avoid
any reality external to God that limits God.
4. Immanence
 God’s presence and activity within the world. Panentheists
assert that traditional theism limits its affirmation of God’s
immanence by understanding immanence as the transcendent presence of
the supernatural Being within the natural realm. When this divine
presence is understood as distinctively transcendent, God’s
presence and activity within the world as natural occurs as an
intervention of the supernatural within the natural. God, then, is
unaffected by the world and absent from the natural except in specific
cases of intervention.
5. Kenosis
 Divine self-emptying, or withdrawal, of divine attributes.
Traditionally, the choice to limit the exercise of the divine
attributes resulted from the divine will whether in the case of
Jesus’ human life or in God’s relation to the
creation.
6. Essential Kenosis
 God’s nature is self-giving and other-empowering. Thomas J.
Oord’s concept of essential kenosis bases the emptying of divine
attributes on the divine nature rather than the divine will (Oord
2015, 158–166).


Terms influenced by the German Idealism of Hegel and Schelling:

1. Dialectic
 The presence of contradictory realities where the contradiction
is overcome by including elements from each of the contradictory
elements in a synthesis that is more than the combination of each
member of the contradiction. Whitehead’s understanding of
God’s redemption of evil by placing an evil event in a contrast
to a good event expresses a similar understanding although he is not
as explicit as Hegel in understanding all of reality as a dialectical
development.
2. Infinite
 The obvious understanding of the infinite is as a negation of any
limits such as a bounded space or time. However, many panentheists,
and other thinkers (Williams 2010, 143), understand the infinite in a
positive sense as the inclusion of all that is and that might be
(Clayton 2008a, 152). Panentheists influenced by process philosophy
emphasize that divine infinity deals with possibility not actuality
(Dombrowski 2013, 253, and Keller 2014, 80. In the process
understanding, God contains all possibilities and presents every
possible response that an actual event might make to any events from
the past that influence what that event becomes.
3. Perichoresis
 The ontological intermingling of the divine and human natures in
Christ and the members of the Trinity (Otto 2001). This concept of
intermingling has also been utilized to describe the Incarnation and
the relationship between God and individuals/creation. Moltmann
generalizes perichoresis to the cosmic realm by affirming the presence
of God in the world and the world in God.


Terms influenced by Whiteheadian process philosophy:

1. Internal and External Relations
 Internal relations are relations that affect the being of the
related beings. External relations do not change the basic nature or
essence of a being. For panentheism, the relationship between God and
the world is an internal relationship in that God affects the nature
of the world and the world changes the nature of God. Classical theism
affirms an external relationship between God and the world in that
God’s actions affect the world but the world does not change
God’s essence, necessary existence, or basic nature.
2. Dipolar
 Refers especially to God as having two basic aspects. Schelling
identified these aspects as necessary and contingent. Whitehead
referred to God’s primordial and consequent natures meaning that
God has an eternal nature and a responsive nature. Whitehead
understood all reality to be dipolar in that each event includes both
physical and mental aspects in opposition to a mind-body dualism.
Hartshorne identified these aspects as abstract and concrete.


Terms related to current scientific thought:

1. Dualism
 While dualism may refer to a variety of pairs of opposites, in
scientific thought and process philosophy dualism refers to the
position that consciousness and matter are fundamentally different
substances, or kinds of stuff. Panentheists generally reject the
dualism of consciousness and matter (Clayton 2004c, 3). As an
alternative, paenentheists tend to affirm that consciousness and
matter are different manifestations of a basic ontological unity. This
basic ontological unity may take the form of panpsychism,
panphyschism, in which all actualities include an element of
mentality. Griffin prefers the term “panexperientialism”
because all actualities have an experiential component (2004, 44-45).
Clayton takes an alternative approach to overcome the
consciousness-material dualism by advocating strong emergence in which
ontologically different types of existence develop out of the basic
ontological unity (2004, 3-6). Leidenhag identifies difficulties with
each of these approaches (2016).
2. Reductionism
 The properties of one scientific domain consists of properties of
a more elementary scientific domain (Kim 2005, 164). Modern
reductionism primarily holds that all of reality can be explained by
using only physical, sub-atomic, entities and denies the existence of
mental realities as a separate kind of existence. Any reference to a
higher type of existence results from a lack of information about the
physical entities that are involved. Modern reductionism denies the
existence of mental realities as a separate type of existence.
Causation always moves from the bottom-up, from the basic physical
entities to higher forms of organization. For example, thought is
caused by the physical components of the brain. Reductionism allows
for weak emergence but not strong emergence and top-down causation
(Davies 2006, 37). Panentheism critiques reductionism as an
oversimplification of reality and the experience of reality.
3. Supervenience
 Generally refers to a relation between properties. Popular usage
refers to one property depending on another property such as mind
being a quality that supervenes on physical structures. Analytic
philosophy instead emphasizes a logical relation between classes of
properties with a variety of understandings of the nature of the
relationship (Leuenberger 2008 and McLaughlin and Bennett 2014).
4. Emergence
 Emergence, as a process involved in supervenience, occurs when a
new property arises out of a combination of elements. The traditional
example is that water emerges out of the combination of oxygen and
hydrogen atoms in certain proportions. There are a variety of types of
emergence that have been identified. In part-whole emergence, the
whole is more than the total of all the parts (Corning 2002). Strong
emergence understands evolution to produce new and distinct levels
characterized by their own laws or regularities and causal forces.
Weak emergence holds that the new level follows the fundamental causal
processes of physics (Clayton 2004c, 9). Strong emergence is also
known as ontological emergence and weak as epistemological emergence.
Many panentheists attach an emergentist sense to supervenience in
which higher level properties have downward causation from the
supervenient property to the underlying property (Clayton 2006a,
26-27, but see Leidenhag 2016 for a critique of attaching a strong
emergence concept to supervenience).
5. Top-Down Causation
More complex levels of objects or events affect less complex
elements. A common example of top-down causation is the effect of
thought upon a person’s body. This contrasts with bottom-up
causation where the simple is the cause of the more complex. In
bottom-up causation, physical elements cause other, more complex,
objects or events. Scientists heatedly debate the possibility of
top-down causation (Davies 2006).
6. Entanglement
In quantum theory, the correlation of two particles that originate
in a single event even though separated from each other by significant
distance. Entangled objects behave in ways that cannot be predicted on
the basis of their individual properties. The impossibility of
prediction can be understood epistemically if behavior is considered
the result of an average of many similar measurements or ontologically
if behavior results from the existence of the world in an indefinite
state prior to measurement. Both Bohr’s indeterministic and
Bohm’s deterministic understandings of quantum theory accept
this relational understanding of physical processes. Understanding the
world as persistent relationships that continue even during separation
provides a model based in science for understanding God’s
relation to the world. God’s influence can be present at the
level of individual events although this entanglement would remain
hidden from a local perspective. However, the implications of
entanglement for concepts of causality become even more complex when
considering the relation between God and the world. Polkinghorne
suggests that causality may be active information,
“pattern-forming operations” of what might be called
“the causal principle”, rather than an exchange of energy
(2010, 9).


Although numerous meanings have been attributed to the
“in” in panentheism (Clayton 2004, 253), the more
significant meanings are:

1. Locative meaning
 Location that is included in a broader location. For example,
something may be located in a certain part of a certain room. Such a
meaning is problematic in reference to God because of the common
understanding that God is not limited by spatial categories. If
spatial categories do not apply to God in ordinary usage, to say
something is located in God becomes problematic. “In” then
takes on metaphysical meanings.
2. Metaphysical basis for being
 Beings come into existence and continue to exist due to the
presence of divine Being. The concept of participation in both
classical theism and panentheism often includes the understanding that
the world comes into being and continues to exist through taking part
in God’s Being (Clayton 2008, 118–119).
3. Metaphysical-Epistemological basis for being
 Presence in God provides both identity and being. Karl
Krause’s panentheism asserted a metaphysical structure that
involved both how an entity differs from other entities
(epistemological identity) and what it is in itself (ontological
status) (Göcke 2013a).
4. Metaphysical interactive potential
 Neither God’s actions nor the world are completely
determined. This lack of complete determination leads to an
unpredictable self-organizing relation of both God and the world based
on prior actualizations of each. “The ‘en’
designates an active indeterminacy, a commingling of unpredictable,
and yet recaputulatory, self-organizing relations” (Keller 2003,
219).
5. Emergence metaphor
 A more complex entity comes from at least a partial source.
6. Mind/Body analogical meaning
 The mind provides structure and direction to the organization of
the organism of the body. The world is God’s body in the sense
that the world actualizes God as specifically who God is and manifests
God while different from God. Many, but not all, panentheists utilize
the mind/body analogy to describe the God/world relation in a manner
that emphasizes the immanence of God without loss of God’s
transcendence.
7. Part/Whole analogical meaning
 A particular exists in relation to something that is greater and
different from any of its parts and the total sum of the parts. The
world is in God because the world shares in the greater unity of
God’s being and action.

2. History

Although Karl Krause (1781–1832) appears to be the first to use
the explicit label of “panentheism” (Gregersen 2004, 28),
Schelling used the phrase “Pan+en+theism” in his Essay
on Freedom in 1809 before Krause used “panentheism” in
1829 (Clayton 2010, 183). However, various advocates and critics of
panentheism find evidence of incipient or implicit forms of
panentheism present in religious thought as early as 1300 BCE.
Hartshorne discovers the first indication of panentheistic themes in
Ikhnaton (1375–1358 BCE), the Egyptian pharaoh often considered
the first monotheist. In his poetic description of the sun god,
Ikhnaton avoids both the separation of God from the world that will
characterize traditional theism and the identification of God with the
world that will characterize pantheism (Hartshorne 1953, 29–30).
Early Vedantic thought implies panentheism in non-Advaita forms that
understand non-dualism as inclusive of differences. Although there are
texts referring to Brahman as contracted and identical to Brahman,
other texts speak of Brahman as expanded. In these texts, the perfect
includes and surpasses the total of imperfect things as an
appropriation of the imperfect. Although not the dominant
interpretation of the Upanishads, multiple intimations of
panentheism are present in the Upanishads (Whittemore 1988,
33, 41–44). Hartshorne finds additional religious concepts of
God that hold the unchanging and the changing together in a way that
allows for the development and significance of the non-divine in
Lao-Tse (fourth century BCE) and in the Judeo-Christian scriptures
(1953, 32–38).

In philosophical reflection, Plato (427/428–348/347 BCE) plays a
role in the development of implicit panentheism although there is
disagreement about the nature of that role. Hartshorne drew a dipolar
understanding of God that includes both immutability and mutability
from Plato. Hartshorne understood Plato’s concept of the divine
to include the Forms as pure and unchanging being and the World soul
as changing and in motion. Although he concluded that Plato never
reconciled these two elements in his understanding of the divine, both
aspects were present (1953, 54). J. Cooper, instead, maintains that
Plato retained an essential distinction between the Good and the other
beings that Plato called gods. According to J. Cooper, Plotinus
(204–270 CE) rather than Plato provided the basis for
panentheism with his description of the physical world as an emanation
of being from the One making the world part of the Ultimate (2006,
35–39). However, Baltzly finds evidence in the Timaeus
of a polytheistic view that can be identified as panentheistic
(2010).

From Plato to Schelling (1775–1854 CE), various theologians and
philosophers developed ideas that are similar to themes in
contemporary panentheism. These ideas developed as expressions of
traditional theism. Proclus (412–485 CE) and Pseudo-Dionysus
(late Fifth to early Sixth century) drawing upon Plotinus developed
perspectives in which the world came from God and understood the
relationship between God and the world as a dialectical relationship
in which the world came from God and returned to God. (J. Cooper 2006,
42–46). In the Middle Ages, the influence of Neoplatonism
continued in the thought of Eriugena (815–877 CE), Eckhart
(1260–1328 CE), Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464 CE), and
Boehme (1575–1624 CE). Although accused of pantheism by their
contemporaries, their systems can be identified as panentheistic
because they understood God in various ways as including the world
rather than being the world and because they used a dialectical
method. The dialectical method involved the generation of opposites
and then the reconciliation of the opposition in God. This retained
the distinct identity of God in God’s influence of the world (J.
Cooper 2006, 47–62). During the early modern period, Bruno
(1548–1600 CE) and Spinoza (1631–1677 CE) responded to the
dualism of traditional theism by emphasizing the relationship between
God and the world to the point that the nature of any ontological
distinction between God and the world became problematic. Later
thinkers such as the Cambridge Platonists (Seventeenth century),
Jonathan Edwards (1703–1758 CE) (Crisp 2009), and Friedrich
Schleiermacher (1768–1834 CE) thought of the world as in some
way in God or a development from God. Although they did not stress the
ontological distinction between God and the world, they did emphasize
the responsive relationship that humans have to God. Human
responsiveness assumed some degree of human initiative if not freedom,
which indicates some distinction between God and humans. The
assumption of some degree of human initiative was a reaction against
the loss of freedom due to Spinoza’s close identification
between God and the world (J. Cooper 2006, 64–90).

The nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw the development of
panentheism as a specific position regarding God’s relationship
to the world. The awareness of panentheism as an alternative to theism
and pantheism developed out of a complex of approaches. Philosophical
idealism and philosophical adaptation of the scientific concept of
evolution provided the basic sources of the explicit position of
panentheism. Philosophical approaches applying the concept of
development to God reached their most complete expression in process
philosophy’s understanding of God being affected by the events
of the world.

Hegel (1770–1831) and Schelling (1775–1854) sought to
retain the close relationship between God and the world that Spinoza
proposed without identifying God with the world. Their concept of God
as developing in and through the world provided the means for
accomplishing this. Prior to this time, God had been understood as
unchanging and the world as changing while existing in God (J. Cooper
2006, 90). Schelling’s understanding of God as personal provided
the basis for the unity of the diversity in the world in a manner that
was more open than Hegel’s understanding. Schelling emphasized
the freedom of the creatures in relation to the necessity of
God’s nature as love. For Schelling, God’s free unfolding
of God’s internal subjective necessity did not result in an
external empirical necessity determining the world (Clayton 2000,
474). This relationship resulted in vitality and on-going development.
Hartshorne classified this as a dipolar understanding of God in that
God is both necessary and developing (1953, 234). J. Cooper describes
Schelling’s thought as dynamic cooperative panentheism (2006,
95). Hegel found Schelling inadequate and sought a greater unity for
the diversity. He united Fichte’s subjective idealism and
Schelling’s objective idealism to provide a metaphysics of
subjectivity rather than substance (Clayton 2008a, 125). Hegel’s
unification of Fichte and Schelling resulted in a more comprehensive
and consistent system still based upon change in God. God as well as
nature is characterized by dialectical development. In his rejection
of pantheism, Hegel understood the infinite as including the finite by
absorbing the finite into its own fuller nature. This retained divine
transcendence in the sense of the divine surpassing its parts although
not separate from the parts (Whittemore 1960, 141–142). The
divine transcendence provided unity through the development of the
Absolute through history. Karl Krause (1781–1832) in 1828
labeled Schelling’s and Hegel’s positions as
“panentheism” in order to emphasize their differences from
Spinoza’s identification of God with the world (Reese 2008, 1).
J. Cooper describes Hegel’s panentheism as dialectical
historical panentheism (2006, 107).

As Darwin’s theory of evolution introduced history into the
conceptualization of biology, Samuel Alexander (1859–1938),
Henri Bergson (1859–1941), and C. Lloyd Morgan (1852–1936)
introduced development into the ways in which all of physical reality
was conceptualized. They then worked out positions that in a variety
of ways understood God and the world as growing in relationship to
each other. Although Hartshorne’s classification of
“panentheism” did not include Alexander in the category of
“panentheism,” only occasionally mentioned Bergson, and
made no reference to Morgan, Whitehead referred to all three of these
thinkers positively. Although it may be too strong to claim that they
influenced Whitehead (Emmett 1992), they did provide the background
for Whitehead’s and then Hartshorne’s systematic
development of process philosophy as an expression of panentheism.
Hartshorne popularized the modern use of the term
“panentheism” and considered Whitehead to be the
outstanding panentheist (Hartshorne 1953, 273). Although Hartshorne
made several modifications to Whitehead’s understanding of God,
the basic structures of Whitehead’s thought were continued in
Hartshorne’s further development of Whitehead’s philosophy
(Ford 1973, Cobb 1965). God, for process philosophy, is necessary for
any actual world. Without God, the world would be nothing more than an
unchanging existence radically different from the actual world of
experience. God as both eternal and temporal provides possibilities
that call the world to change and develop. God as eternal provides an
actual source of those possibilities. However, if God is only eternal,
the possibilities would be unrelated to the actual world as it
presently exists. Thus, Whitehead and Hartshorne understand the world
to be present in God in order for the possibilities that lead to
development to be related to the world (Hartshorne 1953, 273). The
implication of God’s inclusion of the world is that God is
present to the world and the world influences God. Although the
presence of the world in God could be understood as a form of
pantheism, process philosophy avoids collapsing the world into God or
God into the world by maintaining a distinction between God and the
world. This distinction is manifest in the eternality of God and the
temporality of the world. It is also apparent in the freedom of the
events in the world. Although God presents possibilities to the events
in the world, each event “decides” how it will actualize
those possibilities. The freedom of each event, the absence of divine
determination, provides a way for process thought to avoid God being
the cause of evil or containing evil as evil. Since God includes the
events of the world, God will include the evil as well as the good
that occurs in the world and this evil will affect God since the world
affects God’s actualization. But, because God does not determine
the response of each event to the possibilities that God presents, any
event may reject God’s purpose of good through the
intensification of experience and actualize a less intense experience.
God does take this less intense, evil, experience into God’s
self, but redeems that evil by means of relating it to the ways in
which good has been actualized. Thus, God saves what can be saved from
the world rather than simply including each event in isolation from
other events (J. Cooper 2006, 174, 180).
3. Contemporary Expressions

Protestant theologians have contributed to recent developments of
panentheism by continuing the German Idealist tradition or the
tradition of process philosophy. Although the majority of the
contemporary expressions of panentheism involve scientists and
protestant theologians or philosophers, articulations of forms of
panentheism have also developed among feminists, in the Roman Catholic
tradition, in the Orthodox tradition, and in religions other than
Christianity.

Utilizing resources from the tradition of German Idealism, Jürgen
Moltmann developed a form of panentheism in his early work, The
Crucified God in 1974 (1972 for the German original), where he
said that the suffering and renewal of all humanity are taken into the
life of the Triune God. He explicated his understanding of panentheism
more fully in The Trinity and the Kingdom in 1981.
Theological concerns motivate Moltmann’s concept of panentheism.
Panentheism avoids the arbitrary concept of creation held by
traditional theism and the loss of creaturely freedom that occurs in
Christian pantheism (J. Cooper 2006, 248). Moltmann understands
panentheism to involve both God in the world and the world in God. The
relationship between God and the world is like the relationship among
the members of the Trinity in that it involves relationships and
communities (Molnar 1990, 674). Moltmann uses the concept of
perichoresis to describe this relationship of mutual interpenetration.
By using the concept of perichoresis, Moltmann moves away from a
Hegelian understanding of the trinity as a dialectical development in
history (J. Cooper 2006, 251). The relationship between God and the
world develops because of God’s nature as love that seeks the
other and the free response of the other (Molnar 1990, 677). Moltmann
does not consider creation necessary for God nor the result of any
inner divine compulsion. Instead creation is the result of God’s
essential activity as love rather than the result of God’s
self-determination (Molnar, 1990, 679). This creation occurs in a
process of interaction between nothingness and creativity, contraction
and expansion, in God. Because there is no “outside” of
God due to God’s infinity, God must withdraw in order for
creation to exist. Kenosis, or God’s self-emptying, occurs in
creation as well as in the incarnation. The nothing in the doctrine of
“creation from nothing” is the primordial result of
God’s contraction of God’s essential infinity (J. Cooper,
2006, 247). Moltmann finds that panentheism as mutual interpenetration
preserves unity and difference in a variety of differences in kind
such as God and human being, person and nature, and the spiritual and
the sensuous (Moltmann, 1996, 307).

In his process panentheism, David Ray Griffin assumes that scientific
understandings of the world are crucial and recognizes the
implications of scientific understanding for theology. However, his
concept of panentheism builds on the principles of process philosophy
rather than scientific concepts directly. Griffin traces modern
atheism to the combination of understanding perception as exclusively
based on physical sensations, accepting a naturalistic explanation of
reality, and identifying matter as the only reality. But, the
emergence of mind challenges the adequacy of this contemporary
worldview (2004, 40–41). He claims that the traditional
supernaturalistic form of theism with its emphasis upon the divine
will does not provide an adequate alternative to the atheism of the
late modern worldview because God becomes the source of evil. Griffin
argues that traditional theism makes God the source of evil because
God’s will establishes the general principles of the universe
(2004, 37). Process panentheism provides a way to avoid the problems
of both materialistic naturalism and classical theism (2004, 42).
Griffin proposes panexperientialism that bases sensory perception on a
non-sensory mode of perception in order to explain both the mind-body
interaction and the God-world interaction. God and the world are
different entities but both are actual. They are numerically distinct
but ontologically the same, in Griffin’s terms, avoiding dualism
and supernaturalism. God and events in the world interact through
non-sensory perception (2004, 44–45). Through this interaction,
God can influence but not determine the world, and the world can
influence God’s concrete states without changing God’s
essence. Process panentheism recognizes two aspects of the divine, an
abstract and unchanging essence and a concrete state that involves
change. Through this dipolar concept, God both influences and is
influenced by the world (2004, 43–44). Griffin understands God
as essentially the soul of the universe although distinct from the
world. The idea of God as the soul of the world stresses the intimacy
and direct relationship of God’s relationship to the world, not
the emergence of the soul from the world (2004, 44). Relationality is
part of the divine essence, but this does not mean that this specific
world is necessary to God. This world came into existence from
relative nothingness. This relative nothingness was a chaos that
lacked any individual that sustained specific characteristics over
time. However, even in the chaos prior to the creation of this world,
events had some degree of self-determination and causal influence upon
subsequent events. These fundamental causal principles along with God
exist naturally since these causal principles are inherent in things
that exist including the nature of God. The principles cannot be
broken because such an interruption would be a violation of
God’s nature. An important implication of the two basic causal
principles, a degree of self-determination and causal influence, is
that God influences but does not determine other events (2004, 43).
Griffin’s understanding of naturalism allows for divine action
that is formally the same in all events. But this divine action can
occur in a variable manner so that some acts are especially revelatory
of the divine character and purpose (2004, 45).

Much of the contemporary discussion and development of panentheism
occurs in the context of the science and religion discussion. The
early modern concept of an unchanging natural order posed a challenge
to understandings of divine action in the world. The current
discussion draws on the development of scientific information about
the natural world that can contribute to religious efforts to explain
how God acts in the world. In the contemporary discussion, Arthur
Peacocke and Paul Davies have made important contributions as
scientists interested in, and knowledgeable about, religion. Peacocke
developed his understanding of panentheism beginning in 1979 and
continuing through works in 2001, 2004, and 2006. Peacocke starts with
the shift in the scientific understanding of the world from a
mechanism to the current understandings of the world as a unity
composed of complex systems in a hierarchy of different levels. These
emergent levels do not become different types of reality but instead
compose a unity that can be understood naturally as an emergentist
monism. At the same time, the different levels of complexity cannot be
reduced to an explanation of one type or level of complexity. The
creative dynamic of the emergence of complexity in hierarchies is
immanent in the world rather than external to the world (Peacocke
2004, 137–142). Similarly, Paul Davies describes the universe by
talking about complexity and higher levels of organization in which
participant observers bring about a more precise order (2007). An
important scientific aspect of this concept of complexity and
organization is the notion of entanglement especially conceptual level
entanglement (Davies 2006, 45–48). Again, the organization,
which makes life possible, is an internal, or natural, order rather
than an order imposed from outside of the universe (Davies 2004).
Peacocke draws upon this contemporary scientific understanding of the
universe to think about the relationship between God and the natural
world. He rejects any understanding of God as external to nature
whether it is a traditional theistic understanding where God
intervenes in the natural world or a deistic understanding where God
initiates the natural world but does not continue to be active in the
world. For Peacocke, God continuously creates through the processes of
the natural order. God’s active involvement is not an
additional, external influence upon events. However, God is not
identified with the natural processes, which are the action of God as
Creator (Peacocke 2004, 143–144). Peacocke identifies his
understanding of God’s relation to the world as panentheism
because of its rejection of external interactions by God in favor of
God always working from inside the universe. At the same time, God
transcends the universe because God is more than the universe in the
sense of God being unlimited by the world. This panentheistic model
combines a stronger emphasis upon God’s immanence with
God’s ultimate transcendence over the universe by using a model
of personal agency (Peacocke 2004, 147–151). Davies also refers
to his understanding of the role of laws in nature as panentheism
rather than deism because God chose laws that give a co-creative role
to nature (2004, 104.

Philip Clayton begins with contemporary scientific understandings of
the world and combines them with theological concepts drawn from a
variety of sources including process theology. He describes
God’s relationship with the world as an internal rather than an
external relationship. Understanding God’s relationship as
internal to the world recognizes the validity of modern scientific
understandings that do not require any external source in order to
account for the order in the world. At the same time, God’s
internal presence provides the order and regularity that the world
manifests (2001, 208–210). Clayton agrees that the world is in
God and God is in the world. Panentheism, according to him, affirms
the interdependence of God and the world (2004a, 83). This affirmation
became possible as a result of the rejection of substantialistic
language in favor of personal language in thinking of God.
Substantialistic language excludes all other actualities from any one
actuality. Rejection of substantialistic language thus allows for the
interaction of beings. Clayton cites Hegel’s recognition that
the logic of the infinite requires the inclusion of the finite in the
infinite and points towards the presence of the world in God (Clayton
2004a, 78–79). Clayton, along with Joseph Bracken (1974, 2004),
identifies his understanding of panentheism as Trinitarian and kenotic
(Clayton 2005, 255). It is Trinitarian because the world participates
in God in a manner analogous to the way that members of the Trinity
participate in each other although the world is not and does not
become God. God freely decides to limit God’s infinite power in
an act of kenosis in order to allow for the existence of non-divine
reality. The divine kenotic decision results in the actuality of the
world that is taken into God. But, for Clayton, God’s inclusion
of finite being as actual is contingent upon God’s decision
rather than necessary to God’s essence (2003, 214). Clayton
affirms creation from nothing as a description of creaturely existence
prior to God’s decision. The involvement of the world in an
internal relationship with God does not completely constitute the
divine being for Clayton. Instead, God is both primordial, or eternal,
and responsive to the world. The world does constitute God’s
relational aspect but not the totality of God (2005, 250–254).
The best way to describe the interdependence between God and the world
for Clayton is through the concept of emergence. Emergence may be
explanatory, epistemological, or ontological. Ontological
understandings of emergence, which Clayton supports, hold 1) monism
but not physicalism, 2) properties emerge in objects from the
potentiality of an object that cannot be previously identified in the
object’s parts or structure, 3) the emergence of new properties
giving rise to distinct levels of causal relations, and 4) downward
causation of the emergent level upon prior levels (2006a, 2–4).
Emergence recognizes that change is important to the nature of the
world and challenges views of God as unchanging (Clayton 2006b,
320).

A number of feminists advocate panentheism by critiquing traditional
understandings of transcendence for continuing dualistic ways of
thinking. Feminist panentheists conceive of the divine as continuous
with the world rather than being ontologically transcendent over the
world (Frankenberry 2011). Sallie McFague’s use of metaphors in
both theology and science led her to describe the world as God’s
body. McFague bases the metaphorical nature of all statements about
God upon panenetheism (2001, 30). Furthermore, for McFague,
panentheism sees the world as in God which gives priority to
God’s name but includes each person’s name and preserves
their distinctiveness in the divine reality (2001, 5). God’s
glory becomes manifest in God’s total self-giving to the world
so that transcendence becomes immanence rather than being understood
as God’s power manifest in distant control of the world. Grace
Jantzen also uses the metaphor of the world as God’s body.
Additionally, Jantzen (1998) and Schaab (2007) have proposed metaphors
about the womb and midwifery to describe God’s relation to the
world. Anna Case–Winters challenges McFague’s metaphor of
the world as God’s body. Case–Winters acknowledges that
this metaphor maintains God’s personal nature, offers a coherent
way to talk about God’s knowledge of and action in the world,
recognizes God’s vulnerable suffering love, and revalues nature
and embodiment. But at least McFague’s early use of the
world-as-God’s-body metaphor tended towards pantheism and even
her later introduction of an agential role for the divine still
retains the possibility of the loss of the identity of the world.
Case–Winters uses McDaniel’s (1989) distinction between
emanational, arising out of the being of the One, and relational,
present through relationship, understandings of God’s immanence
in the world to establish a form of panentheism with a clearer
distinction between God and the world. The world is an
“other” in relation to God rather than being a direct
expression of God’s own being through emanation for
Case–Winters (30–32). Frankenberry contrasts
McFague’s and Case–Winter’s two concepts of
transcendence to the traditional hierarchical concept of
transcendence. McFague’s concept is one of total immanence while
Case–Winters holds a dialectic between individual transcendence
and immanence (2011). Frankenberry suggests that pantheism may provide
a more direct repudiation of male domination than panentheism provides
(1993).

Although much of the development of panentheism takes place in the
context of the Christian tradition, connections between other world
religions and panentheism have been identified. These connections
range from explicitly panentheistic traditions, to similarities to
specific beliefs and practices of a tradition, to beliefs and
practices that could be developed into panentheistic positions.
Hartshorne in his discussion of panentheism included a section on
Hinduism (1953). Biernacki considers Hinduism to be one of the most
panentheistic traditions (Biernacki 2014b). The concept of the world
as the body of the divine offers a strong similarity to Western
panentheism. The Gita identifies the whole world, including
all the gods and living creatures, as the Divine body. But the Divine
Being has its own body that contains the world while being more than
the world. While the Upanishads acknowledge the body of the Divine at
times, the body of the divine is never identified as the cosmos. Most
of the Tantrics hold a pantheistic view in which the practitioner is a
manifestation of the divine. Abhinavagupta, in the tenth century,
provided the first panentheistic understanding of the world as
God’s body. For him, differentiation is Shiva concealing his
wholeness. Abhinavagupta also insisted that Shiva transcends the
cosmos (Bilimoria and Stansell 2010, 244–258; Clayton 2010,
187–189; and Barua 2010, 1–30. See also Hardy 2016). Other
traditions where connections to panentheism have been found include
Judaism (Artson 2014 and Langton 2016), Jainism (Chapple 2014),
Confucianism (Lee 2014), Buddhism (Samuel 2014), and Sufism
(Sharify–Funk and Dickson 2014). While these connections might
imply a universalistic theology, panentheism affirms the importance of
all religions and supports inter–religions dialogue (Biernacki
2014a, 6, 10).
4. Ontological Nature of God/world Relation

The feminist discussion about the adequacy of the metaphor of the
world as God’s body points toward an issue in the broader
panentheistic discussion about how to describe the relationship
between God and the world and the adequacy of the specific metaphors
that have been used. McFague argues that any attempt to do theology
requires the use of metaphor (2001, 30). Clayton proposes different
levels of metaphor as the most adequate way to reconcile the conflict
between divine action and the integrity of the created realm (2003,
208). For Peacocke, the limitation of language requires the use of
models and metaphors in describing both God and the cosmos (Schabb
2008, 13. The dominant metaphor in panentheism has been the world as
God’s body. The primary objection to the world as God’s
body is the substantialistic implications of the term
“body” that lead either to an ontological separation
between the world and God or to a loss of identity for God or the
world. Further, Bracken finds that the soul–body metaphor lacks
clarity about the freedom and self–identity of the creatures in
relations to God (1992, 211). Anna Case–Winters faults the
soul–body metaphor for tending to see the soul as dominating the
body and failing to recognize the world as a unified organism (1995
251, 254). Metaphors may be helpful, but they are never literal and
thus fail to describe precisely the actualities involved. Beyond the
difficulty of the soul–body metaphor the multiplicity of ways
that panentheists describe the mutual relationship between God and the
world indicates a vagueness of understanding of the ontology of the
relation between God and the world. Other attempts to describe the
God–world relation by use of the term “in” confront
a diversity of meanings seeking to make the concept of the world
existing in God more precise (Clayton 2004b, 253).

More clearly metaphysical understandings of God’s relation to
the world have been articulated. Schelling’s German idealism
understood God as freely unfolding emanation by introducing
subjectivity. There is no ontological separation between God and the
world because the world participates in the infinite as its source
(Clayton 2000,477–481). Krause understood the world’s
participation in God both ontologically and epistemically. The
particularity of each existent being depends upon the Absolute for its
existence as what it is (Göcke 2013a, 372). Keller offers another
metaphysical understanding by arguing for creation out of chaos. She
rejects substance metaphysics and describes the relation between God
and the world as a complex relationality involving an active
indeterminacy and past realities (2003, 219). Finally the science and
religion discussion provides another metaphysical understanding by
drawing upon scientific concepts of supervenience, emergence, downward
causation, and entanglement to provide a ground for theological
concepts of God’s relation to the world.

The nature of the mutual relationship between the infinite and the
finite is crucial to the claim by panentheism to be a creative
alternative to the transcendent being of classical Christian theism
and the immanent being of pantheism. The nature of this relationship
basically depends upon the understanding of the ontology of each
member of the relationship. The issue is the nature of being for God
and for the world as the basis for mutual influence between God and
the world. Various traditions in Christian thought have sought to
describe the nature of God’s being and the world’s being
in their relationship. Thomistic thought utilizes a concept of analogy
as it wrestles with the nature of the being of God and the being of
the world (Malloy 2014). Others in considering God’s action in
the world posit the necessity of ontological difference between God
and finite reality (Leidenhag 2014, 219). Process thought directly
addresses the issue of ontology by calling for an ontology that does
not consider substance as the basic type of existence because
substance does not allow for internal relations (Bracken 2014,
10).

Historically, participation, Hegelian dynamic ontology, and process
dynamic ontology have been utilized to describe the ontological basis
for the relations between God and the world. Participation has
philosophical antecedents in Plato and Aristotle and was utilized in
Augustinian and Orthodox Christian traditions. In participation, the
existence of the world somehow takes part in God’s being. Early
modern usage of the concept of participation appears in the thought of
Krause (1781–1832) and Sergei Bulgakov (1871–1944). Krause
identifies the character of every thing as the result of its
participation in the original unity of the Absolute. But the Absolute
is still different in its internal constitution from its parts
(Göcke 2013a, 372). Bulgakov describes participation as the
inclusion of the finite by the Absolute (Gavrilyuk 2015, 453).
Hegelian dynamic ontology describes an Infinite which gives rise to
the finite through a dialectical process of negation. The finite
through a second reciprocal negation of its finitude brings about
union and return in transformation to both the Infinite and the finite
(Williams 2010, 143). Process dynamic ontology understands God as
dipolar with a primordial nature that is eternal and a consequent
nature that includes the actualizations achieved by the world. God
presents possibilities to the events of the world which then make
decisions bringing about actualities that are then included in
God.

Bracken and Cazalis seek to make the ontological nature of the
relation more precise. Bracken proposes a Trinitarian field theory to
explain the world’s presence in God. The world is a large but
finite field of activity within the all–comprehensive field of
activity constituted by the three divine persons in ongoing relations
with each other and with all the creation (2009, 159). Bracken’s
Trinitarian field theory draws on systems theory from science,
Whitehead’s concept of society, and Christian Trinitarian
doctrine. A society as a type of system is a group of entities with an
organizing principle. Basically, reality is an all–encompassing
society in which subsocieties operate in their own ways as distinct.
God functions as the regnant subsociety and receives the richness of
the information from the world of creation (Bracken 2014, 80). Bracken
summarizes this system understanding of panentheism in three
conclusions: 1) systems are social rather than individual, can be
combined horizontally and vertically, change over time due to changes
in constituents, and do not make decisions; 2) the three divine
persons and all their creatures are together constituent members of an
expanded divine life–system; and 3) the relationships of the
various levels of societies involve both bottom–up causation and
an objective formal top–down causation of the constraints of
higher order systems on lower order systems (2015a, 223). Although not
as fully developed as Bracken’s society explanation, Cazalis
uses category theory and the concept of adjunction in order to offer
an internal law that gives specificity to panentheism. In this
approach relations go both ways between two categories and the link
carries the univeral property from one element of a given category to
another category (Cazalis 2016, 210).

5. Criticisms and Responses

Even after more than one hundred years of development, panentheism
continues to grow and change. Much of this growth has taken place as a
result of advances in science. Another impetus for change has been
criticisms of panentheism. Some of the most important criticisms are
raised by the major alternatives to panentheistic understandings of
the God-world relation. Panentheism faces challenges both from those
who find some form of pantheism more adequate than any distinction
between God and the world and from those who resist any lessening of
the emphasis upon divine transcendence. Finally, the variety of the
versions of panentheism has led to an active internal discussion among
the various versions.

Both pantheists and scientists working with naturalist assumptions
criticize panentheism for its metaphysical claim that there is a being
above or other than the natural world. At times, this criticism has
been made by claiming that a thorough-going naturalism does not need a
transcendent, individualized reality. Corrington describes the
development of his thought as a growing awareness that panentheism
unnecessarily introduces a being above nature as well as in nature
(2002, 49). Drees expresses a similar criticism by arguing that all
contemporary explanations of human agency, including non-reductionist
explanations, are naturalistic and do not require any reference to a
higher being. For panentheists to claim that divine agency is
analogous to human agency fails both to recognize that human agency
requires no additional source or cause and to explain how a divine
source of being could act in the realm of physical and mental
processes (1999). Frankenberry makes this objection more specific.
Panentheism offers a more complex relationship between God and the
world than is necessary. This unnecessary complexity is revealed by
the problems that panentheism has with the logic of the freedom of
parts in wholistic relations, the possibility of the body-soul analogy
relapsing into gender inflected ideas of the soul as the male
principle, the problem with simultaneity of events in the divine
experience in relation to the principle of the relativity of time, the
necessity of the everlasting nature of value, and finally the use of
the ontological argument to establish the necessity of the abstract
pole of the divine nature (1993, 36–39). Gillett points out that
panentheism lacks an explanation for a causal efficacy higher than the
causal efficacy realized by microphysical causation (2003, 19).
Generally, panentheists respond to these criticisms by affirming the
inadequacy both scientifically and metaphysically of any type of
reductionistic naturalism. Such a naturalism whether articulated in
scientific categories or religious categories fails to recognize the
emergence of levels of complexity in nature. The emergence of higher
levels of organization that cannot be completely explained in terms of
lower levels renders non-differentiated accounts of being inadequate.
Panentheists often argue that the emergence of higher levels of order
makes possible downward causation. Davies describes the difficulties
in coming to a clear description of downward causation and concludes
that the complexity of systems open to the environment makes room for
downward causation but has not yet provided an explanation of how
downward causation works (2006, 48). The concepts of entanglement and
divine entanglement may offer a new perspective on causation and
especially the role of the divine in natural causation
(Wegter–McNelly 2011).

Traditional Christian theists raise a variety of critiques of
panentheism. Experiential critiques question the ability of
panentheism to provide a God worthy of worship (Nash 1983, 117). One
response to this critique is to question the definition of
“worthy of worship”. Leftow suggests that any definition
of God as meriting worship includes a conceptually appropriate object
that is aware of the world and being superior to the world in some way
(2016, 70). A closely related experiential critique is that the
panentheistic God is unable to guarantee a future good. While
panentheists agree that human freedom logically precludes God’s
prevention of future evil that results from human choice, many affirm
that God’s response to unpreventable evil is that God suffers
with the person suffering evil. However God’s suffering with a
person, even if that offers the support of a relationship with God,
does not provide a basis for the hope of overcoming evil.

These experiential criticisms express underlying theological
critiques. The dominant theological criticism of panentheism is that
God is unable to guarantee the defeat of evil. Clayton and Bracken
respond by maintaining that the world does influence God but
God’s will, expressed through the decisions that God makes,
protects God’s ability to save (Clayton 2005). Moltmann
describes God’s essence as directing God’s activity in
order to maintain the reliability of God as love acting on behalf of
creation. Moltmann does not find it necessary to protect divine
freedom by giving it priority over divine love but rather understands
freedom as acting according to the divine nature of love (Moltmann
1981, 98, 99). J. Cooper challenges this response by criticizing
panentheism for holding a concept of God that can save through the
general processes of nature but not in any distinctive way.
Vanhoozer’s concern for divine freedom is based on a similar
concern (1998, 250). But, Griffin’s discussion of divine
variable action does allow for specific and distinctive manifestations
of divine love (2004, 45). Jensen also criticizes the ability of the
panentheist concept to save by distinguishing between salvation by God
and salvation through agents of their own salvation (2014,
12–13). For him, a process panentheist’s God can only draw
and persuade rather than save (Jensen 2014, 128). Pak concludes that
an open future makes any ultimate victory over evil impossible (Pak
2014, 223–224). In response, B. Cooper lists five ways in which
a process theology supports God’s power over other realities: 1)
ontological priority in providing definition, 2) universality to all
actuality, 3) as the ground of novelty, 4) as the ground and preserver
of all value, and 5) the unconditioned character of God’s
integrity as seeking to increase value in the world and love towards
the world (1974, 102). Oomen finds three similar elements in
Whitehead’s thought that relate to God’s governing and
sustaining the world: 1) God originates all occasions by presenting
the initial aim which provides some direction against evil, 2) God
preserves all that can be preserved, and 3) God as everlasting means
that no occasion can overcome God forever (2015, 287–288). An
additional criticism is that since the world is necessary for God to
be God in the classic panentheism of Hegel and Whitehead, God is not
free to choose to save. The absence of a doctrine of creation from
nothing results in God’s provision of salvation being necessary
rather than free (Olson 2012). While Olson questions whether or not a
classic panentheist can hold to creation from nothing, Clayton affirms
creation from nothing as consistent with panentheism (2008).
Ultimately the panentheist response is that God’s nature as love
directs God’s actions bringing salvation. God’s nature as
love is the crucial aspect of divine action rather than a causal
efficacy. The emphasis of traditional theism on divine will misses
that the divine will is directed by divine love (Oord 2015 and Molnar,
1990, 679).

Metaphysical critiques of panentheism provide a basis for both the
theological and experiential criticisms made by traditional Christian
theists. Four types of metaphysical critiques have been made. One
criticism is that panentheism fails to maintain an ontological
distinction between God and the world (Leidenhag 2014, 215, 219, 220).
While panentheism identifies differences between God and the world,
the distinction is one of characteristics rather than one of being.
Although different forms of panentheism understand similarities and
differences between God and the world in different ways, both Hegel
and Whitehead refer to differences between God and the world that are
important. Hegel’s dialectical panentheism distinguishes between
God prior to creation and creation in God (Tabaczek 2013, 151).
Whitehead describes God as non–temporal and events composing the
world as temporal (Bracken 2015, 542). The modal status of the world
in relation to God provides a related challenge to panentheism.
Göcke concludes that the significant difference between
panentheism and classical theism is that according to panentheism the
world is an intrinsic property of God while classical theism holds
that the world is an extrinsic property of God (2013b, 74). A third
type of critique is that panentheism holds an inadequate concept of
transcendence. According to J. Cooper, if God’s transcendence
does not infinitely exceed God’s immanence, God’s
presence, knowledge, and power are limited rather than complete,
immediate, and unconditioned (2006, 322–328). Transcendence may
be either horizontal, between like entities, or vertical, involving
different entities. Whitehead’s understanding of God’s
transcendence is horizontal and limited because God only influences
events before or after the decisions of the events. God cannot be
present simultaneously with the event. Likewise, Hegel’s denial
of divine simplicity makes ontological difference between God and the
world impossible thus limiting God’s transcendence (Tabaczek
2013, 151, 154). While Clayton and others have identified
top–down causation as indicating God’s vertical
transcendence, Jensen finds this inadequate because they are unable to
identify clearly God’s presence in the causal nexus of the world
(2014, 131). However, Bracken rejects the necessity of a causal joint
when both top–down and bottom–up causation occur (2014,
10). Also, Clayton counters that few process panentheists accept a
full equality between finite actual occasions and the divine actual
occasion or occasions. God being the chief exemplification of
creativity indicates a difference between God and actual occasions and
thus a vertical transcendence (Clayton 2015, 27). Finally
Bracken’s field understanding of panentheism gives priority to
God as the regent subsociety (2014, 79–80). The fourth
metaphysical criticism grows out of a technical aspect of
Whitehead’s cosmology, the relation between creativity and God.
Whitehead attributes metaphysical ultimacy to creativity and
understands God as the primordial manifestation of creativity. This
appears to leave God in a secondary position (Hosinski 2015, 275).
Cobb resolves the problem of the priority of creativity by identifying
creativity as an abstract metaphysical principle rather than an
actuality more important than God (1982, 126 and see Nobharu 2015,
499). Bracken considers creativity to be the systematic whole rather
than a greater reality than God (1992, 216 and 214).

Analytic theology (Jeanine Diller and As Kasher, eds. 2013 and Andrei
A. Buckareff and Yujin Nagasawa, eds. 2016) offers a different type of
critique of panentheism. Analytical approaches to panentheism critique
panentheism as lacking a distinctive identity making careful
identification, research, and development of a distinctive position
impossible. Göcke’s effort to identify a distinctive of
panentheism notes the similarities of classical theism and panentheism
and concludes that the only difference is a modal difference in that
the world is not necessary for God in classical theism while the world
is necessary for God in panentheism (2013). Lataster challenges
Göcke’s limitation of the distinction between classical
theism and panentheism by claiming that panentheism’s rejection
of divine immutability distinguishes panentheism from classical theism
(2014). Göcke rejects this distinction as failing to recognize
that spatial references are not adequate in dealing with metaphysical
rather than physical or logical necessity (2014). Göcke makes the
requirements for the distinction between classical theism and
panentheism more specific by calling for a consistent definition of
“in” by panentheists and by noting the presence of
logically contradictory but self-consistent interpretations of key
notions by various panentheists (2015). Nagasawa develops the concept
of modal panentheism by describing modal panentheism as holding that
God is the totality of all possible worlds and that all possible
worlds exist to the same extent that the actual world exists. Thus God
includes all possible worlds and any actual worlds. But Nagasawa also
notes that modal panentheism has some similarities to traditional
theism which limits any modal distinction between classical theism and
panentheism (2016). Mullins provides further evidence and refinement
in questioning the distinctiveness of panentheism by pointing out
similarities among panentheism, open theism, and neo-classical theism
and by critiquing Göcke’s modal distinction as failing to
say anything unique about God. Both modal distinctions and considering
the world as God’s body fail because they do not say anything
unique about the nature of God (2016). Mullins offers an analytic
response to the challenge regarding the distinctiveness of panentheism
by suggesting that panentheism can distinguish itself from classical
theism by making absolute space and time attributes of God and by
recognizing the distinction between absolute time and space and
physical and temporal realities contained within absolute time and
space. Such a distinction offers a literal understanding of
“in” in contrast to classical theism (2016).

An alternative response begins by recognizing that metaphorical
meanings of “in” serve as placeholders for what is
asserted about the relationship between God and the world (Göcke
2015, 4). Panentheism’s metaphors offer a variety of ways of
describing the distinctive of panentheism, the balance between divine
transcendence and divine immanence. In distinction from classical
theism’s derivation of immanence from divine transcendence,
panentheism affirms the basic role of divine immanence. In contrast to
pantheism’s derivation of divine transcendence from divine
immanence, panentheism affirms God’s difference from the world.
Nikkel recognizes the importance of this balance even within
panentheism. He warns against an overemphasis upon transcendence
leading to the loss of the indeterminacy needed for growth that occurs
in panentheism overly influenced by German Idealism and an
overemphasis on immanence leading to the loss of God as the source of
existence that occurs in panentheism overly influenced by process
thought (2016). While the idea of panentheism may not be a
philosophically stable concept in itself, that instability makes
possible respecification in light of particular theologies (Gregersen
2017, 583). Thus the term “panentheism” pointed to a
balance between classical theism and pantheism in the early twentieth
century with its use of “in”. The growth of the influence
of scientific thought upon theology leads to a more specific
understanding of the balance in the relation between God and the world
that emphasizes the mutual interaction of God and the world and moves
on from the usefulness of “in”. Gregersen articulates this
by suggesting two requirements for a contemporary stable notion of
panentheism, God contains the world so that the world belongs to God
and there is a feeding back from the world into divine life (2017,
582).

The varieties of panentheism participate in internal criticism.
Clayton (2008, 127) and Crain (2006) emphasize the dependence of the
world upon God rather than the dependence of God upon the world
although they maintain that God is influenced, and changed, by the
world. They criticize understandings of God that limit God by making
God subject to metaphysical principles. Griffin emphasizes the
regularity provided by metaphysical principles. This regularity
recognizes the order in reality that the reliability of God’s
love provides. Panentheists also caution that the emphasis upon the
ontological nature of the relation between God and the world can lead
to a loss of the integrity of the world. Richardson warns against
losing the discrete identity of finite beings in God (2010, 345).
Case-Winters calls for maintaining a balance between the distinction
between God and the world and God’s involvement with the world.
Over–emphasis upon either side of the balance leads to positions
that are philosophically and theologically inadequate
(Case–Winters 2007, 125).