The ethics of parenthood and procreation apply not only to daily
acts of decision-making by parents and prospective procreators, but
also to law, public policy, and medicine. Two recent social and
technological shifts make this topic especially pressing. First,
changing family demographics in North America and Europe mean that
children are increasingly reared in blended families, by single
parents, or by same-sex partners, prompting questions of who should be
considered a child's parent and what good parenting
requires. Second, the development and proliferation of
“Assisted Reproductive Technology” (ART) raises questions
concerning access to the technology, its permissibility, and its use to
enhance future children or prevent the birth of children with certain
conditions. Recent debate in ethics and political philosophy has
focused on the following questions:

Are there any procreative rights? If so, what are they? What, if
anything, limits them? When is it morally permissible to
procreate?  What may procreators permissibly aim at in choosing
characteristics of potential children?  What are the moral
constraints on the means of procreation?
What are the grounds of parenthood?  In what respects is
parenthood a biological or natural relationship, and in what respects a
social one?
What are the scope and limits of parental rights and
responsibilities? What must parents provide for their children? 
How should their parental responsibilities weigh against other
obligations?  What should parents be allowed to do, and when may,
or must, public agencies intervene?  What, if anything, does
society owe parents?



In the following entry, we divide these questions into three
sequential stages: the ethics of procreation (creating a child), to
which we devote two sections, and then becoming parents (acquiring
parental rights and responsibilities), and being parents (holding and
discharging parental rights and responsibilities).
 
1. Foundations


A parent is someone with weighty rights and responsibilities
regarding a given child. Parents usually have decision-making rights
over most areas of their child's life and rights to exclude
others from making such decisions. So long as parents fulfill
requirements to nourish, educate, and provide healthcare for their
children, they may make many decisions over how and what their child
eats, dresses, plays, studies, and with whom he or she interacts. 
Section 5 surveys controversies regarding 
the content of these rights and responsibilities.


“Parenthood” has distinct senses: biological, social,
legal, and moral. These categories present problems at the
margins. While the idea of a biological parent seems
self-evident, modern reproductive technology complicates it, as a child
can have genetic parents (gamete providers, who supply the sperm or
egg) and a third, gestational, parent. Each of these is a
biological parent, by virtue of making a biological contribution to
producing the child. Possible technologies such as human cloning
involving transfer of a nucleus to an egg cell, or three-person ART, in
which the nucleus of a fertilized egg would be transferred to a second
egg for medical reasons, introduce further complications, as additional
genetic material—mitochondrial DNA—would be supplied by the
egg cell.   


Biological parents are commonly distinguished from social parents,
who rear the child and are socially perceived as responsible for it.
 Adoptive parents, or parents who rear children created with
donated gametes and gestated by a third party, are social, but not
biological, parents. (Biological parents need not be social
parents, as biological parents give up children for adoption, donate
gametes, or work as gestational mothers.)  The category of social
parent presents borderline cases when a given community does not
socially recognize those rearing a child as parents. This might occur
with a mother's unmarried partner, two friends rearing children
together, other relatives like grandparents rearing the child, or when
a community participates in child-rearing. Legal and moral
criteria for the acquisition of parental rights and responsibilities should
clearly designate whom society should recognize as having
them. 


Legal parenthood consists in possessing legal parental rights and
responsibilities. In the US, a pregnant woman's husband is generally
presumed to be her child's legal father: marriage, not biology,
underpins the legal relation. This has faced legal challenges from
genetic fathers (Rosenman 1995; see Hubin 2003 on fatherhood). The
rise of ART has prompted many questions regarding assignment of legal
parenthood when there are contending claims—as between a couple
who commissioned a contract pregnancy and the contracting gestational
mother. They have also stretched the understanding of parenthood, as
when the Ontario Court of Appeal recognized three legal parents
(A.A. v. B.B., 2007 ONCA 2)—a lesbian couple and sperm
donor. 


Legal, social, and biological parenthood can be conceptually
distinguished; however, parenthood is arguably fundamentally a moral
relationship, and its moral assignment should be considering in
answering the preceding questions. Moral parenthood is possession of
moral parental rights and responsibilities. These may differ in
content from legal rights and responsibilities—we might think
parents morally ought to do more than they are legally required, for
example. The moral grounds for assigning parental rights can also
differ from their legal assignment. Of course, legal assignment
of parenthood may trigger moral obligations, due to a general moral
obligation to obey the law or because the legal parent is best-placed
to rear the child. But moral theories of parenthood give
independent grounds for parental rights from the standpoint of which
particular legal arrangements may be criticized.


The interrelation of legal, moral, social, and biological parenthood
depends on the particular moral theory of how one becomes a
parent. For example, on a genetic account, biology determines
moral parental status, whereas on an intentional account, biology will
be less morally salient. Section 4 reviews these theories.
2. Procreative Autonomy


20th-century international human rights documents
explicitly codify the right “to marry and found a family”
(United Nations 1948, Article 16), and thus some writers argue that
liberal constitutions implicitly enshrine a right to procreate (Hill
1991). A right to procreate, or procreative autonomy, could be
construed as a negative or positive right. As a negative right,
it would be a right against coercive interference in decisions
regarding procreation. As a positive right, it would be an
entitlement to assistance in procreation. 


This entry does not consider abortion. Although positions on
procreative autonomy are not independent of positions on abortion, the
extensive philosophical debate about abortion must be dealt with
independently. The issue of contraception can be touched on briefly
here. While some religious views oppose contraception, this position is
not widely defended in philosophical ethics. However,
philosophical debate has recently emerged over “conscientious
objections” by pharmacists. In some jurisdictions,
pharmacists opposing abortion have a legal right to refuse to dispense
emergency contraception, on the (medically controversial) grounds that
it acts as an abortifacient. This right has been defended on the
grounds that pharmacists' freedom of conscience outweighs mere
inconvenience to women (if they can obtain the drug elsewhere). 
But others have argued that such refusals constitute serious harms to
women, not mere inconveniences, and that similar objections would not
be permitted in non-procreative cases, such as a vegetarian pharmacist
who refused to dispense materials tested on animals (LaFollette and
LaFollette 2007; Fenton and Lomasky 2005; McLeod 2010; Kelleher
2010). 
2.1 Grounds and limits of a right to procreate


A negative moral right to procreate may be grounded in autonomy
rights to control one's body and make certain important decisions
for oneself (Dworkin 1993). Violations could involve direct physical
coercion such as rape or forced abortion or sterilization, or coercive
interference with decisions regarding sexual activity or
contraception. Involuntary physical interventions such as forced
contraception, sterilization, or abortion were practiced in
twentieth-century eugenic movements. Their wrongness is now generally
acknowledged, but critics see continuity between such policies and
contemporary moderately coercive policies such as making contraceptive
implants the condition of medical aid for impoverished women (see
Moskowitz and Jennings 1996).


A right to procreate may also be grounded in the strong interest
people have in creating a child, giving birth, and parenting
(Robertson 1994). Because this justification does not concern a right
to use one's body, but to realize the important interest in creating
and rearing a child, it implies a positive (as well as negative) right
to procreate, most often understood as entailing a right to access ART
(Robertson 1994, 2004–05).  Such a positive right could also
entail a claim to sufficient environmental resources to raise children
justly (Gheaus 2016) or to funding for ART - however, a distinct right
to parent could be met through adoption, perhaps justifying financial
barriers to ART where children are available for adoption (De
Wispelaere and Weinstock 2014).


Arguably, the right to procreate is limited, as other rights are
limited, by the threat of harm to others. Benatar argues, for
example, that autonomy rights cannot permit risking severe harm to
children; those who risk transmitting HIV, for instance, cannot assert
a right to reproduce. While the moral costs of forced abortion or
sterilization are “immense,” the moral costs of moderate
coercion or directive counseling should be weighed against the moral
costs of harm to future children (Benatar 2010, 94). One
rejoinder is to ask whether the proposed coercion, counseling, or
penalties are consistently extended to all behavior harmful to
potential children, or whether drug-addicted and poor women are singled
out, betraying a non-medical bias (Hausman 2006). 


Some philosophers argue for limiting the moral right to procreate to
married or long-term male-female couples on harm-based grounds (Almond
2006). Some claim that same-sex and single parenting harm
children. While the wealth of debate cannot be addressed here,
there seems to be a lack of evidence that same-sex parenting harms
children (for diverse views, see Nussbaum and Estlund 1997, Part
IV). Since evidence suggests that divorce can harm children, such
arguments risk inconsistency if not applied to male-female couples at
risk of divorce or sub-par parenting. Another argument suggests the
moral right to procreate is burdened by a non-anonymity condition.
Velleman argues that procreation using anonymous gamete providers is
wrong because it frustrates children's interest in knowing their
genetic forebears (Velleman 2005). But not only would this make
certain forms of adoption morally suspect, it presupposes implausible
connection between genetics, identity, and human flourishing (Haslanger
2009).


A second set of objections to the unburdened exercise of procreative
autonomy is anti-natalist. Anti-natalism is opposition to procreation;
in its local form it applies only to particular people in certain
instances, in its global form, to everyone. A local anti-natalist
holds that prospective parents who believe they will not be
sufficiently competent should not procreate (Cassidy 2006).  Local
anti-natalism is also supported by the judgment that wrongful birth,
birth which wrongfully imposes undue risk and harm on a resulting
child, is possible (Shiffrin 1999). Global anti-natalism opposes
procreation in general. One global anti-natalist position holds that
in all cases procreation is a harm to those brought into
being. Benatar argues that while existence brings pains as well as
pleasures, non-existence is a lack of pains and pleasures. While pain
is bad, absence of pain and pleasure is not bad, so it is always worse
to be than not to be (Benatar 1997, 2006; see also discussion of
Shiffrin 1999, below; for a response, see Overall 2012). Other global
anti-natalist positions focus on harms or costs to others. An
environmentalist anti-natalism argues that procreation is wrong for
the same reasons overconsumption is (Young 2001, MacIver 2015). An
opportunity-cost anti-natalism argues that the money spent on rearing
a child would be better spent on ameliorating the lives of those
already existing (Rachels 2014). And a misanthropic anti-natalism
argues that humans cause so much harm - to other humans, non-human
animals, and the environment - that there is a duty not to procreate
(Benatar 2015). Others have argued that the availability of children
needing homes creates strong moral reasons to adopt rather than to
procreate (Friedrich 2013, Rulli 2014a). Anti-natalists, however, do
not always defend legal restrictions, because interfering with
procreation may involve intolerably illiberal coercion of the
person. One response to anti-natalist views is to provide a
justification for the decision to procreate. Some authors, agreeing
that procreation requires a justification and that many common reasons
for procreating carry no moral weight, locate a possible justification
in the unique nature of the parent-child relationship, the desire for
pregnancy, or the desire to pass on valuable family traits (Overall
2012, Rulli 2014b, Brake 2015; on whether one can make a rational
decision to have a child, see Paul 2015 and Krishnamurthy 2015). 


While harm to identifiable others is generally agreed upon as a
constraint on the morality of procreation, various views would
constrain a right to procreate even further. In the following sections
we consider communitarian conservative, liberal, and feminist
approaches to procreative liberty.
2.2 Communitarian conservative perspectives on procreative autonomy

Communitarian conservative approaches to procreative liberty
tend to regard procreation as part of a dense web of practices that
gain their meaning and value from being part of a comprehensive way of
life. Efforts to increase procreative autonomy—particularly
through biotechnology—risk meddling with such ways of life
(Sandel 2007). Thus, communitarian conservatives view ART with
suspicion. The 20th-century record of Nazi
“eugenics” programs, forced abortion as a
population-control mechanism, and widespread nonconsensual
sterilization in many countries, including the United States, is
adduced as support for pessimism about technological, policy-driven,
or self-indulgent interventions in procreation (Meilaender 1987).


Communitarian conservatives typically oppose the use of ART. They
also criticize talk of rights in discussion of procreation and
parent-child relations. As Murray writes: “Procreative liberty's
problems began when it appropriated the abstract principle—the
right to choose—and ripped it out of the rich context that
provided its moral heft” (Murray 2002, 42).


Communitarian conservatives need not deny that persons have a strong
interest in autonomy regarding procreative decisions. The point is that
this interest is both generated and delimited by a particular communal
context. They believe there is no right to reproductive autonomy,
because reproductive choices gain their meaning and value from this
context.
2.3 Liberal perspectives on procreative autonomy


Liberal theory has generated two distinct positions on procreative
autonomy. The “repro-libertarian” approach opposes
regulations on reproductive decisions and ART unless they can be shown
to threaten harm to others. Repro-libertarianism is grounded in the
values of individual equality and autonomy (Feinberg 1986; Dworkin
1993). The basic thought is that interfering in procreation involves
illiberal interference with the person and her choices. Further,
some authors hold that ART ought to be universally available provided
it does not harm others, because any restrictions would constitute
unequal treatment of those who cannot conceive through sexual
intercourse (whether due to infertility or because they do not form a
“traditional” family) (Harris 1998).


Repro-libertarians have been concerned to show that assumptions
about the inherent wrongness or harmfulness of ART are not justified.
In particular, they have argued that conservative opposition to
cloning, genetic selection, surrogacy, and harvesting fetal ovarian
tissue is based in undefended traditionalism (Harris 1998; cf. Glover
1998; Buchanan et al. 2000, chap. 2).


Many liberals move beyond a focus on individual liberty to consider
broader effects of reproductive policy. Such “policy
liberals” share values of autonomy and equality with
repro-libertarians, and as a result treat market exchanges and
consensual services as “innocent until proven guilty.” But
while repro-libertarians focus on the effects of particular procreative
choices, policy liberals also attend to the impact of
institutionalizing practices such as genetic selection, or IVF, within
a society that aims to maintain liberal background institutions (Glover
et al. 1989; Buchanan et al. 2000; Brock 2005). Institutionalization
foregrounds concerns that liberals focused on individual choices
downplay, such as the effects of large numbers, the incentives that
policies create, and opportunity costs. Thus for policy liberals it
will be impossible to determine the scope of procreative rights without
considering institutional structure, given reasonable assumptions about
human motivations.


For instance, when many people make similar reproductive choices,
the resulting “baby boom” may reshape the social, economic,
political, and environmental landscape. Similarly, sex ratios might
become grossly skewed in countries with a strong preference for male
children. Such concerns might provide grounds for restricting ARTs or
incentivizing their use. Similarly, arguments for incentivizing
procreation within marriage assume that children reared within
marriages will benefit as contrasted with those reared outside
marriages (Galston 1991, chap. 10; but see Young 1995).


Policy liberal accounts of procreative autonomy may face problems in
a context of social inequality and over-population. Some affirm
procreative autonomy, but regard it as compatible with apparently
coercive population policies such as limitations on the number of
children particular persons may have. This may be because they regard
procreative autonomy as a merely prima facie right, less
weighty than other rights, such as the right to a minimally decent
quality of life (Bayles 1979). Or they may regard procreative autonomy
more narrowly than is commonly done (O'Neill 1979; Hill 1991; Floyd
& Pomerantz 1981). O'Neill, for example, construes
procreative autonomy as requiring an intention to rear the resulting
child so that it has a life at least normal for its society. Without
such intentions, parents are not exercising a right to procreate, and
thus policies to curtail their behavior do not constitute coercive
infringements of procreative autonomy.


In conclusion, policy liberals hold that procreative autonomy is one
among many important forms of autonomy, which may conflict among
themselves, and with the state's legitimate (or compulsory) ends such
as the provision of public goods and compliance with national constitutions.
Talk of rights, from such a standpoint, is appropriate only within a
nexus of liberties, claims, powers, and ends. From such a perspective,
the implications of a right to procreative autonomy are much less
straightforward than from the individually focused repro-libertarian
perspective.
2.4 Feminist perspectives on procreative autonomy


The final major perspective on procreative autonomy includes various
views that share a feminist commitment to opposing patriarchy and
promoting people's (particularly women's) abilities to
determine the shape of their own lives, where this includes sexual and
reproductive autonomy. While feminists can be found in each of the
previous schools, many feminists criticize them.


The feminist concern to enable women to control their own lives and
bodies suggests sympathy with the repro-libertarians' focus on
autonomy and equality. But unlike liberals, many feminists are
skeptical of the reproductive biotechnology establishment, which
remains preponderantly white, upper-middle class, male, and corporate.
Hence feminists often charge that repro-libertarianism would exacerbate
existing power inequalities (Corea 1985, 1988; Rothman 1989; Dodds and
Jones 1989a). While this establishment represents itself as empowering
women, many feminists charge that it succeeds only in disempowering
them: it conscripts poorer women into service for people who are
usually wealthier; it creates new expectations that may subtly coerce
women to pursue fertility treatments or other medical interventions;
and it inevitably reflects the cultural, economic, sexist, and racist
biases of the society at large (Brazier 1998).


Some feminist writers have also raised the concern that any putative
right to procreate threatens to give men power over women. In addition
to empowering the mostly male scientific establishment, a right to
procreate could empower a man to prevent his erstwhile partner from
aborting her pregnancy (Overall 1993). Thus the importance of a right
not to procreate has led many feminists to place the various strands of
procreative autonomy within a nexus of interests.


Critiques of the concept of procreative autonomy as misleading or
empty rhetoric reflect a larger feminist project critical of autonomy
construed as individual choice: within an inegalitarian social and
economic system, some feminists argue, pressures on choice will ensure
that supposedly free choices disadvantage women. This is particularly
problematic when the medical establishment presents burdensome
technologies as the expected norm. Choices are shaped by the
salient alternatives, so that the widespread adoption of new medical
technologies will affect women's choices (as the normalization of
testing for Downs' syndrome shapes women's choice to
undergo such testing). The point is not that adopting new technology is
always problematic, but that the repro-libertarian framework for
evaluating it is naïve and misleading (Sherwin 1992).


A further feminist concern is that the rhetoric surrounding
reproductive biotechnology commodifies women's bodies, devalues women's
role in reproduction, and treats women as mere means rather than ends
in themselves. For instance, some reproductive services entail
so-called “womb rental,” “egg harvesting,” or
“surrogate motherhood” (Rothman 1989; Ber 2000). Feminists
such as Corea argue that the reproductive biotechnology establishment
relies on a distorted and stereotyped picture of the nature, desires,
and needs of women, as well as the success rate of the technologies it
purveys, and that these technologies result in physical harms to women
(Corea 1985; Brazier 1998).


Finally, by conceptualizing women and their fetuses or newborns as
having conflicting interests, rather than as in symbiotic harmony (as
they usually are), the medical establishment promotes an adversarial
view which lends itself to overriding pregnant women's treatment
decisions. Such interventions, such as court-ordered C-sections,
are especially problematic when similar interventions would not be
imposed on parents to save a born child's life (such as a
court-ordered blood transfusion); this inconsistency suggests a bias
against pregnant women's decision-making capacity. 
Understandings of pregnancy and motherhood, feminists argue, need to be
enriched by considering women's experience of pregnancy and
moving away from an antagonistic medical model, as well as appreciating
how that model has been socially constructed (Purdy 1990; Kukla 2005;
Mullin 2005).
3. The Morality of Procreation


For the most part, secular debates about the morality of procreation
focus on whether and when procreation is impermissible, rather than
whether it might be obligatory (though see Smilansky 1995 and Gheaus
2015 on whether there could be a duty to procreate). The debates
concerning the impermissibility of procreation raise deep issues in
metaphysics and value theory (Belshaw 2003; Holtug 2001; Kavka 1982;
Rachels 1998). We restrict our discussion to moral issues rather than
legal ones, and assume throughout that reproduction is fully voluntary
and informed—that is, neither coerced nor accidental.
3.1 Direct and indirect personal interests


We can distinguish three kinds of considerations at stake in
reproductive decisions: direct personal interests, indirect personal
interests, and impersonal considerations. Direct personal
interests are the interests of the child that would be created
following the reproductive decision. These come into play with
particular urgency when the child would experience a life so miserable
as to be not worth living. Whether there are such lives—and if
so, what characterizes them—is controversial, but it is not
unreasonable to suppose that a life can be so irremediably miserable
that it is of no benefit to the individual who endures it. Arguably,
the lives of those born with Tay-Sachs disease fit this description,
and many argue that it is immoral to knowingly bring such children into
the world. However, some authors go much further than this, arguing
that procreating is wrong unless the parent has reason to think he or
she can provide the child with a good chance of a normal life. The
general claim is that certain types of individuals have an interest in
not being brought into existence on account of the quality of life they
would have were they created (McMahon 1998; Roberts 1998).

Indirect personal interests are the interests of those
affected by the creation of the child, other than the child her- or
himself. For example, in societies in which the state provides health
care and education each new child represents a cost to the existing
members of society, as well as a potentially useful member of the
workforce and community later in life (see Section 5.2). The
justification for compulsory schooling may take into account the
substantial public goods generated by an educated citizenry, and the
herd immunity effects of vaccination may comprise part of the
justification for requiring children to be vaccinated. Indirect
personal interests are widely held to have a bearing on the morality of
reproduction, but a general account of their impact on reproductive
deliberation would be complex and highly nuanced. Brock (2005) provides
a valuable overview (albeit with a policy focus) of limitations based
on “the protection of others from harm,” “the
protection of public goods,” and the “prevention of social
harms.”
3.2 The Non-Identity Problem and Impersonal Considerations


 It might be hoped that we could give a full account
 of permissible reproduction by appealing to only direct and indirect
 personal interests. Unfortunately, there is reason to think that this
 may not be possible. Consider the following sort of case, introduced
 into the literature by Parfit (1984), and known as the non-identity
 problem (Hanser 1990; Harman 2004; Woodward 1986; entry on 
the nonidentity problem):



Marie is taking a drug that she knows will cause a birth
defect—say, a withered arm—in any child that she conceives
(call this child “Amy”). In 3 months this drug will have
passed from her body, and she will be able to conceive a child free
from this defect (call this child “Sophie”). Intuitively,
Marie does something wrong in deciding to have Amy rather than
Sophie.



Non-identity cases of this kind are called “same-number”
cases because they involve comparing situations that contain the same
number of individuals. Other versions of the non-identity problem
involve different-number (or non-comparative) choices:


Sally has a genetic condition that she knows will cause any child
she conceives to be born with a serious cognitive disability. Despite
knowing this fact, Sally deliberately conceives and gives birth to a
seriously cognitively disabled child, George.



Assume, plausibly, that Amy and George have lives that are worth
living. Does Marie do something wrong in conceiving and giving birth to
Amy? Does Sally do something wrong conceiving and giving birth to
George? Many are inclined to think that they do, but it is unclear how
we can capture this wrongness by appeal only to personal interests.
This is because wronging someone seems to presuppose that things could
have gone otherwise for that individual—i.e., it seems
to require talk of direct personal interests—but things could
not have gone otherwise for either Amy or George. Sally's putative
wrong consists in creating George, and doing otherwise would have
entailed creating no one. Her action has no victim and therefore sets
back no one's interests. Amy isn't made worse off by Marie's actions,
for had Marie waited another three months before conceiving she would
have given birth to a different child (Sophie) instead of Amy. It is
therefore difficult to see how Marie might have harmed or wronged
Amy.


It is also prima facie implausible that indirect personal
interests explain why these actions would be wrong: they are wanted and
their births don't harm their community.


The non-identity problem is not solely a problem for the morality of
procreation. Anyone who affects the welfare of future people in
identity-affecting ways may face it. Readers interested in general
approaches to the non-identity problem should consult the relevant
entry. Here we discuss just those aspects bearing on the ethics of
becoming parents (see also Hanser 1990; Vehmas 2002).


Feinberg (1992) compares situations like the Marie and Sally cases
with cases in which someone is harmed in the course of being saved from
a greater harm (e.g., his leg is broken while his life is being saved).
In both cases an evil or harm is justified in virtue of the fact that
it is a necessary condition of a greater good—in the one case
saving a person's life, in the other case bringing a life into
existence. Shiffrin (1999), however, holds that harming someone to save
them from a greater harm is morally distinct from harming them to
impose a “pure benefit” on them. Shiffrin claims that we
have serious qualms about harming someone without their consent to
secure a pure benefit for them, even when we can be sure that they
would regard the pure benefit as far outweighing the harm (see also
Steinbock and McClamrock 1994). She concludes that procreation is
routinely more morally problematic than is generally recognized.


Shiffrin's attempt to drive a wedge into Feinberg's analogy raises
questions of its own. First, one might challenge the assumption that
life is a pure benefit. Even if we assume that Amy's life would be
worth living, creating her would be a benefit only on a rather peculiar
conception of what a “benefit” entails. Amy is not better
off than she otherwise would have been, for there is no way that she
otherwise would have been. Furthermore, the argument may prove too
much. If one is never justified in harming someone (without their
consent) to impose a pure benefit on them, and if existence always
involves some form of harm, then it must always be wrong to bring
someone into existence. A global form of anti-natalism (see
 Section 2.1) thereby seems to be 
the price of this solution to the non-identity
problem.


A number of authors, including Parfit, argue that we need to appeal
to impersonal considerations to solve the non-identity problem. Several
of these solutions appeal to the role morality of parents. According to
Freeman, “The principle of parental responsibility requires that
individuals should desist from having children unless certain minimum
conditions can be satisfied. Responsible parents want their children to
have good and fulfilling lives” (1997, 180). Freeman goes on to
claim that the principle of parental responsibility entails that the
very young and very old should not become parents. Similarly, Purdy
claims that one shouldn't reproduce unless one can ensure that one's
children will have a decent life, with clean water, nutritious food,
shelter, education, and medical care counting as basic prerequisites
(Purdy 1995). Purdy's position seems to imply that many—even
most—of the world's children have been wrongly brought into
existence. More recently, Wasserman has argued that whether it is
permissible to bring a child into existence with certain
characteristics (such as impairments), depends on the reasons the
prospective parents have for creating such a child. These should be
reasons that concern the good of the child (Wasserman 2005).


Not all of those who have written on the non-identity problem accept
that Marie does wrong in deciding to have Amy rather than Sophie, or
that Sally does wrong in reproducing. Indeed, some find the suggestion
that it is wrong to (knowingly) bring disabled children into the world
abhorrent due to the implications of such views for individuals with
disabilities. Asch holds that a woman has a right to an abortion, but
also that it would be wrong to have an abortion to prevent the birth
of a disabled child. Abortion on such grounds is immoral, she argues,
because it communicates that “disability is so terrible it
warrants not being alive” (Asch 1999, 387). The argument could
easily be extended to decisions about whether to conceive a certain
type of child. Does prenatal diagnosis and selective abortion, or
preimplantation genetic diagnosis, communicate that disability is so
terrible it warrants not being alive? On its face this claim is
contestable; the associated decisions are highly specific to each
case.  And even if such acts did communicate something, it is unclear
that it would be a thesis about relative qualities of life (see also
Buchanan et al. 2000, chap. 7). For more discussion of the ethics of
creating people with disabilities see encyclopedia article
on disability: health, well-being, and personal relationships.
3.3 Assisted Reproduction


Suppose that competent adults have the liberty to procreate. Are
there limits on the means that they may take in order to do so? In this
and the following section we focus on three methods of ART that have
generated controversy: gamete donation, in vitro fertilization
(IVF), and commercial surrogacy. Most discussion has centered on
whether it is permissible for prospective parents to avail themselves
of these novel technologies for procreation. We might also ask whether
people have a claim to access these technologies through public health
care systems or private health insurance. Most rich countries with
universal health care provide some treatment for infertility. For
example, the United Kingdom's National Health Service funds a
limited number of cycles of IVF for couples who meet eligibility
criteria. Given limited resources, providing ART takes away from money
that could be spent on other health care interventions. In this context
it is particularly important whether infertility is properly considered
a disease or disability in need of treatment.


Gamete donation involves the provision of gametes by a man or woman
who is not intended to be the resulting child's social parent.
Insemination by another man is not a new technology per se, but the
modern phenomena of sperm banking and anonymous providers have led some
to question the morality of artificial insemination by donor (AID).
Some objections clearly have a religious basis; we therefore do not
discuss them here. Repro-conservatives have also developed secular
objections to gamete donation by both sexes. The most interesting of
these focuses on the practice of paying gamete providers. For example,
Thomas Murray criticizes “insemination by vendor” on the
grounds that it inserts the values of the marketplace into family life
and thereby threatens to undermine it (Murray 1996, 34). The process of
harvesting ova also involves serious risks to the woman providing them,
which are discussed in the description of the IVF process below.


A different set of concerns centers on the moral responsibilities of
gamete providers. Since in most jurisdictions gamete providers must
waive all parental claims over their genetic offspring, it has been
widely assumed that they do not have moral parental responsibilities.
Several philosophers have, however, argued that gamete donation is
morally dubious, precisely because providers take their parental
responsibilities too lightly (Benatar 1999; Nelson 1991). The argument
can be challenged in at least two ways. First, we might challenge the
claim that gamete providers typically treat their parental
responsibilities too lightly by transferring or alienating them (Bayne
2003, Page 1985), especially in the case when gamete donation occurs in
a context in which assisted reproduction is regulated and would-be
gamete recipients are screened. Second, one could argue that in the
broad nexus of persons responsible for creating a child through
assisted reproduction, the contribution of gamete providers is not
especially morally significant (Fuscaldo 2006).


IVF involves fertilizing ova outside the womb and transferring
resulting embryos into the uterus. The woman whose ova are used is
given a hormone treatment that induces producing multiple ova, which
are harvested by a needle inserted through the vaginal wall.
Fertilization may involve incubating the ovum in sperm or injecting a
single sperm into the ovum in intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI).
Several embryos are transferred into the uterus after three to five
days. Since the birth of the first “test-tube baby” in
1978, IVF has become a fairly common procedure for addressing certain
forms of infertility.


Objections to IVF have focused on negative consequences for the
women or their offspring and on wider societal implications.
Stimulation of the ovaries may lead to ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome, a potentially serious condition. Like any surgical procedure
there are risks involved in retrieval of ova. Transferring multiple
embryos increases risk of multiple pregnancy, which can be risky for
both mother and fetuses. Fetuses born as a result of IVF may be at an
increased risk of birth defects, lower birth weights, and premature
birth (Bower and Hansen 2005; Reefhuis et al. 2009). The absolute risk
of these problems remains relatively low, however, and so they do not
seem to justify a blanket prohibition on IVF.


Similar objections to those raised against gamete donation have also been
raised against IVF, including that it commodifies children and female
reproduction. Feminists have developed a more subtle critique. Sherwin
(1987) argues that the powerful desires that many people, especially
women, have for their own biological children are the product of
problematic social arrangements and cultural values. While reproductive
technologies like IVF may help some (privileged) women get what they
want, they also further entrench the oppressive societal values that
create these powerful desires in the first place.


IVF typically results in creating more embryos than are used in the
fertility treatment. The remaining embryos may be given to other women
for implantation, donated for research, destroyed, or cryogenically
stored. A 2003 study estimated that there are 400,000 cryogenically
stored embryos in the United States (Hoffman et al. 2003). Depending on
one's view of the moral importance of human embryos this may be
considered an especially worrying consequence of IVF. People who
believe that such embryos have the same moral status as humans will
judge that destroying them is wrong and creating them without a plan
for implantation is comparably bad. The use of surplus embryos as a
source of totipotent stem cells for medical research has generated
objections from religious groups and conservatives opposed to abortion.
Consistency would seem to require that anyone who objects to using
these embryos in research ought also to object to their creation in the
first place, since it almost inevitably results in surplus embryos that
will eventually be destroyed.
3.4 Surrogacy and Contractually Assisted Reproduction


Perhaps the most controversial form of assisted reproduction is
so-called “surrogate” motherhood. Surrogacy arrangements
can take many forms, but the most widely discussed involves two
parties, a contracting couple and a “surrogate” or
gestational mother. Typically in return for payment, the gestational
mother carries a child derived from the gametes of one or both members
of the contracting couple and agrees to give the child over to the
couple after birth.


Many of the disputes surrounding surrogacy focus on the question of
who should be given parental rights and responsibilities if the
arrangement breaks down. (In some cases, neither party to the
arrangement wants to keep the baby; in other cases both parties want to
keep it.) Indeed, much of the impetus for recent accounts of the
grounds of parenthood has derived from attempts to adjudicate such
disputes (section 4).


Repro-libertarians insist that a right to procreative autonomy
entails protecting most methods of “collaborative
reproduction,” so long as they are safe and consensual (Robertson
1994, chap. 6). For them, the right to procreate is a special case of
the right to make binding contracts. But it is not settled whether such
contracts ought to be legal and, if so, enforceable. One central point
of contention is whether gestational surrogacy involves
commodification—for example, by entailing that the gestational
mother is selling her baby—or whether it is no different in kind
from other forms of paid childcare (Anderson 1990; Radin 1996; Glover
et al. 1989; Shanley 1993; but see also Arneson 1992). A
further concern has to do with whether anyone who undertakes a
contractual obligation to surrender custody of future children can do
so autonomously. Some writers argue that such decisions cannot be
autonomous, and hence that surrogacy contracts should not only be
unenforceable but also illegal (Dodds and Jones 1989b; see Purdy 1989
and Oakley 1992 for a response). Others reject bans on surrogacy
contracts as paternalistic but nevertheless urge that safeguards should
be in place, such as mandated post-natal waiting periods during which
the gestational mother is permitted to change her mind (Steinbock
1988).

Surrogacy is now regulated in most countries. Commercial surrogacy is
widely, though not universally, illegal. Many more jurisdictions
permit so-called “altruistic” surrogacy, which do not
involve paying the surrogate mother over and above compensating her
for direct costs. To what extent this distinction actually matters
morally is disputed (Anleu 1990).
3.5 Enhancement


Some couples who undergo IVF also opt for preimplantation genetic
diagnosis (PGD) whereby the genomes of their embryos are analyzed and
particular embryos then selected for implantation. This is more common
among couples at risk for transmitting a genetic disease or who are
trying to create a child compatible with an existing ill child so that
she can be used as a source of donated stem cells. However, it can be
used for selecting for or against other traits, such as gender, or
disability—for example, some deaf parents want to raise children
who inherit their deafness. Such uses of PGD are controversial (on
gender selection see Robertson 2003; Purdy 2007; Heyd 2003; on
selecting deafness see Karpin 2007).


Though current technology is mostly limited to selecting among
existing embryos, the prospect of genetically altering gametes or
embryos has generated questions about the permissibility of genetic
enhancement.


Several recent critics of genetic enhancement argue that permitting
enhancement is liable to undermine important human values. Sandel
argues that the control that enhancement technology would allow parents
is liable to undermine their humility in the face of the gift of their
children, impose responsibilities that we are not prepared to deal
with, and threaten social solidarity (Sandel 2007). Habermas argues
that parents who genetically enhance their children will, through the
control they exert, prevent their children from entering relationships
of moral equality and undermine their ability to be autonomous
(Habermas 2003). Both have been criticized for exaggerating the likely
effects of permitting enhancement technologies (Fenton 2006; Lev
2011).


A second argument against permitting parents to genetically enhance
their offspring is that it is liable to exacerbate unfairness.
Enhancements will probably be available only to richer parents. As a
result, their offspring, who are already advantaged over their peers,
would be even better able to compete against them (Etieyibo 2012).This
is commonly raised as a particular objection to genetic (or other
biomedical) enhancements, but it is not clear why there is something
distinctive about genetic enhancement that renders it more troubling
than other ways in which parents attempt to enhance their children,
such as private schooling.


The fairness objection also assumes that the advantages of genetic
enhancement are competitive advantages, so that an enhancement would
make the recipient better able to compete with others for goods such as
careers and social status. This assumption underlies concerns both that
the availability of enhancements would exacerbate existing inequalities
and that if universally available they would be collectively
self-defeating (as, for example, if everyone were to add 6 inches to
their height) (Glannon 2001). However, this assumption might be false;
for example, literacy is a non-genetic enhancement which is beneficial
both to the literate person and others (Buchanan 2008).


While most discussions of the ethics of genetic enhancement have
focused on whether the practice is ever permissible, some ethicists
argue that it is not only permissible for parents to enhance their
children, but a positive duty. Savulescu (2001) argues for what he
calls the principle of Procreative Beneficence: couples should use
pre-genetic diagnosis and selective abortion to choose the child, of
the children they could have, who will have the best life. This
naturally extends to using genetic enhancement. Savulescu's
justification for the principle of Procreative Beneficence is that it
seems irrational not to select the best child when no other reasons are
relevant to one's choice. But this seems like a very weak
principle: it seems likely that at least some other reason will
frequently apply. For example, prospective parents might just prefer to
leave their child's genetic makeup up to chance. If this is not
an irrational preference, then it plausibly gives some reason for them
not to select any particular embryo to implant. Savulescu's view
is extended in further papers which claim that the principle of
Procreative Beneficence has greater moral weight than simply being a
tiebreaker when no other reasons apply (Savulescu and Kahane 2009, 281;
for criticism see Parker 2010).


Finally, controversy is not limited to genetic interventions: there
are live debates about whether parents may choose (male) circumcision,
clitoridectomy, marrow donation, sex assignment of inter-sexed
children, and other surgical interventions (see, e.g., Benatar and
Benatar 2003 on circumcision; Parens 2006, on surgically shaping
children).
4. Becoming Parents


In virtue of what does one become a moral parent, i.e., a primary
bearer of parental rights and/or parental responsibilities with respect
to a particular child? We can distinguish four general answers:
genetic, labor-based, intentional (or voluntarist), and causal
accounts. On monistic versions, only one of these properties generates
parental relationships. On pluralistic accounts, more than one of these
relations can ground parenthood.
4.1 Genetic accounts


Genetic theories ground parenthood in the relation of direct genetic
derivation. Geneticism thus places parenthood in the nexus of other
familial relations, such as being a sibling, cousin, and so on, which
appear to have a genetic basis.


Hall (1999) defends geneticism by appeal to the Lockean notion of
self-ownership. Since genetic parents own the genetic material from
which the child is constituted, they have a prima facie
parental claim to the child. There are a number of problems with this
line of argument (Kolers & Bayne 2001) and it is an argument that
Locke himself rejected (Franklin-Hall 2012). First, it subsumes
parental relations under property relations, by attempting to derive a
claim about parenthood from premises involving claims about ownership.
The plausibility of this derivation is based on emphasizing parental
rights associated with exclusivity and authority, and downplaying
parental responsibilities. Those responsibilities—to both child
and community—pull sharply against a property-based analysis of
parenthood. Second, taking self-ownership seriously entails that
children own themselves, and this surely defeats any proprietary claim
that their parents might have in them (Archard 1990). Third, genetic
parents do not provide the material from which the child is
constituted
in utero; that derives from the gestational mother, not the
genetic parents (Silver 2001). Of course, the child's genetic make-up
structures that matter, but to argue for the priority of the genetic
over the gestational contribution is to argue for the priority of form
over matter, and it is not obvious that this can be done.


Other arguments for geneticism derive from considering paternity, in
that direct genetic derivation appears to provide the most plausible
account of the basis of fatherhood. Several recent legal cases have
overturned adoptions on the grounds that the estranged father,
unidentified at the time of birth, has returned to claim the child
(Rosenman 1995, Shanley 1995). Supporters of these decisions endorse
the view that unalienated genetic claims to children can override
months or even years of rearing by the adoptive parents, as well as the
earlier failure of the father to claim the child. Similarly, in
“surrogacy” cases, many writers have argued—or simply
assumed—that a genetic father may have his own child by
contracting with a surrogate mother. This seems to presuppose a genetic
account of paternity; and it is a small step from a genetic account of
paternity to a genetic account of parenthood. One need appeal only to
the principle of “parity,” according to which the sort of
relationship that makes one person a parent suffices to make anyone
else a parent (Bayne & Kolers 2003; Austin 2004).
4.2 Labor-based accounts


An alternative account views parents' work, rather than their
genetic relationships, as essential to the parental relation. According
to these labor-based accounts, people who play or have played a
parental role in a child's life have thereby become the parents.
In this spirit, a number of authors have argued that the primary ground
of parenthood is the gestational relation (Rothman 1989; Feldman 1992).
In reproductive contexts in which a child's gestational mother differs
from its genetic mother—as in egg (or embryo) donation and
gestational surrogacy—it is therefore the gestational mother
who has the primary claim to parental rights and responsibilities. This
line of argument can be expanded to include people besides the
gestational mother who have taken a parental role in rearing a child
(Millum 2010).


Two main considerations are presented in favor of labor-based
accounts. One focuses on the interests of the child. Where a child has
been looked after by a person or people for some time, it is thought to
be very damaging for her to be taken away from them (Archard
2004). Likewise, in the case of gestation, since the gestational
mother is guaranteed to be identifiable at birth, it is in the best
interests of the child that she be regarded as the mother (Annas 1984).
However, while recognizing the gestational mother or caregivers as
parents will sometimes serve the best interests of the child, it is
implausible that this will always be the case. This argument might, at
best, ground laws presuming that the gestational mother and rearing
parents have a claim to be the legal parents. Since there will likely
be cases in which being reared by someone else would be better for the
child, it will be difficult to justify the assignment of parenthood on
the grounds of labor in every case.


A second line of argument appeals to what parents deserve for the
work they do. Gestational mothers typically invest a substantial amount
of effort into the child. In Narayan's words, a gestational mother
typically undergoes “considerable discomfort, effort, and risk in
the course of pregnancy and childbirth” (Narayan 1999, 81; also
Gheaus 2012). While this account appears to give a special role to
gestational mothers, it can include parenting partners who help bear
the costs or contribute to establishing a relationship (for example, by
viewing an ultrasound image together). Similarly, the people who care
for a child invest a great deal of work. It might therefore be thought
that they deserve to be the parents (Millum 2010). 


Labor-based accounts have the advantage over genetic accounts that
they can explain why the individuals they pick out as the parents ought
to have parental rights. They also incorporate adoptive and other
non-biological parental relationships into a single account of
parenthood, whereas genetic accounts seem forced to view non-biological
parenthood as a distinct type of normative relationship. Objections to
gestationalist accounts of parenthood may start from the problem of
paternity: if gestation is necessary for parenthood, how can men become
fathers (Bayne & Kolers 2003)? Broader labor-based
accounts that count the work of other caregivers can explain
fatherhood, but they still seem to give the gestational mother veto
power over other potential parents. As Barbara Katz Rothman puts it:
“if men want to have children, they will either have to develop
the technology that enables them to become pregnant … or have
children through their relationships with women” (Rothman 1989,
257). Some will find this implausible.
4.3 Intentional and voluntarist accounts


A third approach to parenthood, popular with legal theorists,
appeals to intentions as the ground of parenthood (Hill 1991; Parker
1982; Shultz 1990; Stumpf 1986). Intentionalists motivate their
position by appeal to cases like the following. The Khans wish to have
a child “of their own.” They screen egg and sperm providers
and find providers who satisfy their requirements. They then select a
gestational mother, who carries the fetus to term and then hands the
infant over to the Khans. Intentionalists argue that because they
“carefully and intentionally orchestrated the procreational act,
bringing together all the necessary components with the intention of
creating a unique individual whom they intend to raise as their
own” (Hill 1991, 359), the Khans should be regarded as the
child's sole parents.


Another argument for intentionalism appeals to the “case of
the misplaced sperm”:



Bruce is about to undergo some risky medical treatment, and has
placed some of his sperm in a sperm-bank in case he needs it at a later
date. Through a bureaucratic mishap, Bruce's sperm is swapped with that
of a sperm-donor and is used by Bessie to produce a child. Does Bruce
acquire parental rights and responsibilities over Bessie's child?



Intuitions vary here, but there is at least some pull towards
denying that Bruce's genetic relation to Bessie's child gives him any
parental claim over it. The reason Bruce lacks a parental relation to
Bessie's child seems to be that he didn't intentionally bring the child
into existence.


Intentionalism construes parenthood as relying on facts about agency
rather than biology; for the intentionalist, parenthood is
fundamentally a moral relationship rather than a biological one (see
Fuscaldo 2006, for discussion). Some philosophical defenses of
intentionalism appeal to a voluntaristic account of responsibilities in
general (Van Zyl 2002). If special obligations to particular
others are generally acquired voluntarily, then it is plausible that
parental obligations are also voluntarily incurred (O'Neill 1979;
Brake 2005, 2010; for criticism see Prusak 2011a, b). 
Furthermore, parental obligations are role obligations. While it is a
matter of debate whether any role obligations can be acquired
involuntarily, it is at least plausible that roles assumed as adults
(as opposed to roles one is born into) require voluntary
acceptance. Finally, parental role obligations are conventional:
their scope and content varies by jurisdiction and society (Thompson
2005). This suggests an unfairness if such extensive obligations are
incurred involuntarily (Brake 2010). On the other hand, once it
is recognized that parental obligations are conventional, the content
of parental obligations and the voluntary actions required to acquire
them can be explained with reference to social conventions of
parenthood (Millum 2008). Another defense of intentionalism appeals to
parental autonomy, as opposed to the way in which obligations are
incurred: Richards argues for a variant of the intentional view
according to which parental rights derive from “a right to
continue [projects] we have underway” (Richards 2010,
23). 


One objection to intentionalism concerns the content of the
intentions that are supposed to ground parenthood. Consider a case in
which a couple conceives by accident and then form intentions to give
up the baby for adoption rather than rear it. This intention endures
until 15 minutes after birth, at which point they change their minds
and decide to rear the child. It is highly implausible that for the
first 15 minutes of the child's life they are no more its parents than
anyone else.


Perhaps the most widespread objection to the voluntarist account is
that it seems to absolve unintending procreators from parental
obligation. However, many share the view that procreators, intending or
not, who voluntarily engaged in sex have a moral responsibility to a
resulting child due to their role in causing it to exist (Austin 2007;
Fuscaldo 2006; Millum 2008).


Whatever the prospects of a voluntarist account of parenthood, 
a voluntarist account of familial relations in general is implausible.
The duties that siblings have to each other, or that children have to
their parents, are not easily understood as voluntary undertakings.
This is a problem for  voluntarist accounts of parenthood to the
extent that duties between parents and children should fit within a
wider framework of familial duties (Rachels 1989; Mills 2003; see
Mullin 2010, for discussion; and the entry on
 special obligations).
4.4 Causal accounts


Finally, parenthood may be grounded in causation (Nelson 1991;
Bigelow et al. 1988; Blustein 1997; Archard 2010). A causal account
differs from intentionalism in that one can cause something without
intending to do so. Indeed, one can cause a certain state of affairs
even when one is unaware that one's actions could do so. One needn't
have grasped the connection between sexual intercourse and pregnancy in
order to be the cause of a child's existence.


One of the attractions of causalism is its promise to account for
the plausibility of genetic, labor-based, and intentional accounts of
parenthood. Genetic, gestational, and caregiving relationships
contribute to the child's existence or development, and, in the
cases that some intentionalists appeal to, the commissioning couple are
a cause of the child's existence. Causalism offers to explain its
competitors.


But causal accounts face problems: first, what is meant by
“causation” in this context? ‘But-for’ causation is
too weak to ground parenthood, because its scope is so wide: for
example, procreation might not have occurred ‘but-for’ the
urgings of would-be grandparents or the actions of the match-making
friend who introduced the parents. But it is unclear what notion of
causation the causal theorist should adopt instead of
‘but-for’ causation (Blustein 1997). Second, what
implications does the causal account have? Even with a satisfactory
account of causation it may be unclear whom the account ascribes
parenthood to in any particular case—or if it is clear enough,
there is a risk of an ad hoc account of causation tailor-made for this
purpose. Concern with the arbitrariness of the causal chain by means of
which a child may be created leads writers such as Fuscaldo (2006) to
emphasize that what is wanted is not a theory of causation but of
agency (see also Austin 2004, 2007). This leads back in the direction
of intentionalism.


A related problem is that causal accounts often leave it unclear how
causal responsibility generates moral responsibility. Sometimes it
appears that the thought is that procreators, by causing a child to
exist, have placed it in a needy position and so owe it, as
compensation, “procreative costs.”  But these costs
are arguably not equivalent to the weighty responsibilities of
parenthood (Brake 2010). The question is whether, as a result of causal
responsibility for their existence, parents merely owe children repair
of their needy condition, by fostering survival to adulthood, or
whether such “procreative costs” include a richer set of
parental responsibilities, such as a duty to love and to make the child
“content with his condition” (Prusak 2011b, 67).
   


One final alternative, as noted above, is a ‘pluralist’
account which allows that more than one of these relations (such as
causation or intention) may be sufficient, but not necessary, for
parenthood (Bayne and Kolers 2003). Pluralist accounts have not
yet been developed in depth. 

Having outlined the main theories of
the grounds of parenthood, we turn now to questions concerning the
morality of being a parent.
5. Being Parents


Most contemporary discussions assume that moral parental rights and
responsibilities or obligations are inseparable (Bayne and Kolers
2003). But Archard has argued that this “parental package”
view is untenable (Archard and Benatar 2010, 22–25; Archard
2010; see Austin 2007, chap. 3). To take Archard's example, an
estranged, abusive parent may have moral and legal support obligations
but no parental rights; obligations to ensure a child is provided for
do not entail parental rights. It is more plausible, as Archard notes,
that parental rights and responsibilities—which, as contrasted
with obligations, concern the hands-on, day-to-day rearing of the
child—come together. Even these, in some circumstances, might
come apart—as when an estranged parent retains some
decision-making rights but holds no responsibilities.  
5.1 Parental Rights


Parents have moral and legal rights regarding their children. They
have the liberty to make decisions on behalf of their
children regarding matters such as diet, schooling,
association with others, and—controversially—religious
observance, and the right to exclude others from such decision-making. Such
rights decrease in strength and scope as children gain decision-making capacity, yet until
the child reaches moral or legal competence, issues of substituted
judgment and surrogate decision-making remain (Ross 2002). 


Parental rights' content, extent, and relation to parental
obligations is determined by the underlying theory of why parents
possess such rights. On the child-centered or fiduciary model,
parental rights piggyback on parental responsibilities to children,
which are morally fundamental. One such theory is
Blustein's “priority thesis.” According to the
priority thesis, parents acquire rights in order to carry out their
responsibilities; thus responsibilities are morally prior to rights
(Blustein 1982, 104–114). As Archard writes, “A parent can
choose for his child, and exclude others from the making of these
choices, only in the service of and thus constrained by a duty to care
for the child. It is in the first instance because a dependent
child must have decisions made for it that a designated parent is
entitled to make those decisions.” (Archard 2010, 108; see also
Brennan and Noggle 1997; Austin 2007) 


Other theories of parental rights focus on parents' interests.
Historically, parenthood has often been regarded as a possessory (or
proprietary) relationship. Some genetic accounts of parenthood imply
the proprietarian view that parents own their children (see
 4.1; Hall
1999; Narveson 2002). However, property rights seem inappropriate here
for several reasons: children cannot be sold and they cannot be used
however the parent wishes. While it might be responded that
parental property rights are limited, prohibiting sale and certain
uses, this does not address the more fundamental objection that persons
cannot be property. 


Other theories provide more plausible support for parent-centered, as
opposed to child-centered, accounts of parental rights.  Brighouse and
Swift argue for parental rights on the basis of the irreplaceable good
offered by parenting. Because parenting is a project with goods which
cannot be obtained through other activities, such as the
responsibility of caring for a child and the receipt of children's
spontaneous trust, affection, and intimacy, the interest in parenting
should be protected. On this account, parental rights, not parental
obligations, are fundamental, because the parents' interests are the
basis for the right (Brighouse and Swift 2006, 2014; see also Shoeman
1980). Brighouse and Swift generate this account partly in response to
the challenge of redistribution: why should children not be
redistributed at birth to the best prospective parents, to maximize
children's welfare?  But as Gheaus points out, while Brighouse and
Swift provide an account of fundamental parental rights, they do not
explain why biological parents have rights to rear their biological
children, rather than such children being redistributed to better
prospective parents, who could thereby undertake their own parenting
projects (Gheaus 2012). Finally, a dual-interest view, grounding
rights in interests of both parents and children, is also possible
(Macleod 2015).


One important question concerning the content of parental rights is
their extent. Parental rights entitle parents to exclude others,
including the state, from child-rearing decisions &ndahs; so long as
parents are competent, and refrain from abuse and neglect (on
competency, see Macleod 2015). One controversial right is the right to
infuse children with parents' religious beliefs. On the one hand,
handing down such beliefs to children is, to many, a key aspect of the
parental project (Brighouse and Swift 2006, 2014). Feinberg argued
that children have a “right to an open future,” which such
infusion could violate when it threatens children's ability to choose
their own religious or ethical beliefs later (Feinberg 1980). However,
the right to an open future appears too demanding: many parental acts,
such as opting for cello over violin lessons, narrow children's
options later, but they seem acceptable. Another tack, taken by
Clayton, is to argue that such “enrolment” violates
children's autonomy (Clayton 2006; also Coleman 2003). From a feminist
perspective, Okin argued that religious infusion could affect girls'
developing self-respect and equal opportunity (Okin 1994). But even if
such arguments theoretically justify state intervention, their
proponents must explain how, in practice, the state could intervene in
the intimate parent-child relationship without psychologically harming
children.


Other questions concerning parental rights concern exclusivity and the
number of possible parents. As step-parenting, procreation involving
multiple biological, gestational, and social parents, and other
diverse family forms become more prevalent, why should the number of
parents be limited to two?  As noted in Section 1 above, a Canadian
court recognized a child as having three parents. Relatives in
addition to the parents are frequently involved in raising children,
even in cultures in which the nuclear family is considered the
norm. In the United States, nearly 3 million grandparents have primary
responsibility for children living in their homes and it has been
argued that grandparental rights should be legally recognized
(Henderson 2005). Further, some philosophers have argued for legal
recognition or support for non-parental care, as in, for example,
African-American practices of “othermothering” or
“revolutionary parenting.” This would permit more adults
to contribute to children's development, thereby arguably benefiting
children (Gheaus 2011; hooks 1984; Collins 1991; Mullin 2005). 


So far, we have considered parental rights as parents' moral
and legal claims to make, and exclude others from, decisions regarding
their child. But some philosophers have argued for other rights
held by parents—namely, positive rights to social support for
child-rearing. These proposals are discussed in 5.2, as they aim
at helping parents discharge their responsibilities. 
5.2 Parental Responsibilities


Parenthood inhabits the intersection of two distinct relationships:
a custodial relationship between parent and child, and a
trustee relationship between the parents and the larger
society or other collective. Both may generate responsibilities.


The custodial relationship involves a set of duties aimed at, and
justified by, the welfare of the child. As custodian, the parent is
under a limited obligation to work for and organize his or her life
around the welfare and development of the child, for the child's sake.
Analysis of the content of parental responsibilities has therefore
mostly focused on the rights of the child. Feinberg's right to an
“open future” can be read as a limit on parental
discretion (see 5.1). It can also be interpreted
as giving children positive claims to certain goods, such as an
education that leaves them with a wide range of valuable life plans to
choose from. Whether there is such a positive right and in what it
consists are matters of dispute (Liao 2015; Mills 2003; Lotz 2006 and
2014; Millum 2014; essays in Archard and Macleod 2002; entry on 
children's rights).


Societies, families, and cultural groups also have interests in the
welfare of children. For instance, the state has an interest in the
reproduction of its workforce and its citizens; hence parental
decisions that threaten the child's chances of becoming a fully
participating citizen may come under special state scrutiny. Distinct
groups, such as the state and cultural groups, may make conflicting
claims on the parents as trustees. For instance, in order to promote
culturally prescribed norms, parents might seek to remove their child
from school, or have their daughter undergo clitoridectomy; yet the
state may claim that such a decision violates the parents' trustee
relationship on grounds that the state has a compelling interest in
securing the full citizenship capacities and rights of its citizens
(Galston 1995; Tamir 1996; Nussbaum 1996). Moreover, discharging
parental responsibilities must be balanced with discharging obligations
of distributive and global justice (Archard and Macleod 2002, Part III;
Macleod 2010).


All parents fail to meet their responsibilities at some point. We
would not expect someone to raise a child without making mistakes along
the way. However, at some point, excusable parental failings shade into
neglect and abuse. Exactly what counts as child abuse is a matter for
debate. However, if abuse marks a threshold above which it is
permissible for others—particularly the state—to intervene,
then a clear definition is needed (Archard 2004, chap. 14).


By the time neglect or abuse has reached the point that the state
intervenes, irreparable damage has often been caused, and the actions
that can be taken to improve a child's situation are likely to be
limited. Some philosophers argue that prospective parents should be
screened ahead of time for their ability to parent and those who are
deemed unlikely to be able to fulfill their parental responsibilities
should not be granted parental licenses. The argument in favor of
licensing parents may appeal primarily to the harms to children that
occur if unfit people are allowed to parent (LaFollette 1980, 2010) or
to the wider impact on society from rearing children who are unlikely
to become good citizens (McFall 2009). Either way proposals for
parental licensing schemes must show that it is possible prospectively
to identify individuals who are likely to be neglectful or abusive
parents with sufficient accuracy, show that the schemes do not violate
the rights of prospective parents (on this see Liao 2015), and explain
how they are to be enforced. The latter is perhaps the hardest
challenge: without resorting to compulsory sterilization how can
people be prevented from having children without licenses? (McFall
2009, 122) Of course, there could be penalties for unlicensed parents,
or their children could be subject to confiscation, but such policies
risk inadvertently penalizing the children they were intended to
assist. Moreover, enforcement would disproportionately burden
women. As gestators, women might be subjected to de facto forced
abortions; women are also more likely to be primary caregivers, and
thus subjected to greater interference and monitoring (Engster
2010). A further question is whether onerous licensing policies for
adoptive parents can be justified in the absence of more general
parental licensing schemes (McLeod and Botterell 2014).


Finally, children need a great deal of care if they are to grow up
into autonomous, healthy adults and good citizens. Parents clearly have
the responsibility to provide some of this care, and the state has the
obligation to step in when parents are failing to do as they should.
However, there is an open question about what the state should provide
in cases that do not involve abuse or neglect. As Alstott has argued,
parenting imposes opportunity costs on parents, for example, in earning
potential. Moreover, child-care labor remains gender-structured,
with women performing by far the greater share. On these grounds
Alstott argues for caregiver accounts to ensure equal opportunity, for
example, allocating educational funds to parents (Alstott 2004). 
One pertinent question is whether parenting should be considered a
private good, like an expensive taste which it would be unjust for
society to subsidize (Taylor 2009).  Some have responded
that it is a matter of justice due to its effects on equal opportunity
for women (Okin 1989, Kittay 1999). Others have argued for
collective social responsibility for children on grounds such as
children's welfare and their status as a public good, providing
positive externalities by reproducing society and producing workers who
will support the current generation in old age (George 1987; Archard
2004; Engster 2010; Olsaretti 2013).