Peter John Olivi was one of the most original and interesting
philosophers and theologians of the thirteenth century. Although not
as clear and systematic as Thomas Aquinas, and not as brilliantly
analytical as John Duns Scotus, Olivi’s ideas are equally
original and provocative, and their philosophical value is nowadays
recognized among the specialists in medieval philosophy. He is
probably best known for his psychological theories, especially his
voluntarist conception of the freedom of the will, but his influence
extends also to other areas of philosophy, from metaphysics to
practical philosophy. 
 
1. Life and Work

Olivi (ca. 1248–1298) was born in Sérignan, in the
Languedoc region of southern France. He entered the Franciscan order
at the age of twelve, studied in Paris from 1267 to about 1272 (during
the final years of Bonaventure’s generalate) without becoming a
master of theology, and spent the remainder of his life teaching at
various Franciscan houses of study in southern France, with a stay in
Florence from 1287–89. (For biographical details, see Burr 1976
and 1989, and especially Piron 1998, 1999, 2006a.) Olivi’s
outspoken originality led him into conflict with religious
authorities: his writings were condemned by the Franciscan authorities
in 1283, and although he was later rehabilitated by the new minister
general Matthew of Aquasparta, he remained a controversial figure. He
spent the rest of his life as a lector at Montpellier and Narbonne.
Soon after his death the Franciscan order renewed the prohibition on
reading or retaining his works. Although his philosophical views were
controversial, what proved to be fatal was his reputation within the
so-called “Spiritual” reform movement of the Franciscan
order. Olivi’s understanding of the Franciscan vow and poverty
became influential among the spiritualists, and after his death he was
venerated by fervent laymen in Languedoc. When Church officials took
action against the spiritual movement, Olivi’s reputation
suffered a blow, which obviously limited the influence he would have
on posterity. (See Burr 1989, 1993, 2001.) 

Olivi produced a large and wide-ranging body of work, much of which
has survived. By far the most important philosophical text is his
Summa of questions on Peter Lombard’s
Sentences, a massive work he began writing soon after leaving
Paris and redacted to its final form in the mid-1290s. This
masterpiece of medieval philosophy remains still largely untranslated,
and edited only in part. Olivi’s views on metaphysics and human
nature are mostly found in his questions on Bk. II (ed. Jansen,
1922–26). Material on the virtues is found in Bk. III (ed. Emmen
and Stadter, 1981). Other philosophically relevant works include his
Quodlibeta from 1289–95 (ed. Defraia, 2002), a set of
questions on logic (ed. Brown, 1986), and the Questions on
Evangelical Perfection. Many of his biblical commentaries, the
historically significant Commentary on the Apocalypse, and
various texts pertaining to his condemnation have survived and are
available in modern editions. (For a recent list of editions, see
König-Pralong et al. 2010.) In this article we will focus on just
a few of Olivi’s interesting philosophical views, concentrating
especially on his philosophical psychology. 
2. Human Freedom

Olivi devotes several extended questions of his Summa to the
topic of human freedom, beginning with the question of whether human
beings even have free will (liberum arbitrium). Olivi’s
own argument for the affirmative begins by listing seven pairs of
attitudes (affectus), each of which testifies to the
existence of free will (Q57, p. 317): 

Zeal and mercy
Friendship and hostility
Shame and glory
Gratitude and ingratitude
Subjugation and domination
Hope and distrust
Carefulness and heedlessness


Each of these attitudes, Olivi claims, is intelligible only given the
existence of free will. More specifically, they are “its
distinctive products, or its distinctive acts and habits”
(ibid.). As he runs through the list, explaining how each attitude
entails free will, it becomes clear that many of these claims are
familiar ones. Zeal, for instance, is an angry reaction to bad deeds,
motivated “only against the bad that one judges to have been
done voluntarily, and thus which could have been freely avoided”
(p. 318). Without free will, this attitude is based on an assumption
that is “thoroughly false and grounded on a thoroughly false
object” (p. 317). As zeal goes, so do the related phenomena of
accusations, excuses, blame, and guilt. Generally, “a human
being could no more be accused of some vice than he could be accused
of death, for he could avoid the one as little as the other” (p.
336). Carefulness and heedlessness, the last pair on the list,
likewise become meaningless : “For it is foolish to be careful
about things that will occur necessarily” (p. 323). It becomes
pointless to be careful about deliberation, for instance,
“because the deliberation itself will or will not happen
necessarily, and even one’s carefulness will or will not occur
necessarily” (p. 323). 

For Olivi, these and other data stand as unshakeable evidence for the
existence and nature of free will. He makes this clear from the
beginning of his reply, when he introduces two premisses that
“no one of sane mind ought to doubt” (p. 317). First, it
is impossible for all of the attitudes of one’s rational nature
to be “thoroughly false and perverse and grounded on a
thoroughly false and perverse object.” Since Olivi thinks that
the attitudes that distinguish us as rational creatures are founded on
free will, giving up on free will would be to abandon most of what
makes us human. We would cease to be what we properly are, persons,
and we would become only “intellectual beasts” (p. 338).
Second, it is impossible for attitudes to be entirely illusory when
human beings improve and perfect themselves by assuming those
attitudes (p. 317). If the practices of zeal, deliberation,
friendship, love, political power, etc. were all founded on a false
assumption, then surely these practices would not be so crucial to
human well-being. Thus “no one of sane mind will believe that
something could be the truth which so sharply puts an end to all good
things and brings on so many bad things” (p. 338). In the face
of these implications, we should reject whatever stands in the way of
free will, whether that be the authority of Aristotle or some abstruse
principle of metaphysics. “Even if there were no other argument
establishing that [the denial of free will] is false, this alone ought
to be sufficiently persuasive” (p. 338). Moreover, as he
explicitly notes, we should be persuaded not just of our own free
will, but of the free will of all human beings, since these arguments
are based not on private experience, but on our relationships with
others.

Having proved that human beings have free will, Olivi sets out to
explain what he means by freedom. His conception obviously belongs
within the libertarian camp in the free will debate, and the central
aspect of it is that in order to be free, the will must be active and
capable of reflexively moving itself to action. True, the will’s
choices are not necessitated by reason or anything other than by the
will itself, but Olivi does not merely conclude that the will is not
necessitated; the further conclusion he reaches is that the will,
until it makes a choice, is entirely undetermined one way or another,
and that it determines itself in the direction it chooses. This is
something “every human being senses with complete certainty
within himself” (p. 327). In arguing that the will determines
itself, he means that it is a first mover, in need of no efficient
cause other than itself. “Its free power is the cause of its
motion, when it is moved, and the cause of its rest, when it
rests” (ad 5, pp. 341–42). If the will did not have this
capacity for self-movement, then it would have to be determined by
something else, and it would not be making its own choices. But this
violates the unshakeable assumptions from which Olivi begins, because
it would then turn out that the will is not autonomous, not making its
own choices, hence not a suitable object of one’s zeal or
friendship, among other things.

Olivi is well aware that the lack of autonomy does not entirely
preclude a sort of pseudo-zeal or pseudo-friendship. One might be
angry with someone, for instance, not out of the conviction that the
bad action was that person’s fault, but simply in an effort to
change that person’s ways. But this line of thought does
violence to our conceptions of ourselves and our fellow human beings.
We want people to do the right thing not because they have been
effectively manipulated, but “solely and purely because of the
love of justice” (ad 22, p. 368). Further, when we urge a person
to do the right thing, “we do not intend simply to move someone
toward what is good, but rather to make it that he voluntarily moves
himself toward the good” (p. 369).

Moreover, Olivi argues fervently against the view that the will is a
power for opposites only with respect to a future instant. In order to
be truly free, the will must, in the same instant as it wills
‘A’, be capable of willing ‘not-A’.
Olivi’s conception seems to have been the source of John Duns
Scotus’ revolutionary theory of synchronic contingency (Dumont
1995), and although Scotus is better known as an early proponent of
libertarian freedom, his view is heavily indebted to Olivi. Indeed, it
is arguable that Olivi deserves credit as the founder of this
conception of freedom of the will.
3. Soul and Body

With the rediscovery of Aristotle’s metaphysical and ethical
works, thirteenth-century theologians devoted an increasing portion of
their time to interpreting and developing Aristotelian accounts of
human nature. Olivi was very far from a slavish admirer of
Aristotle’s, and his theory of the nature of the soul and its
relation to the body differs radically from those medieval
interpretations which endeavor to be faithful to the Philosopher.
Nonetheless, he employs the Aristotelian theoretical framework, and
although he often seems to be rather hostile to Aristotle’s
pervasive influence, once remarking that “without reason he is
believed, as the god of this age” (Q58 ad 14, p. 482; see Burr
1971), the main thrust of his criticism is directed at contemporary
Averroist interpretations of Aristotle rather than at Aristotle
himself (Piron 2006b). The critical, even harsh passages must be
understood in this light.

Nonetheless, he rejects many principles that are crucial for
Aristotle’s account of the soul-body relationship. He argues
that it is “not only contrary to reason but also dangerous to
the faith” to hold that “the [soul’s] intellective
and free part is the form of the body per se and considered as
such” (Q51, p. 104). Others had questioned the extent to which
soul and body could be analyzed in terms of form and matter, but Olivi
goes further because he explicitly denies that one part of the soul,
the rational part, can be understood as the form of the body. This
denial is ultimately based on his view that the intellectual part of
the soul must be spiritual and incorporeal because otherwise it cannot
be immortal, intellectual, and free. Yet he does not want to
jeopardize the substantial unity of the soul and the body, and he
works towards a theory which incorporates both of these doctrines.

Olivi’s denial that the soul’s intellectual part is the
form of the body matches fairly closely with a doctrine that was
condemned by the Council of Vienne in 1312, when Pope Clement V
declared in the bull Fidei catholicae fundamento that it is a
heresy to hold that “the rational or intellective soul is not
per se and essentially the form of the human body” (Denzinger
1965, n. 902). However, it is easy to misunderstand what Olivi is
saying, and a closer analysis shows that his position is far more
nuanced than the wording of the condemnation suggests. First, he is
not denying that the rational part of the soul is a form, or even that
it is the form of a human being. To begin with, he follows Bonaventure
and makes a distinction between two kinds of matter. The human body
and all material objects are made of corporeal matter, but spiritual
entities (angels and human souls) also have a material substratum, the
so-called spiritual matter. Olivi argues that the rational part of the
soul, intellect and will, is a form of this spiritual matter. It is
acceptable to speak of intellect as the form of a human being
since the spiritual matter belongs to the human being. But because the
spiritual matter of the soul is distinct from the corporeal matter of
the body, Olivi can maintain that the rational part is not the form of
the body. (See e.g. Q51 appendix, p. 138.)

Second, Olivi is not denying that the soul is the form of the
body. What he denies is that the rational part of the soul
(“the intellective and free part”) is the form of the
body. He resorts to a doctrine of the plurality of substantial forms,
according to which complex substances, such as human beings, have
several more or less distinct forms that together make the complete
human being. The intellectual part of the soul is distinct from
another part, the sensory part, and only the latter is the form of the
body. Because the two parts of the soul are united in the spiritual
matter, it is acceptable to say that the whole soul is the form of the
body:

It is said that the whole rational soul, rather than the sensory part,
is the form of the body, even though it is informed by the whole only
insofar as it is informed by the soul’s sensory and nutritive
part. (Q51 app., p. 146)


We should say that the whole soul is the form of the body, in much the
same way that we say that a person talks, not a tongue (p. 144). But
if we direct our attention to the various parts of the soul, then it
is wrong to say that the rational part, “per se and considered
as such,” is the form of the body. The soul is the form of the
body only with respect to its sensory and nutritive part. 

Despite his theoretical commitments that are not compatible with
Aristotle’s view, there is a sense in which Olivi might
plausibly be said to be agreeing with Aristotle, who explicitly leaves
room for parts of the soul that “are the actuality of no
body” (De an. II.1, 413a7). Presumably, Aristotle is
thinking of the intellect. But it’s not at all obvious how that
remark should be interpreted. Aquinas, for instance, holds without
qualification that “the intellect ... is the form of the human
body,” only its acts are not realized in the bodily organs
(Summa theologiae 1.76.1). So what is it that compels Olivi
to drop intellect from the hylomorphic scheme?

Olivi writes that to identify the rational part as the form of the
body is “not only contrary to reason but also dangerous to the
faith” (as above). More specifically, as he writes in a letter
defending his views, he believes that that claim holds “the
danger of destroying the soul’s immortality, its liberty, and
its intellectual nature” (Epistola n. 7). Each of these
three consequences is based on one overarching assumption: that to
make the soul’s rational part the form of the body is either to
attribute to the body the distinctive capacities of the rational soul,
or to deny these capacities to the intellectual soul. Here is how
Olivi puts that claim:

If the intellective part is the form of the body, then, since all
matter is actualized by its form, it follows that just as a human body
is truly sensory and living through the sensory soul, so that body
will be truly intellective and free through the intellective part.
(Q51, pp. 104–5)


If the intellect is the form of the body, then the body must have the
capacities for intellectual thought and free decision. Olivi is of
course going to reject that as absurd. Notice the form of this
argument. First, Olivi asserts that to be the form of something is to
impart actuality to that thing. This seems uncontroversial. Second,
Olivi argues by analogy. Just as the sensory soul actualizes a body by
giving it life and the capacity for sensation, so the intellective
part—if it is the form of the body—should actualize the
body by making it intellective and free. This claim seems plausible as
well. If one accepts the first step of the argument, that to be the
form of something is to impart actuality to that thing, then the
rational part must be giving something to the body. Olivi
says, “every form imparts to its matter some operation, and some
power for operating” (Q51, p. 109). So, if the rational part
does not render the body immortal and give it the capacity for
intellective thought and freedom, we have to provide some sort of
account of what the rational part does give the body. But what else
could the rational part of the soul do for the body, if not endow it
with its essential properties and powers? 

We might view this argument as posing a dilemma. If the rational part
is the form of the body, then one must either understand this formal
relationship in the ordinary way, in terms of actualizing the body, or
one must concede that the rational part is not the form of the body in
any ordinary sense. The first horn of the dilemma leads in the
direction of materialism, because it forces one to claim that the
powers of the rational soul are instantiated in the body. The second
horn of the dilemma leads one toward retracting the original
assertion: that the rational part, the intellect, is the form of the
body. For it is not at all clear what that means, if the intellect is
not in any way actualizing the body.

Given Olivi’s argumentation against the formal union between the
intellectual part of the soul and the body, it may seem that the unity
of the human being is compromised. Olivi argues, however, that the
relation between these two parts is substantial even though it is
mediated by the sensory part and the spiritual matter of the soul. He
writes:

If the human body is united and inclined to the sensory form, which is
inclined and united to the intellectual form; and the intellectual
form is essentially united to the sensory form, which is inclined to
the body; then by the same token the intellectual form and the body
are necessarily substantially united to each other. Still, this does
not mean that they would be united as form and matter. (Q51, p. 134)


The substantial union between the intellectual and sensory parts is
due to their being the forms of the same spiritual matter of the soul.
In this way, all the metaphysical components constitute a single
substance. A human being is an essentially unified entity even though
the intellectual part of the soul is not the actuality of the body or
any of its parts.
4. Cognitive Activity and Attention

One of the most interesting and original aspects of Olivi’s
philosophy is his critique of the standard Aristotelian model of
cognition. The starting point of this critique is the Augustinian
conception of the ontological superiority of the soul with respect to
the body, which leads Olivi to insist that perception and intellectual
understanding cannot be passive reception of external stimuli but must
be understood as active processes. On the conventional medieval view,
a cognitive power simply receives impressions from the world, in the
form of sensible or intelligible species. Olivi argues that such an
account leaves out a crucial element, the focusing of the cognitive
power’s attention on the object to be cognized.

However much the cognitive power is informed through a disposition and
a species differing from the cognitive action, it cannot advance to a
cognitive action unless before this it actually tends toward the
object, so that the attention of its intention should be actually
turned and directed to the object. (Q72, p. 9)


Olivi gives the kinds of examples that one would expect. The ears of
someone sleeping, for instance, receive the same impressions as the
ears of someone awake, but the sleeper does not sense these
impressions. Even when we are awake, we sometimes do not perceive
objects right in front of us when we are intently focused on something
else (Q73, pp. 89–90). 

Olivi argues that this kind of cognitive attention requires a
“virtual extension” toward the object. Though he accepts
the traditional theory of species in medio, sensible
qualities that fill the air between the senses and their objects, he
denies that these species are the efficient cause of cognition. One
striking consequence of this claim is that the object itself need not
exert any causal influence, not on the cognitive powers nor even on
the physical sense organs. The external object need only be close
enough to be apprehended by the cognizer’s spiritual attention.
In the cases of both perception and understanding, the efficient agent
is the cognitive power. The external object is merely a kind of final
cause or, more precisely, a “terminative cause” (Q72, p.
36; Epistola, n. 12). It is merely by being the object of the
cognitive power’s attention that the external object plays a
role in cognition. 

Olivi treats virtual attention—or directedness—not as a
sui generis activity of the mind, but as a general kind of causal
relationship that can be applied to physical agents just as much as to
mental ones. For him, every natural physical agent has a virtual
attention of this sort that extends as far as its causal force does
(Q23, pp. 424–25). One authority comments that Olivi’s
virtual attention is “in fact equivalent to action at a
distance” (Jansen 1921, p. 118), a characterization that seems
just in the case of physical effects such as the light of the sun that
illuminates distant objects.

However, the case of cognitive acts is different. Olivi carefully
avoids committing to real extramission of vision, and he argues that
perceptual acts take place in the powers of the soul, not in the
perceived object (Q58, p. 482; Silva & Toivanen 2010). The virtual
extension of the soul’s attention is not real, not even in some
special nonphysical sense. When Olivi explains that the extension is
‘virtual’, he means to contrast it with
‘real’. He explicitly denies, for instance, that this
virtual extension involves “any real emission of its
essence” (Q73, p. 61). Elsewhere, considering the claim that
“our mind is where it fixes its intention,” he says that
“these words are metaphorical. For we are not there really or
substantially, but only virtually or intentionally.” (Q37 ad 13,
p. 672.) On this basis it is fair to say that the soul does not
actually perform any action at a distance, although its attention can
be directed to distant objects. Olivi’s view is best described
as an intentional theory of cognition (Perler 2003; Toivanen
2013a).

Olivi allows that the object itself, through species in
medio, can indirectly act on our spiritual faculties, through
what he calls the via colligantiae (way of connection). A
flash of lightning will make a physical impression on our eyes, and
this physical impression can, through the via colligantiae,
affect the spiritual sensory powers. But, crucially, this connection
is not what brings about sensation. We see this flash, as
opposed to receiving merely a physical impression from it, when we
direct our spiritual attention toward it (Quodlibet I.4).
This via colligantiae plays an important role across
Olivi’s philosophical psychology, being his general method of
explaining the vexed connection between mind and body (see Q59, pp.
546–54; Q72, pp. 30–35; Jansen 1921, pp. 76–90).
5. Direct Realism

Olivi’s direct realism is central to his thinking about
cognition. If he were willing to say that the object of our spiritual
attention is not the external object but an internal species of the
object, then he could reformulate his theory of cognitive attention in
a more plausible way, as a matter of grasping an internal impression
from the object. But Olivi works very hard to avoid falling into any
kind of position that might be called representationalist—that
is, a view on which the immediate objects of cognition are internal.
This epistemological commitment to direct realism is one of the most
important philosophical reasons for Olivi to reject the standard
scholastic account of sensible and intelligible species. On that
standard account, species serve as forms that provide the intentional
content of sensation and thought. Although these forms were standardly
described as merely the means by which we grasp external things, Olivi
argued that in fact the proponent of species was committed to
representationalism. 

Olivi argues against the species theory by advancing through a series
of ever-more-serious charges. First, the theory is committed to taking
species as the objects of cognition:

A species will never actually represent an object to the cognitive
power unless the power attends to the species in such a way that it
turns and fixes its attention on the species. But that to which the
power’s attention is turned has the character of an object, and
that to which it is first turned has the character of a first object.
Therefore these species will have the character of an object more than
the character of an intermediate or representative source. (Q58 ad 14,
p. 469; cf. Q74, p. 123)


His argument for this conclusion turns on the first sentence of the
passage, in which he claims that a species cannot represent an object
to a cognizer unless the cognizer attends to the species. For Olivi,
such attention to some thing is both a necessary and a sufficient
condition for that thing’s being cognized. So if we do have to
focus our attention in this way on species, he infers that those
species will be the object of cognition, not merely causal
intermediaries. 

Next, Olivi argues that species would have to be the first object of
cognition. To turn toward a species in the way that we must if that
species is to represent the external world “is the same as to
attend to it as a first object” (Q74, p. 123). Elsewhere,
“we would always cognize the species before the thing itself
that is the object” (Q58 ad 14, p. 469). The point Olivi wants
to make is one more often made by denying that the world is seen
directly or immediately. If we see the external
world at all, we see it only at second hand, indirectly.

The argument goes one final step. Someone who wants to claim that our
internal sensations are themselves perceived has to choose whether or
not to claim that the external world is also perceived. Olivi takes it
that it is not; on the species account, we would not perceive the
external world at all, only images of it:

The attention will tend toward the species either in such a way that
it would not pass beyond so as to attend to the object, or in such a
way that it would pass beyond. If in the first way, then the thing
will not be seen in itself, but only its image will be seen as if it
were the thing itself. (Q74, p. 123; cf. Q58 ad 14, pp. 469–70,
487–88)


The argument is based on a dilemma. Granting that cognizers must
attend to species, there either will or will not be a separate and
further attention to the object itself. It would of course be quite
odd to say that there is such a further attention. This would entail,
as Olivi goes on to say, that one “considers the object in two
ways—first through a species, second in itself” (Q74, p.
123). This seems too much at odds with the phenomenal feel of
perception to be a serious possibility. The obvious way out of the
dilemma, then, is to say that there will not be any further attention:
one apprehends the external world, if one does at all, in virtue of
attending to the species themselves. This is what the
representationalist will likely say. But if this is the case, Olivi
argues, then we won’t be seeing the things in themselves but
only their images. Memorably, he remarks that a species “would
veil the thing and impede its being attended to in itself as if
present, rather than aid in its being attended to” (Q58 ad 14,
p. 469; Pasnau 1997). 

In place of the species theory, Olivi offers an interesting
alternative. Rather than treat mental representations as something
separate from an act of cognition, Olivi proposes identifying the two.
On his view, an act of cognition in itself represents the object that
is perceived. There is no need to postulate any further representation
beyond the act itself: that inevitably results in the mediation that
Olivi wants to avoid. This act theory would prove influential on later
scholastics, most notably William Ockham. And in our own era it has
been reinvented and renamed, as the adverbial theory of thought and
perception.
6. Word and Concept

Olivi extends his critique of species to the mental word
(verbum), which was standardly postulated as the product of
intellectual thought. His treatment of the verbum raises
different issues from those associated with species. Here the issue is
not direct realism, precisely, but rather the nature of concept
formation. Near the start of his commentary on the Gospel of John,
Olivi describes the standard view as follows: “Our mental word
is something following an act of thought ... and formed by that
thought. ... After it has been formed ... the [extra-mental] object is
clearly understood or viewed in that word as if in a mirror”
(Tractatus de verbo 6.1). This word, moreover, “is that
which is first cognized by intellect and is its first object;”
the extra-mental object is cognized secondarily. This description
closely matches a characterization Olivi gives in his later
Sentences commentary: 

Some maintain that a kind of concept, or word, is formed through an
abstractive, investigative, or inventive consideration, in which real
objects are intellectively cognized as in a mirror. For they call this
the first thing understood, and the immediate object; it is a kind of
intention, concept, and defining notion of things. (Q74, pp.
120–21)


This view has two characteristic features. First, it postulates a
mental representation—a concept or word—that is the
product of intellectual activity. Second, it supposes that we
understand the world through these representations, in such a way that
we get at the world indirectly, or secondarily, “as if in a
mirror.” Call this an object theory of the verbum. 

Olivi’s own view is that the verbum should be
identified with a particular act of thought: “our mental word is
our actual thought” (Tractatus 6.2.1). When we engage
in abstract intellectual cognition, Olivi says, “nothing serving
as an object is really abstracted or formed that differs from the act
of consideration already mentioned” (6.2.3). The
Sentences commentary offers a concise characterization:

This [sort of intervening concept] ought not to be called a
verbum, nor can [such a concept] be anything other than the
act of consideration itself or a memory species formed through that
act. (Q74, p. 121)


There are, then, acts of intellect, but there are no separate inner
concepts that are the objects of those acts. Call this an act theory
of the verbum. 

Why is this act theory superior to an object theory? One line of
argument holds that the object theory “contains in itself
obvious absurdities and thus contradicts sound reason”
(Tractatus 6.2.2). This claim is argued in different ways,
with the following dilemma often playing a crucial role: On one hand
the verbum is said to be the product of intellectual
cognition. But on the other hand the verbum is said to be
required for cognition as the “first thing understood.”
How can it be both? Olivi thinks his opponents will have to maintain
that in some way the verbum is the product of one act of
intellect and the object of a second. This leads him to argue that his
opponents are treating the verbum as merely a memory. But
Olivi is happy to countenance representations of this sort. Thus the
object theory collapses into the act theory.

The second line of attack holds that the theory lacks support because
“there is no necessity or utility in postulating such a
verbum” (6.2.3). Here Olivi considers two parallel
lines of argument that a proponent of the mental word might make
against this charge of superfluity.

First,... we experience in ourselves that we form in our mind new
concepts of many propositions and conclusions. These concepts remain
in us later and we return to them when we want to remember such
propositions. ... Second,... from individuals seen or imagined by us
we abstract and form defining characterizations of their universal
features,... and we come back to these when we wish to view such
universal features. (6.2.3)


Each argument appeals to our experience of forming within ourselves
abstract ideas: in the first case propositional ideas, in the second
universals. Intellect in each case is said to form a verbum.
Olivi replies that no such inner word is necessary. In each case we
have an act of conceptual thought, but no object is formed in
intellect over and above the act of thinking itself. Indeed, if
anything, such an object “would be an impediment”
(6.2.3)—alluding to the epistemological difficulties discussed
in the previous section. 

By eliminating the representations that might intervene between
intellect and external reality, Olivi gives us what we might be
tempted to think of as a direct realist theory of intellectual
cognition. Yet direct realism faces a serious problem at the
intellectual level, a problem that Olivi’s discussion fails to
acknowledge. Direct realism is attractive as a theory of sensation
because it seems clear what the objects of sensation are. But what are
we directly in touch with when our intellect thinks abstractly or
propositionally? One answer to this question is Platonism: universals
and/or propositions have some kind of abstract mode of existence,
independently of the human mind. Like almost all the scholastics,
Olivi firmly rejects this kind of account (Q13). Another kind of
answer, sometimes called conceptualism, treats universals and/or
propositions as mental constructs. Defenders of the object theory can
take this approach. They can hold that although there are no
universals or propositions in external things (in re), there
are universals and propositions in the mind (in mente). The
verbum, serving as universal or as proposition, will (in some
cautiously described sense) be the object of thought.

Olivi’s act theory would seem to rule out this kind of
conceptualism. But what then will Olivi put in its place? He speaks of
intellect’s “attending to and considering the real
character of a common or specific nature” (376–379), as if
he has an unproblematic account of intellect’s relationship to
the external world. Yet he says nothing to clarify the status of this
relationship. He simply does not seem to have recognized the problem
of abstract knowledge as a fundamental metaphysical motivation for the
object theory. In this respect his overall account, although
conceptually innovative, remains fundamentally incomplete.
7. Self-Awareness and Reflexivity

Olivi discusses various types of self-reflexivity fairly extensively
in his writings. He adopts the traditional idea that the intellect is
capable of turning reflexively toward itself, but he also attributes
certain types of reflexivity to the sensory powers of the soul and
argues that the will is a reflexive power.

The most rudimentary type of self-reflexivity takes place in the sense
of touch. Aristotle argues in De anima II.11 that the organ
of the sense of touch is the heart and that the flesh of the body is
nothing but the medium that transmits the sensations from an external
object to the heart. Olivi rejects the Aristotelian theory. He thinks
that the whole body functions as the organ of the sense of touch.
Moreover, he argues that the body is the primary object of the sense
of touch, while external objects are perceived secondarily by
perceiving the harmful and beneficial changes that they cause in the
body. This position leads to the obvious problem that the sense of
touch seems to be a reflexive power, as it is capable of sensing the
state of its own organ. Olivi recognises this problem and gives two
possible solutions: either the sense of touch which is in one place of
the body senses the state of the adjacent part of the body, or the
sense of touch really is capable of a certain type of reflexivity. In
the latter case, Olivi argues, the sense of touch would be capable of
sensing the state of its own organ but not its own act or itself as a
psychological power. He does not make up his mind between these two
explanations, but he clearly thinks that the sense of touch enables a
certain kind of bodily self-perception. Even the simplest animals are
capable of perceiving their bodies, because every animal has the sense
of touch. (Q61, pp. 575–85; Yrjönsuuri 2008a; Toivanen
2013a.)

The sense of touch is not the only sensory power that is capable of
reflexivity. The so-called common sense—the highest cognitive
power of the animal soul and the only internal sense Olivi
acknowledges—is another. Although he does not provide a
systematic discussion of the reflexivity of the common sense, he
suggests in several places that it is capable of apprehending its own
activity by turning toward itself incompletely (semiplene)
(Q62, p. 595). This ability is obviously related to the Aristotelian
conception of perception of perception, but Olivi suggests something
more than the traditional Aristotelian picture. Following Augustine,
he argues that animals are aware of their own bodies and the purpose
and value of their organs and body parts, since otherwise they would
not be able to use their bodies effectively and preserve their
lives:

When a dog or a snake sacrifices one of its members in order to save
its head or sacrifices some part in order to save the whole, then it
prefers the whole over the part and the head over the other member.
Therefore, these animals must have some common power which shows both
extremes simultaneously, their mutual comparison, and the preference
of one over the other—although it does not do this with the same
fullness and degree of reflexive judgement as does the intellect.
(Q62, p. 588)


The common sense enables animals to perceive their own bodies, the
parts and their functions, and the relative value of the parts for the
well-being of the animal as a whole, thus making animals capable of
self-preservation that goes beyond the ability to avoid pain. (See
Toivanen 2013b.)

The difference between intellectual self-reflexivity and the
reflexivity of the common sense is based on the spiritual nature of
the intellectual soul. Unlike the common sense, the intellectual mind
is spiritual and immaterial and therefore capable of being directly
and immediately aware of itself. Certain authors (most notably
Aquinas) had argued that this kind of direct awareness is not possible
because considered in itself the intellect is fully potential. It must
be actualized by thinking something else before it can be cognized. By
contrast, Olivi argues that the soul is directly aware of itself:

The soul knows or is able to know itself in two ways. The first of
them is an experiential and as if tactile sensation by which the soul
undoubtedly senses that it is, lives, cognizes, wills, sees, hears,
moves the body, and likewise for its other acts, whose principle and
subject it knows and senses itself to be. And this [happens] to such
an extent that it cannot actually know or consider any object or any
act without always knowing and sensing itself to be the subject
(suppositum) of the act by which it knows and considers that
[object or act] ... The other way of knowing itself is by reasoning.
In this way the soul investigates the genera and differences that it
does not know in the first way. (Q76, pp. 146–47)


By separating these two types of knowledge that the soul or mind has
of itself, Olivi is in a position to explain why we do not have
certain knowledge of the nature of the soul. The direct awareness
tells us only that the soul lives and acts, but in order to know the
essence of the soul, we must compare this immediate awareness to our
knowledge of the species and genera of the things in the world, and
this process is not infallible. (Putallaz 1991; Brower-Toland
2013.)

The highest level of reflexivity, however, is found in the will,
because only the will is capable of moving itself to action. In order
to be free, the will has to be able to move itself in such a way that
it can also refrain from moving itself. It has this ability because it
is related to itself as a mover to a moved thing: “Insofar as
the will is free, it has another kind of reflexivity upon itself which
the intellect lacks: for, the will is turned toward itself not only as
to an object, but also as a mover to a moved thing” (Q51, p.
115). In fact, the reflexivity of the intellect is based on the
will’s ability to direct other powers of the soul. (Q57, pp.
364–66; Q58, pp. 421–23.) Usually human beings are able to
control themselves by their will, and this ability is what makes them
persons. Reflexivity of the will plays a crucial role in the process,
as we can see from a passage in which Olivi explains how sleep affects
the psychological processes of the soul:

Sometimes the attention of the superior part of the soul is in such a
state that it is able to invent and form various things with respect
to the cognitive powers and, similarly, to refuse and approve with
respect to appetitive powers; then it is said to deliberate and
combine, to consent and choose. And nevertheless it does not move to
these acts freely, as it does when awake, because it moves itself to
these acts in such a way that it does not have a power to move itself
otherwise. (Q59, p. 564)


Experience shows that the will can act also when a person is asleep,
as we often make choices in our dreams. But because the reflexivity of
the will is hindered, it does not make these choices freely. In this
way, the ability to move the will to its acts is the crucial factor
that makes us free, and our personhood is dependent on the highest
type of reflexivity, which ensures that our choices and actions
originate in us.