Immunology comprises a multifaceted research agenda that has developed
around the clinical challenges of host defense, transplantation,
autoimmunity, tumor immunology, and allergy. The physiological
processes mediating these clinical problems designate the immune
system, which, in turn, is understood in terms of establishing and
maintaining organismal identity. While immunology as a science has been defined as
the “science of self/nonself discrimination” (Golub and
Green 1991), from a philosophical point of view, immunology
is the science concerned with those mechanisms defining the identity
of the organism. This more expansive definition allows for conceiving
immune processes in their broadest biological context, namely, in
addition to defensive and restorative processes, the immune system
also may be understood as engaged in information processing and
cognition; active exchange with the environment to allow for benign
intercourse; and tolerance for symbiotic relationships constitutive of
an organism conceived as a complex holobiont. Thus two general
orientations vie for dominance: (1) the traditional biomedical concern
with host defense emphasizes the insularity of the organism and
immunity in service to its protection; and (2) immunity in its full
ecological context—internal and external—mediates the
organism’s dynamic identity in dialectical exchange with its
environment. In either case, cognition—its models,
metaphors, and organization—serves as the central issue
pertinent to philosophical considerations of biological identity,
individuality, organism, and agency. 
 
1. Introduction

Immunology, from its earliest inception, has been concerned with
biological identity—its establishment and maintenance. Three key
characteristics—individuality, immunity, and
identification—together have defined immune identity, and as one
notion changes meaning, so do the others. Individuality
undergirded the science from its inception, for the defense against
pathogens was framed by an attacked patient (individual) pitted
against alien others, the invaders. In this scenario, distinct borders
confer individuality, and immunity is the response to the violation of
those boundaries. Thus from the perspective of infectious diseases,
the individual is “self-contained”. This construction
satisfies both clinical evidence and the evolutionary history of
immune responses to pathogens. Certain microorganisms are recognized
as pathological and are identified by immune mechanisms that initiate
defensive responses (Frank 2002). This is the setting of immunity in
which self/nonself discrimination dominates immune theory, which is
based on an understanding of biological identity, namely an entity,
the self, requires defense.

However, immunity extends well beyond the protective motif to include
mediation of exchange processes with the environment, where active
tolerance allows nutritional assimilation and cooperative symbiotic
relationships. To emphasize the flexibility of borders and the dynamic
changes in the immune repertoire as a result of life-long immune
encounters, Grignolio and colleagues have described the immune
identity profile as “fluid” (Grignolio et al. 2014).
Emphasizing the organism’s plasticity highlights how life
experience alters the immune response to environmental challenges and
opportunities. With this ecologically informed understanding of
biological identity, the idea of immunity widens beyond
defense of an insular individual, to include the mediation of the
organism’s inter-active economy and dependence on the
environment. This includes the internal environment as well, inasmuch
as the microbiome, established through immune tolerance, has
increasingly focused attention on the prevalence of symbiosis and the
biology characterized by cooperative relationships of various sorts
(Eberl 2010; Bilate and LaFaille 2012), and with that shift, the idea
of immunity is also broadened. With this expanded theoretical
framework, the understanding of “organism” moves from an
autonomous entity to a complex consortium, a “holobiont”
(the multicellular eukaryote plus its colonies of persistent
symbionts). And accordingly, the concept of an
“individual” has radically been altered (Chiu and Gilbert
2015; Gilbert and Tauber 2016). Going from the almost exclusive focus on aggressive immune
responses to the study of the balance of reactivities on an
immune activation gradient has altered the basic notions of immunity.
Supplementing a defensive state, immunity in its full
ecological context may now be regarded as an on-going process of
establishing and maintaining organismal identity, which requires a
collection of physiological processes with protean functions. 

Originally, the defensive character of immunity designated antibody as
“antitoxin” and antigen as the distinguishing 
characteristic of a pathogen, or, more generally, a dangerous
substance. In this protective scenario, “autoimmunity” was
misdirected immunity to host constituents and “allergy”
resulted from a deranged identification of an innocuous substance as
immunogenic. However, immune surveillance (e.g., against malignancies)
was appreciated as an important immune function, as was the scavenging
of effete, damaged, or dead cells by immune processes similar to those
directed at pathogens under the rubric of maintaining the body’s
anatomic integrity (Metchnikoff 1905). This discriminatory scenario
assumed new complexity when so-called “natural antibodies”
were discovered (Avrameas 1991; Varela et al. 1991). These were found
to mark normal body components much like an outline of the body
conceived as an “immune homunculus” (I. Cohen 1992a; Madi
et al. 2009), a representative of the normal autoimmune housekeeping
and sentinel activities that monitor the organism and assure its
integrity. With this widened conception of immunity, autoimmunity
(traditionally associated with the rejection response targeting normal
components) is replaced with a beneficial self-regulatory function. And
with this expanded understanding, immune activities are arrayed on a
functional gradient, where various kinds of reactions are governed by
different criteria of immune identification.

On this general view, the immune system’s identification
processes are understood as determined not by recognition of toxicity
per se, but by the context of the encounter in which
the potential danger is recognized. The classification of friend or
foe is determined by multiple factors that together create the setting
for the immune response (Matzinger 1994). So in terms of understanding
the nature of the immunity, this contextual orientation challenges the
earlier conception of immune specificity as arising from some simple
mechanical lock and key matching between selected antibodies binding
to noxious antigens, to one characterized by a collective
response of diverse elements that together determine the extent of the
immune response (Daëron 2014). Thus a spectrum of reactive
profiles determines the character of immunity.

In short, the philosophical challenge of defining immune identity is
framed by differing orientations, namely, autonomous individuality
versus collective ensemble. Which version chosen then leads to
strikingly different answers to immunology’s key questions: 1)
What is immunity? 2) What are the defining characteristics of
individuality as determined immunologically? 3) What are the
epistemological standing of immune selfhood and the rhetorical uses of
agency in its various forms (literal, metaphoric, and idiomatic)? 4)
How has the cognitive metaphor framed immune processes as an
information processing system? and 5) How might biological causation
of the immune system studied as a whole be modeled? Each of these
issues directly pertains to philosophical considerations about the
character of the organism, the relationships of parts to the whole,
principles of biological organization and regulation, the construction
of the cognitive metaphor, and the ability of models to capture
complex organic functions. The literature addressing these issues is
legion, but in regards to the study of immunology little philosophical
comment has been made. Here, an outline is offered to help guide
further considerations.
2. Immune Selfhood

The first medical use of the term “immunity” (originally a
legal designation conferring exemption and distinction) appears in
1775, when Van Sweiten, a Dutch physician, used
“immunitas” to describe the effects induced by an early
attempt at variolization (Moulin 1991: 24). But the concept was not
developed until the mid-19th century, when Claude Bernard
(1813–1878) set the theoretical stage for the autonomous
organism. In contradistinction to an animal in humoral balance with a
pervasive environment, Bernard postulated the primacy of the
organism’s essential independence. He thus furnished biology
with a new concept of the animal. While interchange with the
environment was a necessary requirement for life, Bernard emphasized
how boundaries provided the crucial metabolic limits required for
normal physiological function (Bernard [1878] 1974). With his concept
of the milieu interieur, the body was envisioned as a
demarcated, inter-dependent yet autonomous entity (“corporeal
atomism” [E. Cohen 2001: 190]). He thereby establishing the
theoretical grounding that became the sine qua non for the
development of the animal-based models for infectious diseases,
genetics, neurosciences, and immunology in all of its various
guises.

Bernard introduced a revolutionary approach to the study of the
organism, and immunology became one of its defining sciences, indeed,
immunity was alien to the older humoral view. By radically changing
the inside/outside topology so that the organism’s interior
becomes the determining context of function, Bernard effectively
isolated the organism from its environment, and joined a complex
cultural movement of redefining the body more generally. This
conceptual development was closely tied to those discoveries leading
to the elucidation of the bacterial etiology of infectious diseases,
which draws together twin disciplines—microbiology, the study of
the offenders, and immunology, the examination of host defense. Thus,
in this pathological context, immunology began as the study of how an
animal reacts to pathogenic injury and defends itself against the
deleterious effects from such microbial insult. This is the typical
historical account of immunology as a clinical science, a tool of
medicine, and as such it focuses almost exclusively on the role of
immunity as the mechanism of defense of the infected (Silverstein
2009). The paradigmatic host is the patient, an infected
“self”, which is the critical element for the power of
this view. Indeed, the clinical orientation, which assumes an
autonomous entity—an insular host requiring defense—set
the conceptual orientation of the science and subsequent clinical
conditions were adapted to this self-other dichotomous theoretical
structure.
2.1 Self and nonself

That pathogens must be combatted—neutralized or
killed—defined a biology of competition in the war of survival.
And in this scenario three implicit ideas organized the nascent
science: Immunity was constituted by the requirement of
protecting an autonomous individual. Each of these
features—protection, autonomy, and individuality—thus
served as the foundations of what would become in due course a fully
developed theory of immunity based on self/nonself discrimination.
Note, the “self/nonself model” is not a model in
the usual sense, but rather serves as a guiding framework or a basic
presupposition of the science that begins with this differentiation of
identity. (For a topology and analysis of different kinds of immunity
models developed and used in the more common sense see Baetu 2014.)
Accordingly, “the self” orders immune phenomena and serves
as shorthand to represent immune silence or non-reactivity. In other
words, virtually all models of immune function build in the basic
premise of self/nonself discrimination.

The explicit differentiation of self/nonself evolved during the 1940s
when transplantation biology became a focus of intense interest as a
result of attempts to transplant skin to severely burned patients
(Silverstein 2009). Shortly following those studies, research on
autoimmunity offered a window into immune function that heretofore had
not been fully appreciated. With these developments, Frank Macfarlane
Burnet (1899–1985) hypothesized a model of immune regulation
that would eventually define contemporary immunology. He argued that
during embryonic development “self” elements were
identified and once recognized, the “self-recognizers” are
purged from the immune library. The expunged thus leaves a
“hole” in the reactive profile of the immune system
corresponding to host constituents, or as soon popularized, “the
immune self” (Burnet and Fenner 1949; Tauber 1994).

In terms of practical utility, the self/nonself motif has dominated
immunology for the past half century. Indeed, the implicit presence of
the self formalized in the self/nonself distinction (amplified by
Burnet’s later formulation in the “clonal selection
theory” (CST; Burnet 1959) has justly been acknowledged as
immunology’s governing paradigm (Golub and Green 1991) and has
been consistently defended by those committed to the self/nonself
discrimination as the basis of immune function (e.g., Cohn 2015).
However, the original guiding features of an autonomous, insular
entity have lost their exclusive hold on framing the discipline:
Protection represents only a particular aspect of immunity;
autonomy of the organism has been challenged by an ecological
orientation emphasizing symbiotic relationships; and the notion of
individual, in the guise of “the immune self”,
has been deconstructed as a result of the failure to define such an
entity from within the science itself. With immunology’s
earliest precepts challenged, expanded meanings of immunity have
emerged. The defense-derived definition of immunity not only has
proven too restrictive, even superficial to deeper meanings, but such
a formulation also distorts significant dimensions of immunity. In
short, the idea of immunity has evolved, and consequently the ontology
of immune identity has shifted.
2.2 Defining the self

Because of immunology’s eclectic contributions to pathology,
clinical medicine, and basic biology, it cannot unite under a single
experimental banner. Rather, it is (and from its inception has been)
characterized by multiple, even competing research agendas, each
requiring a different methodological apparatus to order its
experimental program. Yet the discipline is organized by an underlying
concept of an identified and protected self. In whichever
domain immunity is studied—from basic science to clinical
syndromes—“the immune self” is either implicitly or
explicitly invoked and thus serves as a powerful idiom to organize
diverse research findings in different research traditions. Because
the “self” possesses operational value by attending to
various functions (i.e., different communities of scientists use
different understandings of agency), the topography of the
self’s employment then becomes a map of a field divided by
different scientific traditions, methodologies, and goals directed by
different experimental and conceptual models.

Clearly the self’s appearance in immunology served as a readily
understood shorthand reference to personal identity and the efforts to
substantiate that extrapolation on its own terms guided the discipline
for the latter half of the twentieth century (for historical case
studies see Löwy 1991). Indeed, the autonomous construction of
immune selfhood resonates with Western cultural ideals and in turn
supports them by melding laboratory findings with various extrapolated
or borrowed philosophical, political and psychological meanings of
human agency (Tauber 1994, 2016). So while firm definition of the
immune self has remained elusive, this epistemological ambiguity and
flexible polysemy has proven effective in sustaining the term’s
powerful heuristic value as an idiom with many uses and
meanings (Crist and Tauber 1999). Its versatility and pragmatic
utility has effectively integrated clinical immune phenomena by
highlighting the essential similarity or interconnectedness of diverse
immune-mediated processes in response to various clinical challenges.
Thus nutrition, allergy, infection, autoimmune disease, various
phenomena of tolerance, natural (pregnancy) or experimentally created
chimeras (transplantation), and autoimmunity all become conceived as a
network of interlinked or interrelated functions. As these topics
mirror and play off one another under the rubric of selfhood,
immunologists have a ready means by which to represent states or
processes, which arise in the various interactions between body and
environment, at different stages of evolution and development.
However, despite the wide range of meanings and uses, immune selfhood
carries an implicit understanding connoting individuality and
insularity, whose philosophical significance will be considered in
turn below.

Several meanings of immune selfhood are in current use: the
“organismal self”—a functional (colloquial) category
immunologists typically employ; the “immunological
self”—the more carefully crafted definition that serves as
an ontological construction which draws from molecular definitions and
builds upon a theory of tolerance (i.e., the absence of reactivity so
constituents of the self are ignored); and the “immune
self”—a metaphysical formulation of the system-as-a-whole
(Ulvestad 2007: 88 ff.). There are at least half a dozen different
conceptions of what constitutes the immune self: (1) everything
encoded by the genome; (2) everything under the skin
including/excluding immune “privileged” sites; (3) the set
of peptides complexed with T-lymphocyte antigen-presenting complexes
of which various sub-sets vie for inclusion; (4) cell surface and
soluble molecules of B-lymphocytes; (5) a set of bodily proteins that
exist above a certain concentration; (6) the immune network itself,
variously conceived (Matzinger 1994: 993). While these versions may be
situated along a continuum between a severe genetic reductionism and
complex organismal constructions, each shares an unsettled
relationship to a dichotomous model of self and other. 

In consideration of the ambiguity of criteria for establishing
selfhood, historically concepts of immune identity have evolved
through at least three distinct articulations (each drawing upon
different philosophical and lexical understandings of biological
identity), and each has had profound influence on how findings are
interpreted and how such understanding effectively organizes research
agendas. 

a) Early immunology was based on the implicit autonomous
identity of the organism, namely, an insular organism exists and must
be defended. Within the immunochemical tradition the emergence of that
identity is not pertinent to the delineation of immune mechanisms, and
to the extent that molecular biologists study immune factors and their
genetics, the issue of immune identity escapes
concern—theoretical or practical. For such investigations, the
organism is “given”. Accordingly, the evoked immune
response results from discrimination between the (given) organism
(self) and its other (nonself), which in turn builds on
Bernard’s conception of a homeostatic, balanced interior that
depends on the insularity of the organism. Any insult to such
stability results in processes to restore the original steady state as
in Bernard’s understanding of metabolic homeostasis. And,
indeed, early immunologists assumed the key characteristics of the
Bernardian formulation: the organism is autonomous with secure borders
that confer the integrity of its physiological functions. Immunity
fits into this orientation inasmuch as it was originally conceived as
a means of dealing with a disruptive state (infection) and immunity
restores balance. In this scenario, immunity serves to protect that
autonomy.

Burnet’s CST model follows Bernard. Burnet offered an
explanation of how the self develops and retains its identity
throughout life. And identity, to the extent this category is
considered, is stable and serves as the platform upon which immune
functions are played. This paradigm effectively captures a vast array
of stimulated immune responses that begin with non-self-recognizing
lymphocytes responding to antigen challenge and, once
“selected”, this group expands to mount the immune
reaction to insult. This CST formulation stands as the prototype of
immune selfhood and has extensive experimental support (Podolsky and
Tauber 1997).

b) A second formulation of immunity originates at the end of the
19th century, with the proposal offered by Élie
Metchnikoff (1845–1916) that organismal identity is a dynamic
construct mediated by immune surveillance. As an embryologist, his
theory originally placed immunity in a developmental context, where
phagocytic cells were observed to mediate what is allowed to attain
maturity (e.g., phagocytes “ate” the tadpole’s
tail). In the adult, the same physiological process determines what is
excluded in an on-going negotiation between “friend” and
“foe” (Metchnikoff 1905; Tauber 1994), whose dynamics of
rejection and tolerance portray immune identity as a product of a
complex balance between different arms of the immune apparatus (Eberl
2016). By employing temporal, evolutionary, and environmental
dimensions, a model of immunity shifts from a static understanding of
immune selfhood to one that accounts for biological changes occurring
with age and differing contexts related to nutrition and geography.
Such temporal and geographical dimensions continuously reshape the
antigenicity of physical entities (molecules, cells, bacteria,
viruses), create new targets that are either tolerated or rejected,
and challenge the status of unexpected self epitopes produced by
proteasome splicing (Grignolio et al. 2014) Not surprisingly, a recent
examination of twins has shown that the vast predominance of immune
variation results from non-heritable influences, and thus the immune
profile of healthy individuals is largely the product of particular
responses to environmental challenges (Brodin et al. 2015).

Assuming this theoretical perspective, given the dynamics of the
multiple factors that comprise the character of the immune response,
immunity is an on-going developmental process, where borders fluctuate
and identity evolves. Accordingly, the immune system directs the
traffic of potentially beneficial against noxious encounters on a
reactive spectrum of tolerance and rejection (Ayres and Schneider
2011; Bilate and LaFaille 2012). That spectrum forms a continuum of
immune reactivities that shift in time and space. This conception of dynamic identity, constituting an
“immunological biography”, captures the organism’s
interactive ecology over time and that history determines an
ever-changing identity (Grignolio et al. 2014). Individuality then
abdicates any static definition and, correspondingly, as useful as the
self idiom has proven, one cannot point to “the self”, an
entity and say, “the immune system defends the
self”. Instead, immunity is the process in which
identity is established.

c) The third iteration of immune identity radically deconstructs the
“immune self”. Despite the ubiquity of the selfhood idiom
in contemporary immunology, an important alternative theory of immune
organization omits the self from immune theory,
altogether. Niels Jerne (1911–1994) presented a model of
immunity that dispensed with self/nonself discrimination as the
modus operandi of immune functions (Jerne 1974). His
hypothesis portrayed antibodies or T-cell receptors interlocked to
form steady-state linkages, which, as a self-referential system was
“closed”, i.e., the network “sees” only its
own constituents and thus perceives only what it might
know—itself. With the introduction of antigen, the
network’s structure is interrupted and only restored by the
elimination of the disordering antigen. Thus established patterns of
the interlocking lattice work provide the system’s basic
organization, and “antigen” signifies a substance that
disrupts that order. Immune activation then is not based on
self/nonself distinctions, but rather by the context of
antigen presentation. In other words, the antigen does not
carry its meaning as some intrinsic property, but rather the context
of its introduction determines the immune response. Jerne’s
network theory thereby shifted the understanding of immune cognition
from the perspective of an agent processing information (an
inherent property of the immune self construction) to an alternate
understanding of perception without agency. This formulation
may be referred to as the absent self, whereby the network
theory completes the self’s deconstruction in immune theorizing,
for the subject-object structure of knowing has been replaced with a
model of cognition occurring directly within the system itself.
Simply, Jerne removed the homunculus at the core of immunology’s
epistemology (Tauber 2013). Indeed, self/nonself has no meaning in
this formulation, because the truly foreign is not recognized at all.


A similar Jernian construct has found its most recent articulation in
the “continuity theory” proposed by Thomas Pradeu and
Edgardo Carosella (Pradeu and Carosella 2006a,b; Pradeu 2010, 2012;
Pradeu, Jaeger, and Vivier 2013). (The formulation described in terms
of activation is better called, the “discontinuity theory”
of immune regulation [Pradeu and Vivier 2016].) Following Jerne
(albeit without the trappings of the idiotypic formulation), the
continuity thesis similarly holds that activation is
determined by the degree integrated elements shift their relative
positions as a result of introducing disruptive antigen (Pradeu 2012:
131–132). In other words, an introduced exogenous element
initiates an activation cascade that results in altering the
“connectivity” of the system as a whole (Stewart and
Varela 1989; Stewart, Varela, and Coutinho 1989; Coutinho 1991). The
respective notions of “pattern” and “context”
both utilize the “lattice” metaphor, inasmuch as each
depiction draws upon the basic idea of disturbing a self-regulated,
ordered, interlocking architecture. Although the components and
organization of each theory differ in important respects, both the
contemporary proposal and the earlier idiotypic network share a
similar conceptual view of the immune system’s regulation, where
only an interruption of its own connections would signal a response.
Note, selfhood plays no role in this schema, for regulation is
determined solely within the dynamics of the system itself.

When the immune system is regarded from the “connected”
perspective, integrated states are quiescent and disrupted ones,
induced by “foreign” elements, generate immune activation.
Such properties are thus determined by a self-regulated system
controlled by a group phenomenon of interactions among several
components comprising a vast interactive system of antigen-presenting
cells, effector T and B cells, regulatory T cells and a diverse soup
of molecular signals (Kim, Levy, and Lee 2009; Kidd et al. 2014). So,
the functional difference that determines recognition of the foreign
results from an aggregate of quantitative affinity differences, the
context in which the antigen is seen, and the degree of interruption
in network dynamics induced by such an immunogen. Accordingly, the
overall function of the immune system may be defined as maintenance of
molecular (antigenic) homeostasis (Poletaev, Stepanyuk, and Gershwin
2008). On this general view, a systems-wide collective
response—not the discriminatory power of individual
lymphocytes—determines identity and immune specificity.

A second challenge to defining immune identity looms, one that
originates with Metchnikoff’s dynamic developmental
understanding of immunity: According to CST, immune selfhood is based
on that which is ignored—an apparent lacuna (or
silence)—established by purging reactive lymphocyte clones.
However, immune silence does not qualify as sufficient to designate
immune identity, for “natural” autoimmunity functions as
an active mechanism of tolerance that includes not only surveillance
of normal host components, but also facilitates the myriad symbiotic
relationships constituting the holobiont (discussed below). From a
stimulus-response perspective, such activities qualify as immune
silence, when in fact they represent an active on-going surveillance
characterized by immune mediation (Dale and Moran 2006; Eberl 2010;
Hooper, Littman, and Macpherson 2012; Root-Bernstein 2016). On this
view, immunity not only serves as a noun designating a
particular defensive state, but it also functions as a verb in terms
of capturing the perpetual processes directed at establishing
the identity of the organism within the context of its environment.
So, while the immune system has largely been defined as those cells
and mediators comprising the immune response to pathogens, in fact
immune processes have diverse roles in the body’s ceaseless
economy of internal cellular turnover, maintaining stable symbiotic
relationships, and mediating external benign exchanges with the
environment. Accordingly, “self” serves as both an
artifice (when construed as an entity) and a useful idiom
that has proven of great practical utility (Crist and Tauber 1999). In
this last iteration, since organismal identity is not a given, nor
attained in anything approaching some final form, selfhood is posed as
immunology’s core problematic.

In conclusion, while the selfhood paradigm is well ensconced (e.g.,
Howes 2008b; Hoffman 2012; Cohn 2015), the definition of “the
immune self” remains unsettled and critics have questioned its
standing and argued that its continued use obscures immune theory
(e.g., Matzinger 1994; Tauber 2000; Pradeu 2012). The latter position
argues that the “self” might be better regarded as only a
metaphor for a “figure” outlined by the immune
system’s silence, i.e., its non-reactivity. That figure is
inconstant and modified upon certain conditions and, as discussed
below, other formulations of immunity displace the insular notions of
selfhood for different understandings of immune identity. In any case,
such criticism has not, and will not dislodge this cardinal organizing
principle from immunology. Simply, considering the self’s wide
use in different clinical and research traditions (provided by the
relaxed and varied meanings associated with its use), the self/nonself
distinction is expected to continue to organize the discipline as its
governing construct despite the challenges posed by conceptualizing
and modeling active tolerance (Bilate and LaFaille 2012). But the
issue of immune identity has wider implications for philosophy of
biology inasmuch as the problematic status of immune selfhood leads to
questions concerning the ontological standing of organism and
individuality.
3. Whither Individuality?

In immunology, the self is loosely used interchangeably with
individual, so given the problematic status of immune
selfhood, what is an individual? Commonly, an individual is
regarded as possessing anatomic borders, harmonious balance
characterized by communication between its parts, division of labor
for the benefit of the whole, and a system of hierarchical dominance
and control. And such an individual reproduces as a unit to replicate
itself. However, symbiosis challenges this well-entrenched definition
of the individual, not only because physiological autonomy has been
sacrificed, but anatomic borders have lost clear definition and
development becomes intertwined among several phylogenetically defined
entities. Complexes of organisms in fact constitute presumed
individuals and thus defy any singular definition of organismal
identity as independent agents (Chow et al. 2010; Gilbert, Sapp, and
Tauber 2012).

Accordingly, animals cannot be considered individuals by anatomical,
or physiological criteria, because a diversity of symbionts is both
present and functional in completing metabolic pathways and serving
other physiological functions. Similarly, recent studies have shown
that animal development is incomplete without symbionts, which also
constitute a second mode of genetic inheritance, providing selectable
genetic variation for natural selection. And most pertinent to this
discussion, the immune system also develops, in part, in dialogue with
symbionts, and thereby functions as a mechanism for integrating
microbes into the animal-cell community. Recognizing the holobiont as
a critically important unit of anatomy, development, physiology,
immunology, and evolution, opens new investigative avenues and
conceptually challenges the ways in which the biological
sub-disciplines have heretofore characterized living entities. The
implications of this general orientation for immunology hardly can be
over-emphasized. Indeed, in many ways, the standing of the
“immune self” amplifies, and potentially helps elucidate,
the complexities of designating what, indeed, is an individual (see
the entry on
 the biological notion of individual).

The definition of organism, also persists as a problem for
philosophers of biology. Because of markedly different relationships
of components, “the organism” possesses no ready reference
beyond a consensus designation of “the largest unit of
near-unanimous design” with unanimity understood in terms of
cooperation (Queller and Strassman 2009, quoted by Godfrey-Smith 2013:
26). But how are boundaries drawn when referring to an ant colony,
aspen ramet, slime mold, or Volvox? Or for that matter, an
animal like homo sapiens, which is composed of multiple
genomes living in a symbiotic commune? Such organisms are constituted
by multispecies units that blur separations based on distinct
physiology, development, and immunology, not to speak of demarcating
the evolutionary unit of selection. And the issue becomes further
complicated when we consider that some Darwinian individuals are not
organisms (e.g., viruses) and some organisms are not Darwinian
individuals (e.g., sterile social insects, mules, and certain symbiont
collectives such as the squid-Vibrio symbiosis [McFall-Ngai
et al. 2012]; Godfrey-Smith 2013: 28–9). Indeed, when symbiotic
relationships are considered, individuality as a governing
precept for understanding organismic function, development, or
evolution requires highly specified definitional constraints or
perhaps even its abandonment as a ruling principle in biology (Gilbert
and Tauber 2016).

The evidence for the centrality of symbiosis in understanding immune
function challenges the prevailing mind-set with a growing body of
evidence that a conception of some core identity cannot serve as the
model of organismic biology. On this view, a key tenet of current
biology has been challenged, for when a science directed at
understanding symbiotic relationships replaces an essentialist
conception of individuality, immunology re-directs itself as well.
Discerning how the immune system develops and functions within an
ecological, symbiotic-conceived framework leads to models of immunity
in directions that transcend the self/nonself, subject/object
dichotomies that have heretofore characterized the science. 

Despite the problems associated with establishing defined organismic
borders, Pradeu has argued that the principle of inclusion
defines a basis for establishing individuation (Pradeu 2010, 2012,
2013). He tracks this criterion phylogenetically from the very
earliest prokaryotic unicellulars (through an RNA interference
mechanism) to the aggregates of superorganisms (e.g., social insects),
where defensive mechanisms have been described at both the single
insect and colony-level (Pradeu 2013: 90–1). Accordingly, the
immune system defines the organism and the term
“individuality” serves simply to identify discernible
elements that may be counted (e.g., mitochondria, cells, an organism).
However, others assert that the criteria of boundaries hardly suffice
for defining an organism, which itself has been recognized as fraught
with ambiguity (for reasons that differ from the problem of
designating the immune self). In the case of immune identity, the
temporal seesaw of autoimmunity and tolerance preclude static
functional borders; substances breathed or eaten from the environment
are ignored; pregnancy as an archetypal chimera defies easy parameters
of individualization (Hunt 1996; Howes 2007, 2008a; Martin 2010,
2011); and the fallibility of anatomic and even genetic criteria of
selfness are well known (e.g., chimeric transplants; Starzl and
Demetris 1995, 1998). Add the symbiotic relationships so prevalent in
multi-cellular organisms, which require immune blindness to remain
stable, suggests that the entire question of what is included as
belonging to the organism and what is not leaves the “principle
of inclusion” with indefinite criteria.

In sum, accepting a loose definition of individuality may suffice for
pragmatic use, but the holobiont challenges demarcation criteria and
autonomy defined by functional independence. From the immunological
vantage, adjudicating the composition and balance of the consortia is
a dynamic process in which dialectical relationships determine what is
“self” as immune identity adapts to an ever-changing
environment. So despite the powerful heuristic appeal of individuality
defined by immune criteria, in the end, indistinct categories persist.
Simply, lexical plasticity is integral to the life sciences. Or put
another way, the commitment to a biology built on individuality offers
a high philosophical threshold to overcome.
4. Eco-immunology

The original conceptualization of an immune self was based on notions
of insular agency and correspondingly ignored the role immunity played
in permitting benign, cooperative relationships characteristic of an
organism’s ecological interactions. On this view, again derived
from the host-pathogen model and the immune specificity required to
discern friend from foe, immunity became the mechanism by which a
self, conceived as having definitive borders, defends itself. That
agenda required defining the components of immunity and their
regulation as a self-contained system (Moulin 1989, 1991,
2001). Accordingly, in this formulation the self as a distinct,
circumscribed entity could not have been more divorced from
its environment.

However, when the organism is understood within its full ecological
context, borders remain guarded, but demarcations are not rigid,
neither in time nor functions; traffic is allowed, for beneficial
exchanges. So when assuming a fuller ecological context, cooperation
and benign relationships also must be accounted for. Accordingly, the
immune system, through active tolerance of “foreign”
substances and microorganisms, maintains its role as a gatekeeper, but
now in service to the metabolism, development, and, ultimately, the
evolution of the holobiont (Gilbert, Bosch, and Ledón-Rettig
2015). The domination of an insular view of the organism requiring
vigilant protection must be weighed against this dynamic conception of
communal interactions.

With an ecological orientation, reassessments of 1) autoimmunity and
tolerance (immunology’s own domain), 2) the pervasive presence
of symbiosis as constitutive elements of the organism, and 3) the
ecological precept that entities “are what they are because of
the environment in which they are found” have challenged
fundamental conceptions of individuality (Birch and Cobb 1981: 94).
Accordingly, immunology’s conceptual horizon has been broadened
into a new field, eco-immunology, which examines the
organism-environment construct in its full complexity (Demas and
Nelson 2011; Brock, Murdock, and Martin 2014; Viney and Riley 2014).
Beginning in the 1990s, efforts to describe the natural variation in
immune functions were undertaken to assess the cost/benefit ratios of
mounting immune responses to parasites, e.g., parasite-mediated
selection and population dynamics (Sheldon and Verhulst 1996). From
this perspective, immunity became a measure of virulence not solely in
terms of parasite eradication but in regards to trade-offs that sought
an adjusted equilibrium between host organism and infection.

The micro-organismal infiltration of the host is more complex than a
straightforward disease-causing phenomenon. The boundaries between
interpenetrating organisms are pliable, and thus the lines between
parasitism, tolerance, and symbiosis are variable and fluid,
both intra- and inter-individually. This ecological view of organisms
intertwined in “the entangled bank” (Darwin [1859] 1964:
489) was intimately linked with Burnet’s immunological
conception of selfhood. “Equilibrium” between organisms,
became cast in his immunological thought as a matter of “immune
tolerance”. Indeed, the first use of the concept of
tolerance is synonymous with the idea of “a virtual
equilibrium” in which both host and parasite “survive
indefinitely” (Burnet 1940: 23). However, because immunology
developed in the context of defensive functions, the concept of
biological balance was obscured by the dominant concerns generated by
the threat of pathogens. Despite Burnet’s recognition that
immunity mediates the “delicate unstable balance” of
interacting and interdependent organisms (1940: 11), the biomedical
model of “seek-and-destroy” so dominated immunology that
the larger ecological context of infection represents a small portion
of the literature, and the specific ways in which the immune system
tolerates, or even fosters cooperative relationships is smaller yet.


When immunity is placed within an ecological framework, i.e., assuming
optimal balanced relationships, differentiation of the organism is
displaced by integration and coordination that serve as organizing
principles (Ulvestad 2007; Swiatczak 2014). In other words,
balance becomes a regulative principle, and symbiosis offers
the cardinal case study of balance as a governing principle of
immunity. Established symbiosis entails a stabilized tolerant state,
inasmuch as the organism must limit its immune response to allow
installation (Råberg, Graham, and Read 2009). If successful
symbiosis represents tolerance in its most benign operation, then the
extension of immune balance to more hazardous relationships provides
the other end of the mutualism spectrum. In viewing immunity from this
vantage, new concepts about host-pathogen interactions have recently
emerged that subordinate pathogen destruction for a modulated response
that prevents otherwise unchecked deleterious side-effects of an
over-aggressive immune reaction (Vale, Fenton, and Brown 2014). When
organisms become infected, virulence is minimized either by
eliminating pathogens directly (resistance) or reducing the damage
caused by their growth (tolerance). The notion of establishing
“tolerance” to infection (as opposed to resistance or
avoidance) foregoes pathogen elimination for accommodation that limits
immune-mediated damage and thus controls the negative impact of an
infection (Medzhitov, Schneider, and Soares 2012). In some cases hosts are able to
achieve healthy balance with pathogens despite harboring high
infection burdens. In other words, the best state of immunity may be
an equilibrium that requires balancing both resistance and tolerance
(Ayres and Schneider 2011; Vale, Fenton, and Brown 2014).

In consideration of these findings, immunology, ecologically
situated, provides new meanings to identity and individuality, because
symbiosis and tolerance more broadly conceived represent stabilized
immune adaptation to the complex of diverse living elements that live
in a cohesive ecology, both within and external to the traditional
borders of the organism. With immunity oriented to defining those
relationships, immunology moves from its dominant concern with
autonomous individuality to the science of understanding the
cooperative assemblies of organisms. On this view, immunology,
historically aligned with the clinical sciences, must now also be
counted a member of the environmental sciences as well (Tauber 2008, 2017).

Indeed, a general consensus has emerged that immune responses fall
into two categories: 1) some microbial immunogens “carry”
their meaning as pathological and are perceived as dangerous and thus
evoke an immune rejective response; and 2) a class of immunogens that
are based not on intrinsic foreignness, but rather on how the immune
system sees an “alien” or “domestic” character
in terms of the larger context of the body’s economy (Grossman
and Paul 2000; Horn et al. 2001). And that context is fully
ecological—both defensively and co-operatively interactive. So
the atomistic protective model that dominated immunology for over a
century now includes accounts of integrative and tolerant
interactions. The immune system mediates those as well as aggressive
ones, a duality that has pushed the parameters of immunity well beyond
the early defensive formulations. 

In sum, although the historical development of immunology reflects a
deep-seeded conceptual orientation to an individual-based biology
developed at the expense of a more comprehensive interactive ecology,
the gains and losses of that approach are becoming evident as
immunology is directing itself towards placing immune functions within
their broader ecological contexts, which requires comprehensive study
of both the offensive weaponry of immune attack as well as the silence
of immune tolerance required to live in a world of others. Indeed,
neither indolent innocence nor persistent aggression captures the
activity of the immune system that must function within a changing
environment of friend and foe. Defining the off/on status of immune
reactivity is not simply a question of identifying the
“other”, but involves multiple stages of sensing,
adjusting, and configuring immune reactions along a gradient of
rejection and acceptance (Grossman 1993). Note, the immune response
integrates two steps: first the immune system perceives molecular
targets and then “decides” whether to react. Accordingly,
“perception” is primary and effector functions (activation
or tolerance) follow along a spectrum of responses. Thus immunity may
be construed in terms of fundamentally functioning as an information
processing faculty, where the immune and nervous systems are regarded
analogously in terms of linking (in sequence) mechanisms of perception
to derivative actions. From this perspective, immunology’s
research agenda is broadened to include fundamental issues facing the
cognitive sciences.
5. The Cognitive Paradigm

Conceptually, immunity depends on an identification system to discern
the world and given this general requirement, “cognition”
has been an embedded characteristic of the immune system. The
cognitive metaphor finds a conducive home in immunology inasmuch as
common rhetoric portrays the immune system as perceiving and
acting. Immunologists explicitly describe macrophages
“seeing” antigen; antibodies “recognizing”
epitopes; T cell possessing “memory”; and adaptive
immunity comprising a “learning” process. Such extentions
from human psychology have been widely utilized in evolutionary
history (Margulis, Asikainen, and Krumbein 2011), wherein basic
categories of human cognition have been extrapolated to animals
(Bekoff, Allen, and Burghardt 2002), bacteria (Ben Jacob et al. 2004;
Ben Jacob, Shapira, and Tauber 2005), cancer cells (Ben Jacob, Coffee,
and Levine 2012) and, in the case examined here, the immune system (I.
Cohen 1992a,b). Indeed, the influence of the cognitive metaphor (where
intention plays an incipient role) appears throughout immune theory.
With the use of perception language like “recognition”,
and mind functions such as “memory”, and human qualities
such as “tolerance”—each originating in the language
used to describe human behavior, qualities, and
capacities—immunology incorporates basic cognitive capacities that
serve the needs of an agent encountering environmental challenges.
Simply, at least metaphorically, the immune system may be conceived as a
“mobile brain” that mimics the mental agent, who peers at
the world as a Cartesian ego (Fridman 1991).

The origins of conceiving the immune system as cognitive
appeared during the emergence of cybernetics in the early 1950s, and
by the 1960s both Burnet and Jerne drew analogies of immune functions
with learning, memory, information and language to construct immunity
as comparable to mental activity (Tauber 1994: 162–67). A more
explicit theory of immunity based on immune recognition and processing
based upon cognitive parallels between the nervous and immune systems
was developed by Irun Cohen (I. Cohen 1992 a, b) and a group centered at the Pasteur Institute in Paris
(Coutinho 1991, 1995, 2003; Varela et al. 1988; Varela and Coutinho
1991; Varela, Coutinho, and Stewart 1993; Stewart 1992, 1994a, 1994b;
Stewart and Varela 1989; Vaz 2016). From this functional point of
view, the immune system serves as an information processing faculty;
how to model organizational (and ultimately regulatory)
characteristics of such functions depends on how notions of agency are
construed in immune theory.
5.1 Configuring immune cognition

The cognitive metaphor fits commonly held epistemological notions of
agency in which a subject-object division posits an autonomous knowing
entity surveying the world from its own individual perspective. The
immune self fulfills the criteria of such a subject with profound
effects on how immunity is conceived: 1) the identification of the
foreign implicitly requires that something is doing the
recognizing; and 2) recognizing is a perceptive event and must rely on
a cognitive apparatus, at least in typical descriptions of such
phenomena. Thus the cognitive metaphor (by definition derived from a
human perspective) builds upon a general Cartesian
understanding of agency which, in the setting of immunity, utilizes
the modernist epistemological dichotomy of self and nonself. With the
implicit presence of agency, the perceived world is known as
a transmission, which in contemporary cognitive science and modernist
philosophy adopts various modes of re-presentation. Kant is
the master architect of this formulation.

Kant’s constructivism and the representationalism it required
remained central to those diverse efforts to understand how language
hooks onto the world, where 


to know is to represent accurately what is outside the mind; so to
understand the possibility and nature of knowledge is to understand
the way in which the mind is able to construct such representations.
(Rorty 1979: 3) 


On this view, the most obvious function of representations is to help
order and mediate interactions with the world. And, moreover, to
achieve a “true” picture of the world, the repertory of
knowledge must be stored, or represented, in the mind (see the entry on
 representational theories of consciousness).
 The representational mind imposes its own means of processing data,
inasmuch as the mental ultimately becomes an interpretive
system. Accordingly, sensory data stimulate information processing,
which invokes computations, inferential analysis, synthesis,
interpretation and ends with storage or application of this mental
product for use in guiding behavior. The “cognitivist”
program is built upon a causal theory of perception: objects are
perceived as sensory data, which then follow a trajectory that ends in
a mental percept that corresponds to that object. On these accounts,



cognition is mental representation: the mind is thought to
operate by manipulating symbols that represent features of the world
or represent the world as being a certain way. (Varela, Thompson, and
Rosch 1991: 8; emphasis in original) 


This approach characterizes the mind as a computational system
operating on language-like representations, which reflects
naturalistic commitments drawing from cognitive science, neurology,
and psychology, where the cognitivist paradigm has reigned supreme
(Chase and Reynolds 2010: 202–10). Immunology, in its use of the
cognitive metaphor employs this formulation.

In the self/nonself scenario, the perception of an antigen’s
meaning is determined by its reactivity with a suitable antibody or
lymphocyte, which triggers an immune response after suitable
processing. And as in representational theories of the mind, where
word representations capture the state of the world, so too does
antibody transmit meaning by which its binding
(“recognition”) accounts for how the antigen is
“known”. The antibody in this sense is
“mediating” the antigen’s meaning to the system. In
Burnet’s original iteration of the self-other dichotomy, the
cognitive event fulfilled the basic requirement of an informational
code: If an antibody recognized an antigen, that antigen was, by
definition, “other” and thus slated for elimination. In
other words, the antigen is a code that carries its
meaning—otherness, nonself, foreign. Because the
representational schema was devised with an underlying commitment to a
subject-object epistemology, Burnet’s theory implicitly assumes
a notion of agency, an entity that receives the representations,
processes them, and responds appropriately. The philosophy embedded in
immune cognition is analogous to language, where “pass the
salt” now means, “kill the antigen”. And with such a
subject-object epistemological structure, the world is
re-presented to the cognitive faculty. Simply,
representations in such a model serve as the code of perception and
thus become the métier of information processing.

This construction, having dominated cognitive science and contemporary
psychology, supports notions of immune agency conceived as an entity,
a metaphorical extension of a “thinking thing”. And
adopting this view of cognitive operations, places agency in a
circular logic that re-enforces the operations of the sovereign self
as an organizing principle. Indeed, conceptions of agency and
representationalism reinforce each other in supporting the
“immune self” as a theoretical construct, the meeting
point of philosophy, the cognitive sciences, and immunology.

In contrast, Jerne’s network theory emphasized that neither the
antigen or its antibody could be construed as a
representation. On that view, the antigen is not
re-presenting anything but rather presents itself directly to
the antibody or T-cell receptor (TCR). Accordingly, the TCR or
antibody are not representations of the antigen, but rather serve to
transform the recognized molecule into information
that an immunogen (“nonself” substance) has arrived. The
recognition event does not require a second order
re-presentation; the binding confers a direct
“meaning” (“intrusion”), which is then derived
through the immune “grammar” that has been developed to
“learn” how to respond to the foreign. Note, agency, as
such, is eclipsed in this presentational scenario, and if
adopted, immunology’s agent-based conceptual foundation
shifts.

According to the network model, three steps comprise cognition: 1) the
antigen is a substance from the “outside” and its
“form”—its information—is transferred in the
recognition event into an immune form through its binding to antibody
or TCR; 2) the “meaning” is then attained in the second
phase of the cognitive event, namely, the significance of an antigen
derives from the degree in which it disrupts the resting connectivity
of the network; and 3) in this schema, cognition is not of
something; perception is entirely within the system itself; the agent
has disappeared, and with that vacancy, representations are discarded.
After all, what requires a re-presentation? In a
system without agency, what heretofore was referred to as activation
resulting from a subject-object cognitive event now refers to
increased dynamic activity, which is due to the disruption of the
network’s equilibrium. Immune “knowledge” shifts
from a signifier/signified relationship to one in which meaning is
firmly lodged within the system itself (Tauber 2013).

In sum, this “presentational” formulation (inspired by
J.J. Gibson’s theory of perception, 1979) models cognition
without representations and attendant notions of agency dependent on
processing them (for various formulations of this enactivist view, see
Shapiro 2011). Matched molecular entities interact directly with
immune receptors and a cascade of biochemical sequences result. There
is no agent-world divide; the system simply is, for direct
perception dispenses with the recursive, self-reflective persona, who
sits in a Cartesian Theater to observe the world (Dennett 1991). And
if a representational system is relinquished, the subject-object
epistemology dominating current immune theory is radically
reconfigured, for the presentational cognition discounts immune
selfhood. Indeed, adaptive problem solving, signaling, and
communication in the context of functional collective behavior need no
reliance on agency at all (Orosz 2001; Shanks and Pyles 2011). Drawing
an analogy from colony behaviors of insects (Bonabeau 2001; Gordon
2001) and bacteria (Ben Jacob, Becker, Shapira, and Levine 2004; Ben
Jacob, Shapira, and Tauber 2005), the immune system may be conceived
without centralized control or directives by simply following its
embedded rules of regulation. If a subject-object modality of
cognition is replaced with an agent-less understanding of perception,
then immunity may be regarded strictly in terms of its own processes
in the absence of a humuncular witness. Accordingly, individualized
agency would disappear as an organizing principle of the
discipline.
5.2 Intentionality

Cognition carries a heavy philosophical load, which has aptly
been described as a metaphorical construction. The cognitive metaphor
most directly grows from how mental behavior is characterized, which
includes the “intentional stance” (Dennett 1981) and
teleological explanations that conform to widely held ideas about the
purpose of complex phenomena (see the entry on
 teleological notions in biology).
 As explained by Robert Wilson,


The cognitive metaphor is operative whenever psychological terms are
used to describe actions or behaviors of nonpsychological agents [viz.
nervous and immune systems/functions], or to explain actions or
behaviors not caused by psychological states [e.g., ant workers
“sacrificing” for a queen]…and it is manifest in
talk of cell migration, neural memories, molecular signaling,
preferential developmental pathways, the goal of maximizing gene
replication, and of biochemical systems as seeking equilibria. The
cognitive metaphor is ubiquitous in the life sciences. (Wilson
2005: 75; emphasis added)


Wilson goes on to argue that the pervasive cognitive metaphor
magnifies agency, i.e., the role of independent actors, both
self-contained and self-directed, which seems to satisfy criteria for
their autonomy. He explains, 


we literally have psychological states and by treating nonminded
biological agents as if they had such states we assimilate them to
ourselves, 


which he calls the “crystallization thesis”
(2005: 76). He argues that this metaphorical extension is an important
aspect of shifting “merely living things to full-blown
organisms”, which in turn is a key way biology is conceived
(2005: 76). After all, having a stable conception of the organism is
crucial in establishing the boundaries of studies and unifying
research programs. Accordingly, the cognitive metaphor is an important
instrument in that conceptual enterprise. 

Nelson Vaz argues that to understand a “living
thing”—in this case the immune system as a cognizing
faculty of the organism—immunologists assign agency as
they comprehend physiological functions (Vaz 2011). This is
an effective way to model behavior in terms that fulfill entrenched
ideas of agency and reflect the ready application of human life
experience onto the biological phenomena. And with this insight,
philosophers have tools to critically explore the character of agency
in immunology. Indeed, the ready acceptance of immune selfhood reveals
the implicit notion of agency embedded in the conceptual
infrastructure of the science. So while the chemical approach defined
immunology through the mid-twentieth century, the intentional idiom of
selfhood remained in the foundations of immunology’s theory.


This issue of using intentional language in immunology has generated
debate among philosophers. Melander argues that while intentional
idioms are used in immunology, in fact this does not mean that
scientists are, in fact, attributing intentional states to immune
phenomena. Rather by emphasizing the behavioral aspects of immunity,
the intentional idiom has utilitarian value. This use is acceptable
because of the ready analogy of


immunological processes and patterns [with] familiar human activities.
Because of this possibility, redefined intentional idioms are highly
convenient, for instance, when one needs to give a short and
“intuitive” characterization of intricate immunological
processes whose exact description would be too long and complex, and
when one needs to pick out and describe some immunological process of
which one so far knows only the “gross behavior”.
(Melander 1993: 239)


In other words, Melander maintains that the intentional idiom is a
convenient shorthand for highly specific descriptions, and just as the
immune self has practical idiomatic value, so does the extension of
such agency through its constitutive intentional characterizations.
Matthen and Levy (1984) are less sanguine and argue that such
extrapolations guide scientific assessment by offering a particular
framework in which to place immune data, because such intentional
assignments actually reflect an ordering mechanism for phenomena
otherwise difficult to characterize. Whether the teleology embedded in
the intentional proposition remains inescapable is another question.
However, at the very least we may conclude that the language of
contemporary immunology fortifies formulations of agency with the use
of cognitive terms that are employed to describe the means by which
purported intentions are carried forth.
5.3 The neuro-immune system

As discussed, at the most fundamental level, the immune system is an
information-processing faculty that deals with molecular inputs.
Whereas sight perceives radiation, hearing processes vibrations in a
fluid medium, and mechanical pressure triggers direct neural
responses, immunity, like taste and smell, relies on the molecular
alignment of substance and receptor that characterizes
“recognition”. Such inputs, whether nervous or immune,
then cascade into an integrated system of functionally supportive
elements whose rules determine whether actions are initiated, or
not.

Beyond the functional cognitive analogy, there is abundant evidence
that the nervous and immune systems are highly integrated with one
another physiologically and anatomically. They share many of the same
messenger molecules, have close developmental histories both in
phylogeny and ontogeny, and intersect biochemically. Indeed, the
so-called “psycho-neuro-endocrine system” has a
well-established fourth partner in the immune system (Ader 2006). And
beyond these interdependencies, there is a growing appreciation of a
strong parallel in how these complex systems might be organized.
Increasingly, systems analyses applicable to one discipline are
carefully examined for their applicability to the other. On this
integrative view, immunity is fairly regarded as mediating part of the
information spectrum comprising the organism’s interactions with
its environment—both internal and external. Assuming the
cognitive perspective, the immune system might be regarded as
primarily fulfilling an altogether different function if its resting
physiology is measured and its phylogeny carefully examined. On this
basis, John Stewart has suggested that the immune system became
defensive only after its primordial neuroendocrine communicative
capabilities were usurped for “immunity” (Stewart 1992,
1994a). Accordingly, immunology becomes part of a more comprehensive
psychoneuroimmunology, which defines immunity functions as an
information processing activity coordinated with other cognitive
systems.

Explicit shared nervous-immune system organizational characteristics
have been proposed (Nataf 2016): For instance, distinct features of a
visual object (shape, color, motion) are perceived separately by
distinct neuronal populations, whose signals are then integrated by
other nervous system networks. Such higher order processing requires
assembly of various neuronal tributaries and such integration is
characterized by cooperative amalgamation of an ascending assembly of
signals. Simply, perception is the outcome of a collective integrative
process. Similar organizational principles drive the integrated
perception of immune objects in secondary lymphoid organs. In this scheme, an immunogen is “seen” once the
various characteristics of its signal properties are integrated: The
main categories comprising an immune object include the initial
encounter with a suitable receptor, that contextual setting, and the
temporal sequence governing the reaction (Pradeu and Vivier 2016).
This complex process relies on distinct networks of immunocompetent
cells, which collectively integrate in a multitude of lymphoid sites,
where the output signals generated during this primary perception step
finally form. So analogous to the nervous system, the immune system
perceives immune objects by assembling discrete signals, characterized
as immunogens, cytokines, chemokines, etc., (obtained as discrete
informational elements derived from various cell types), which in an
ascending integration generates a multitude of T-cell and B-cell
clones that together initiate the immune response. The immunogen thus
becomes an antigen (a recognized immune object), one constructed
through “clonal cooperation” (Nataf 2016). In this schema,
the integrative processes occurring in lymphoid aggregates is the
functional equivalent to the brain that employs a hierarchal structure
to process information. 
6. Modeling the Immune System

Broadly considered, twentieth century immunology largely followed the
original investigative concerns of the immunochemists, who employed
the reductive strategies dominant in the life sciences of their era.
With the biological turn in the mid-twentieth century (Silverstein
2009), more global properties of immunity were appreciated, but the
basic schema used to model the various tributaries of the cumulative
immune response relied on simply linkages that could not fully capture
the dynamics of the immune response. Parsing immunity into prescribed
segments has failed to reconstruct immune regulation, so during the
past twenty years more holistic approaches have been introduced with
varying success.

Immunology has joined efforts already evident in other areas of
biology to devise system-wide models that account for the complexity
inherent in a broad expanse of immune functions and the accompanying
multifactorial causation of these activities. With the development of
systems biology, the general issue of immune regulation becomes a
central concern, where “complex dynamics giving rise to
continual adaptation and learning, memory, pattern recognition and
collective global control” assume primacy (Mitchell 2006: 1205).
The systems application in immunology potentially falls into three
frameworks: 1) the processing of data based on an orthodox clonal
selection model that examines portions of the system excited by
antigen stimulation; 2) an autonomous modality of immune
“internal activity” that portrays the on-going normal
physiology of immune processing in the body’s economy; and 3) an
ecological formulation that emphasizes the open information flow
that the immune system processes and to which it responds. This last
modality, the interface of the organism with both
“internal” (i.e., holobiont) and “external”
environments, places the immune system firmly within the
organism’s larger interactive context. How systems biology
depicts immune phenomena will thus reflect differing formulations that
assume distinct characteristics depending on which of these three
constructs is subject to its application.

From a practical standpoint,
the sheer mass of data and the sophistication of the analysis of CST
qualifies this domain of immunity as the “lowest hanging
fruit” for modeling and thus most amenable to study. However,
such a depiction captures only a portion of immune activity (i.e.,
fully activated), which may be idiosyncratic in regards to the
physiological immunity of surveillance and cooperative affiliation
leading to symbiotic relationships. The second domain of normal immune
“housekeeping’—also referred to as “normal
physiological” immunity (Metchnikoff 1905),
“conservative” (Vaz et al. 2006), or
“concinnous” (ordering) reactivity (Tauber 2017)—while crucial for understanding the basic organizational
structure and regulation of the immune system has little data with
which modelers might work and requires extrapolations from
pathological autoimmunity. And when the last category is considered,
the ecological, immunologic modelers are beginning to merge efforts
with ecologists who have a longer research experience in systems
analysis (Wodarz 2014).

The “immunocomputing” of artificial immune systems has
drawn on recent developments in computer science, information
processing, pattern recognition, language representation and
knowledge-based reasoning (e.g., Tarakanov et al. 2003; I. Cohen 2007;
I. Cohen and Harel 2007). This medley of approaches reflects the
character of systems biology more generally, and while it is premature
to suggest which application will be most noteworthy for immune
modeling, the first textbook devoted to immunological bioinformatics
announced the goal of establishing “an in silico immune
system” (Lund et al. 2005: ix), which was followed by a surge of
interest and speculation (e.g., Bersini and Carneiro 2006; Flower
2007; Flower and Timmis 2007). Modeling partitions into two distinct
strategies: 1) a merological (reductionist) approach that
builds the system from its component parts, and 2) a holistic
approach that treats the system as a black box and considers only
inputs and outputs. Both seek fuller integrative models and reflect a
reaction against analytic atomism, but early efforts suggest quite
different orienting views of what a system is (see the entry on
 reductionism in biology).
 

Although immunologists have long considered the immune system as a
system (Moulin 1989, 1991, 2001), that understanding differs
on how the system is conceived. The dominant view currently defines
the immune system as “a network of cells, tissues, and
organs” which encompasses all the mediators, antibody, cytokines
and the panoply of factors that have been implicated in immune
regulation” – see the link to the
 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
 in the Other Internet Resources section.  (Note the
“network” is invoked as a synonym of “system”,
but networks have formal properties that are not necessarily ascribed
to the immune system, primarily because knowledge of the
system’s organization and regulation is not sophisticated enough
to draw such formalities.) So how, indeed, might a network be depicted
that includes about 20 cell types and myriad molecular factors, some
effecting natural immunity and others playing a role in regulating
adaptive immunity? The characterization of each element is determined
by the particular experimental protocol chosen, which in turn has on
occasion introduced an artifact related to the contingency of the
factor’s discovery in one context, only to be revealed later as
having other, perhaps more important roles in another experimental
setting (Gilbert and Sarkar 2000; Dinarello 2010).  Despite this high
degree of complexity, the system qua system is examined (to
the extent it has been characterized) as just this ensemble, whose
inner structure and regulatory properties appear as inhibitory and
stimulatory activities. And when composed as such a mechanical
edifice, the immune system’s re-construction (drawn from
piecemeal data derived from diverse elicited reactions) depicts a vast
chart of immunity’s constituent elements related to one another
branching in linear array.

Alternate approaches reveal more complex relationships when multifold
informatics are applied to multiscale biological databases (reviewed
in Kidd et al. 2014). Understanding how immune cells and their
mediators interact with each other, the surrounding tissue and the
microbiome requires comprehensive multi-dimensional modeling to
examine global crosstalk between molecular pathways and cell
populations. Such relationships are now emerging as a result of
applying high-throughput profiling technologies. Quantitative modeling
requires an analysis at several levels—comparative genomics and
proteomics, co-evolution with pathogens, tissue-specific processes,
population dynamics, cell turnover kinetics, and regulation networks.
This multi-disciplinary tactic includes bioinformatics, genomics,
proteomics, cellular, molecular, and clinical immunology modeling, and
ultimately, mathematical descriptions and computer simulations. In
terms of model building, the shift from classical mathematical models
based on ordinary differential equations to other approaches that rely
on stochastic models using simple rules (e.g., Monte Carlo
simulations) to describe populations of interacting agents (molecules
and cells of the immune system), appear to have more power and suggest
advances have been made (Louzoun 2007; Pappalardo et al. 2008; Bauer,
Beauchemin, and Perelson 2009; Kim, Levy, and Lee 2009).

Due to novel
high-throughput techniques interaction data are quickly accumulating
and the databases have already provided new initiatives for modeling
and systems analysis. For example, coupling genomic sequencing and
mass cytometry permit comprehensive measurement of the immune system
across multiple cellular components and time points. Analysis of
genome-wide transcriptions exhibits the changes that correlate with
different states of the immune system such as the molecular signatures
associated with autoimmunity, post-vaccination states, and various
phases of infection. Population studies designed to determine the
links between genotype and phenotype have uncovered numerous genetic
variations that influence functions of the immune system. DNA
sequencing technologies have been applied to monitor responses of
vaccines, evolution of viral variants to escape immune detection,
diagnostics for leukemia, and profiling of T cell and antibody
repertoires. With the integration of peptide and protein data from
different cell types and tissue sources, combined with cytometric
studies and metabolics, an unprecedented number of parameters may now
be integrated.

Such measurements have greatly expanded the potential factors to be
analyzed and have increased the complexity of the mathematical models
required for determining how immune processes operate and relate to
various physiological conditions. Despite employing different network
models, all of them attempt to map potential connections among
intracellular and intercellular components, suggesting new functional
roles for specific genes, proteins or metabolites (Kidd et al. 2014).
And the interface with experimentalists may well take a new turn as
modeling may place an immune mediator in the context of new pathways,
molecular interactions and/or even an unanticipated tissue or disease
link (Kidd et al. 2014: 122). In short, these technologies are synthesizing vast
quantities of data that capture system-wide properties at molecular
and cellular resolution, which, when combined with medical histories,
medication effects and other clinical laboratory data are beginning to
present a picture of immunity with unprecedented resolution and
complexity. 

Perhaps the most ambitious and coordinated effort at such a systems
analysis is the European Union-funded “ImmunoGrid”
project, which is designed to develop a natural-scale model of the
human immune system (reflecting both the diversity and the relative
proportions of the molecules and cells that comprise the immune
system) together with the grid infrastructure necessary to apply this
model to specific applications in modeling immune reactions. A
conservative assessment of this effort has been published
(Halling-Brown et al. 2010): Recognizing the daunting complexity of
the immune system, the lack of a deep understanding of its function,
the lack of reliable data, and the scale of computational resources
required to address a high degree of complexity leave the project with
an uncertain timetable. Considering the early state of modeling, the
authors were circumspect about attaining a fully functional model that
will deliver health-care benefits in the form of personalized care
solutions and improved disease prevention (Halling-Brown et al.
2010).

The likelihood that quantitatively successful descriptions will emerge
from the current efforts at systems-wide analyses is still unsettled
(Tauber 2017). Generally, proponents surmise that the remaining
hurdles lie at the doorstep of computational complexity, which will
eventually be overcome. However, fundamental problems loom: 1) despite
the enormous pool of accumulated data, the lack of uniformity and
steadfast standards have hampered modeling efforts; 2) it is not clear
that the algorithms currently used to model systems are capable of
handling the probabilistic character of causation (Kupiec 2009; see
the entry on
 probabilistic causation);
 3) the basic under-determination of biological systems that employ
redundancy to achieve functional tasks leaves any model with
open-ended boundaries and unaccounted inputs; 4) inherent in the
eco-immunology program, this boundary question (organism-environment)
is compounded by the extraordinary complexity of any system conceived
in open intercourse with the environment; and 5) immunology’s
disciplinary ecology, namely, the diversity of its sciences (molecular
biology, immunochemistry, cell biology, ecology, etc.) joined to the
inter-disciplinary character of systems biology introduces another
dimension to the modeler’s woes that reflect concerns about
systems biology more generally:


Any given molecular network can be modeled in more than one way, and,
as it turns out, depending on the modeling strategy and associated
assumptions, the same network may or may not be shown to possess
certain properties. The absence of a unified theoretical background
makes it particularly difficult to elucidate the relationship between
the various models of the same physical system. It is not clear, for
example, if one model can be treated as a limit case of another, more
general type of model, or whether, in some respects or circumstances,
the modeled systems can behave as described by both types of models
despite contradictory predictions. (Baetu 2014: 6)


These obstacles, perhaps pointing to more intractable impasses,
comprise sobering criticisms that originate in a more general
epistemological observation: Immunology is comprised of a diversity of
models—conceptual (mechanistic, structural, and mathematical)
and experimental (surrogate and exemplar models)—that reflect a
mosaic of scientific knowledge derived from different methodologies
and theoretical concerns. And this mixture underscores the daunting
challenge of modeling a science that 


is more akin to an interdisciplinary rendezvous point where many
theoretical approaches coexist than a thoroughly unified science built
on [an] unique theoretical foundation. (Baetu 2014: 6) 


And, consequently, an integrated approach remains a distant goal. 

Nevertheless, systems-inspired modeling has gained momentum and
various tools developed for predicting key molecular aspects of
adaptive immunity from protein sequences and genome-wide transcripts
have been encouraging. Global assessments have provided accurate
predictions of immune responses: In a well-controlled human
intervention (influenza vaccination) that assessed multiplexed
responses (gene expression, high density analyses of cell populations,
and cellular and serological measurements) investigators quantified
baseline and response heterogeneity in a cohort of individuals. From
this high-density data, they systematically identified correlates,
built predictive models of vaccination response quality, and inferred
functional connections in the immune system (Tsang et al. 2014). If
this approach finds general application and corresponding success in
other experimental scenarios, then we might expect that new ideas
concerning causation in biological systems will emerge (see the entry on
 the metaphysics of causation).
 And from such insights, philosophers of biology will have new tools
to explore the architecture of biological organization and the
regulatory principles that govern complex functions.
7. Conclusion

Two prominent themes have converged to re-orient contemporary
immunology and both have implications for philosophy of biology,
particularly in regards to defining the fundamental characteristics of
identity, individuality, and agency. First, because
the immune self has escaped definitive epistemological
definition, immunity’s theoretical structure has two contending
orientations. The first is the best established, namely, immune
selfhood (variously conceived) determines the basis for immune
discrimination and under this banner diverse immune phenomena have
been bundled in the self idiom. The practical utility of this
construct to describe certain kinds of stimulus-response immune
activation remains at the foundation of immune theory. The other view
holds that unstimulated immune functions operate with different kinds
of tolerant controls that are based on a dynamic construct: Immune
responses arise from a complex calculus of environmental (internal and
external) factors, historical and developmental history, and
evolutionarily derived identifications of “safe” (and thus
tolerated) and “dangerous” (and thus attacked) substances.
Accordingly, immunity is a collective process that eclipses
the self/nonself model (both in terms of collaborating constituents),
but also in terms of the contextual presentation of immune
perceptions. Immunity then becomes a spectrum of responses along a
continuum stretching from the unrecognized to active immune tolerance
to various degrees of immune destructive activation. So by the end of
the twentieth century the full array of immune activities appeared
best characterized not by an on/off switch derived from distinctive
self/nonself designations, but rather a rheostat modulating responses
along a continuum of acceptance and denial. 

Second, following this spectrum of immune responses, the basis of
identity has expanded to account for cooperative relationships that
are immune mediated. Agents so understood then shift from independent
entities to complex co-operative collectives, and, from that position,
instead of the focus on autonomy, the conditions for establishing and
maintaining mutualist relationships assume priority. So while the self
idiom remains firmly entrenched, the notion of individuality is being
challenged by another understanding, one conceived in terms of a
multi-genomic organism embedded in a complex environment. This
ecological framework allows for both competitive and co-operative
exchanges without the requirement of firmly demarcating self and
other. On this dynamic view, the organism abdicates stable definition
or identification. With that shift, the controlling idea of
individuality changes with corresponding modifications of
immunology’s governing precepts. Indeed, having moved from
conceptions of the organism as autonomous (and in the immune
formulation, protecting distinct borders) to one dynamically conceived
in exchange with internal and external environments, challenges
circumscribed notions of identity.

The philosophical consequences of this ecologically informed model of
immune identity highlights the need to clarify the ontological
standing of individuality, agency, and
organism. Without disputing the richness of the original
incarnation of the immune self, conceived in insular terms, this
useful heuristic is undergoing theoretical transformation as a result
of changing scientific considerations in which immune functions are
expanding from a view of the organism segregated in its environment to
a relational scenario that better accommodates ecological exchange.
Immunity operates at the interface of the organism and its
environment, and when divisionary boundaries are reconfigured, notions
of identity require redress. Here a second interface appears between
the science and its philosophy, where clarification of
immunology’s key ontological categories joins similar
discussions in other areas of philosophy of biology. The dialogue
promises a rich harvest for both disciplines.