Philosophy of Liberation is the collective name for a philosophical
movement and method of doing philosophy that emerged at first in
Argentina during the late sixties, but that went on to spread
throughout Latin American during the early seventies. It is for this
reason that sometimes some critics and historiographers of the
philosophy of liberation make reference to a “strict” and
a “broad” conception of the philosophy of liberation, in
order to refer to the immediate context of its earliest articulations,
and to its later general dissemination and development. The philosophy
of liberation belongs to the “maturity” stage within the
“contemporary” period of Latin American philosophy, if we
use Jorge J.E. Gracia and Manuel Vargas’s periodization of Latin
American philosophy (Gracia and Vargas 2013). Without question,
however, the philosophy of liberation is the distinct manifestation of
Latin American philosophy that has received the most international
attention, and that has had the most influence both within Latin
America and the
 United States[1].
 While the philosophy of liberation is deeply rooted in the history
and debates of Latin American philosophy, to the extent that it may be
claimed that it is the most elaborate and substantive response to the
task articulating a distinct Latin American philosophy, it is
nonetheless also a chapter within the broader history of European
philosophy. Even as it defines itself as a critique of Eurocentrism
and the hegemony of European philosophy, it has evolved out of and
made use of its philosophical currents, movements, concepts and
debates. Some may be argue that the philosophy of liberation belongs
to phenomenology, hermeneutics, and Marxism, or more generally,
historical materialism. In fact, because many philosophers of
liberation came out of these different traditions, the philosophy of
liberation was and remains from the outset an internally heterogeneous
movement.
 The philosophy of liberation aims to think the distinct world
historical character of Latin America, using what are argued to be
autochthonous intellectual resources, from out of a situation of
economic, cultural, political dependency. It has a practical aim:
liberation. In very general terms, the philosophy of liberation
defines itself as a counter-philosophical discourse, whether it be as
a critique of colonialism, imperialism, globalization, racism, and
sexism, which is articulated from out of the experience of
exploitation, destitution, alienation and reification, in the name of
the projects of liberation, autonomy and authenticity. That is, the
philosophy of liberation has presented itself as an “epistemic
rupture” that aims to critique and challenge not only basic
assumptions and themes of Euro-American philosophy, but also to make
philosophy more responsible and responsible for the socio-political
situation in which it always finds itself. Thus, by
“counter-philosophical discourse”, philosophers of
liberation did not mean that it was
“anti-philosophical”. Instead, they meant to emphasize a
heightened degree of reflexiveness or self-awareness in their
theorizing. Positively, the philosophy of liberation affirms cultural
diversity, gender and racial equality, and political sovereignty. The
philosophy of liberation’s philosophical orbit is defined by the
axes of critique, commitment, engagement, and liberation. As a
critique of all forms of philosophical dependency and inauthenticity,
it is consciously and avowedly a metaphilosophy. The philosophy of
liberation is thus, among other things, a view about what counts as
philosophy and how it should be pursued.
 This article is divided into four main parts: history, background,
currents, and themes and debates.
 
1. History
As was noted, the philosophy of liberation belongs to the
“maturity” stage of the “contemporary” period
of the history of Latin American philosophy (Gracia and Vargas 2013;
Gracia 1988–89). As a philosophical movement that engages in the
critical task of recovering what is distinctly “Latin
American” thought, it has sought explicitly to unearth and
rescue Amerindian thought, in its pre-Colombian and post-Conquest
forms, as well as all the different philosophical tendencies and
movements that emerged during the long history of colonialism,
independence and projects of national formation. It is for this reason
that the philosophy of liberation has as one of its goals a critical
historiography of Latin American thought, in general, and philosophy,
more specifically. Figures such as Enrique Dussel, Rodolfo Kusch,
Arturo Roig, and Leopoldo Zea have articulated their versions of the
philosophy of liberation in terms of a recovery of earlier stages in
the formulation of a project of Latin American liberation. Yet, the
philosophy of liberation as a self-conscious movement and current,
emerged out of a very distinct convergence of geo-historical,
cultural, intellectual and philosophical tendencies, conflicts and
processes.
1.1 The Long History
The philosophy of liberation, arguably, began in the late sixties
when Leopoldo Zea and Augusto Salazar Bondy launched a debate with the
question: “Is there a Latin American philosophy?” Whether
the answer was affirmative or negative did not affect the fact that
the movement would have to embark on the long path of the recovery of
Latin American philosophy, at the very least in order to identify
those moments of originality and authentically autochthonous Latin
American thinking. It is for this reason that some philosophers
liberation have argued that there are at least three antecedent
historical stages that serve as the geological subsoil of liberation
philosophy. Following Dussel, they could be sketched as follows
(Dussel 2005: 374–5):
 First Period. This is the period of the beginning of the
critique of the conquest and the development of a discourse that
engages Amerindian thought. An important inaugural date is 1511 when
Antón de Montesinos critiques the way evangelization is taking place
in the Americas. This is the period when a distinct continental
awareness of the injustice that is being committed against the
indigenous populations of the so-called New World emerges. The debate
between Ginés de Sepúlveda and Fray Bartolomé de las Casas at
Valladolid in 1550 marks the clear emergence of a liberation discourse
and consciousness. In this debate Sepúlveda articulated a moment in
the emergent imperial and colonizing modern consciousness of Europe
when he argued that Amerindians were naturally born slaves and that
therefore they were to be subjugated.  Sepúlveda questioned the
humanity of Amerindians. In contrast, de las Casas affirmed the
rational humanity of Amerindians, while acknowledging their
distinctiveness. In fact, de las Casas affirms their rationality and
treats appeals to their reason as a theological and evangelical
norm. The only true way for evangelization is the path of
rational deliberation and not violent religious usurpation and
imposition.
 Second Period. This epoch is defined by the process of
what might be called the first emancipation, from 1750 until the end
of the nineteenth century. Defining figures are Benito Diaz de
Gamarra, who published in 1774 his Elementa Recientioris
Philosophiae, Carlos de Singüenza y Góngora, and Francisco Xavier
Clavigero, who articulated an anti-colonial and anti-absolutist
political philosophy that launched a critique of the Spanish
monarchy. Some of the notable figures of this epoch include Fray
Servando Teresa de Mier (1763–1827), Manuel M. Moreno (in La
Plata, what would become Argentina, 1778–1811), Simón Rodríguez
(in Venezuela, 1751–1854), Simón Bolivar (1783–1830),
Francisco de Miranda (1750–1816), Juan Germán Roscio
(1763–1821). In the eighteenth century, these thinkers and many
other “patriotras” articulated a political
discourse of emancipation from the Spanish crown. They called for
continental independence, as well as the development of a distinct
“American” identity. Because of her blend of poetry,
theological speculation, praise of Amerindian traditions, and nascent
feminist awareness, Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz (1651–1695) can
also be considered a contributor to this first discourse of
emancipation and should be included among the figures that define this
epoch.
 Third Period. This epoch could is defined by a second
moment of emancipation, beginning at the end of the nineteen century
and being bookended with the Cuban Revolution in 1959. Defining
figures are José Carlos Mariátegui (1894–1930),
whose book Siete ensayos sobre la realidad peruana (Seven
Interpretative Essays on Peruvian Reality) (1968) gave expression to a
new emancipation agenda that is explicitly elaborated in terms of a
dual approach that is attentive to the historical reality of the
Americas, with its indigenous and criollo backgrounds. It
launched a critical appropriation of European ideas in the
“Latin American” context. This epoch is defined by the
crises of both development efforts and populisms that were inattentive
to the severe racial, ethnic, and class divisions within the Latin
American nations.  It is against this context that Augusto Salazar
Bondy (1925–1974) and Leopoldo Zea (1912–2004) began to
debate the question whether there is a Latin American philosophy. This
third period is defined by the explicit consciousness of economic,
political, social, and cultural dependence, under-development, and
domination (Vallega 2014). It is in this period that the need of a
discourse of liberation begins to be explicitly articulated.
1.2 The Immediate History
This section discusses the broader social and intellectual context
of the third period indicated above, from which an explicit and
nuanced philosophy of liberation would emerge.
 An important part of the origin of the philosophy of liberation as
an autochthonous philosophical movement was rooted in the question of
a distinct or authentic Latin American philosophy. The problem of a
distinct Latin American philosophy has been in gestation at least
since the late nineteen century, when the so-called “generation
of patriarchs” began to ask about a philosophy or thinking from
and for the “Americas” (Beorlegui 2004). This problem took
a distinct shape when Salazar Bondy
(1968) re-framed it in
terms of the question as to the actual existence of a Latin American
philosophy.  Using existentialist and Marxist categories, Salazar
Bondy gave a negative answer. There is no authentic Latin American
philosophy because the sub-continent has lived and developed under
conditions of mental colonialism, intellectual subordination, and
philosophical dependence. In order to achieve an authentic Latin
American philosophy, Salazar Bondy maintained, the sub-continent had
to achieve its independence and establish its autonomy and
self-determination. These thoughts, and Zea’s subsequent
response (1969), set the agenda for a generation. The philosophy of
liberation , so explicitly christened, it could be argued, has gone
through at least the following three stages: constitution and
maturation, persecution and exile, challenges and debates (Dussel
2005; Beorlegui 2004; Cerutti Guldberg 1983 [2006]).
 Constitution and Maturation (1969–1975). The
philosophy of liberation was explicitly labeled as such at the Second
Argentine National Congress of Philosophy, which was held in Cordoba
in 1971. The inaugurating group was conformed by Osvaldo Ardiles,
Alberto Parisini, Juan Carlos Scannone, Julio de Zan, and Anibal
Fornari. But this group took a more formal shape at
the jornadas (week long working seminars) of philosophy that
were organized at the Jesuit University, Universidad of San Salvador (where Pope Francis was educated), in San Miguel, in the outskirts of Buenos Aires, Argentina. The first jornada
took place in 1971, and a second was held later the same year with the
title “Latin American Liberation”. A
third jornada was held in 1973, at which Salazar Bondy gave a
paper titled “Filosofía de la dominacion y
filosofía de la liberación (Philosophy of Domination and
Philosophy of Liberation” (1973), and Leopoldo Zea gave a paper
titled “La filosofía latinoamericana como
filosofía de la liberación (Latin American Philosophy as
a Philosophy of Liberation)” (1973). This stage comes to a close
in 1975 with the First Mexican National Congress of Philosophy in
Morelia, Mexico, with papers by Dussel, Miró Quesada, Arturo
Roig, and Abelardo Villegas. This was an important meeting because it
signaled the launching of the philosophy liberation as a Latin
American philosophical agenda that supersedes its initial Argentine
formulations. A new group of philosophers from across Latin America
entered into the debate: Hugo Assmann, Carlos Bazán, Arturo
Roig,
 In 1974 the journal Revista de Filosofía
Latinoamericana begins to be edited and published in Buenos
Aires, and goes on to become a major publishing venue for philosophers
of liberation, along with Stromata, published at the
University of El Salvador, in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in which many
of the inaugural essays and quasi-manifestos of the movement were
published.
 Persecution and Exile (1975–1983). With the
Peronist dictatorship in Argentina, from 1975 to 1983, there began the
persecution of the philosophers of liberation. Many went into exile,
moving to Canada, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela. In this way,
then, the agenda of liberation philosophy was brought to other parts
of Latin America. However, the Latin American dictatorships of the
sixties and the Cold War in general, had directly influenced internal
debates about the “who” of Latin American philosophy, and
consequently had polarizing and decisive effects for how liberation
was understood. The role of populism and nationalism in defining the
task of philosophy became a litmus test. In 1980, the AFYL (Asociación
Filosofia y Liberación [Philosophy and Liberation Association]), was
established in Bogotá, Colombia, and it become a major vehicle for
organizing congresses, round tables, and sessions at international
philosophy congresses.
 Challenges and Debates (1983 to today). With the
transition to democracy and the collapse or defeat of the military
dictatorships in Latin America there began a new stage in the
normalization and maturation of liberation philosophy. Horacio Cerutti
Guldberg’s Filosofía de la liberación
latinoamericana (Philosophy of Latin American Liberation) (2006)
offered the most comprehensive historical and critical reconstruction
of the movement. In 1988–89, Jorge J.E. Gracia edited a special
issue on “Latin American Philosophy”, with a long essay by
Cerutti Guldberg in which a synoptic overview of the movement is
presented. In 1993, Ofelia Schutte published her Cultural Identity
and Social Liberation in Latin American Thought in which a
critical confrontation with some key theses of liberation philosophy
is developed. These substantive texts signaled the maturity and
general coherence of the philosophy of liberation, at the very least
as it was perceived by its critics. These works called for
re-articulations and reformulations that made explicit the inner
tensions and divisions within the group of thinkers that had first
given voice to this new current and method of doing philosophy in
Latin America.
 These differences and divergences have become increasingly
pronounced. It may now no longer be possible to speak of a
“philosophy of liberation”, in the singular. Instead, it
may be more appropriate to speak of “philosophies of
liberation”, in the plural, where what is shared is a set of
overlapping themes among the distinct accounts of what are the
situations and conditions from which liberation is to be sought, and
different philosophical methods and traditions used to articulate
those accounts . To be sure, there remains a substantive core that
holds together the constellation of the philosophy of liberation now
in the middle of its fourth decade of existence. Widely shared
characteristics of the various philosophies of liberation include the
following:

An indisputable point of departure for all philosophers liberation
is the consciousness of the economic, social, political and cultural
dependence of Latin America on Europe and the United States.
The general affirmation that “philosophy” has to be
practiced from a specific context of both engagement and commitment
within the distinct Latin American historical and geopolitical
situation. The claim is that implicitly or explicitly all
philosophizing is always a form of commitment with an existential
situation. All philosophers of liberation share the conviction that a
philosophy that is worthy of that name is a tool or means of
enlightenment, a theoretical elaboration at the service of
a praxis of liberation. The philosophy of liberation is the
twin of a practice of emancipation.
All philosophizing is done out of a concrete historical
situation. Yet, this “concrete historical” situation has
received different formulations, which define the different currents
within the philosophy of liberation (see section 3,
below). For now, we can note that the “point of departure”
can be a people, nation, or autochthonous culture; it can refer to a
class or economic group understood along Marxist lines; it can include
a cultural, historical, existential project that manifests itself in
terms of a historical formation or agent.
As a critique of putatively colonized thinking and dependent
philosophy, the philosophy of liberation is a metaphilosophy. For this
reason, issues of method are integral to its philosophical agenda. In
tandem with the different “points of departure” for
philosophy that is authentically grounded, different liberation
philosophers argue on behalf of the virtues of one or another
philosophical method or current. Thus, we find some philosophers of
liberation who are “indigenistas”, some who at one time or
another were Ricoeuerian, Heideggerian, Levinasian; others who were
Diltheyan, Gadamerian, and Gaosian and/or Ortegian, and some who were
Marxists. The philosophy of liberation, which is critical of European
philosophy, is so from within, immanently, even when some of its
representatives argue from some “analectical” standpoint,
or standpoint of metaphysical “exteriority” to imperial
and totalizing thought. It is thus not surprising that philosophy
“companions” or handbooks to Existentialism,
Phenomenology, Marxism, or to figures such as Martin Heidegger, Karl
Marx, Emmanuel Levinas, include entries on “philosophy of
liberation”, or some of its most representative figures.
Inasmuch at it is defined by the word “liberation”,
all philosophy of liberation is entangled with the project of
sketching an utopia and identifying the “subject” of the
construction of such an utopia. The utopia of liberation entails
either recognizing the suppressed historical subject, or forging a new
one. This liberation or emancipating subject could the “el
pueblo”, or the proletarian class, or the popular sectors,
made up by the “pueblo” now understood as the
destitute and exploited of the nation. For others, as we will see,
this subject is constituted by the nation as it is embodied in its
popular sector. That sector is not understood simply in terms of class
or even cultural identity, but in terms of an anti-colonial attitude
aimed at national sovereignty.

These general and shared characteristics, problems and themes could
be summarized in three observations about the coherence and unity of
the philosophy of liberation.. First, there is a general agreement
that Latin American philosophy must be a philosophy of liberation that
aims at overcoming dependence, domination and subordination. Second,
there is ample disagreement as to the who, what, or how, is this
project of liberation to be undertaken. Third, there is also ample
disagreement as to the “content” or final goal of
liberation. In short, the philosophy of liberation is defined by what
many would argue is integral to all philosophy as such, namely
questioning the general individual existential situation of
alienation, the corresponding project of liberation, and what the
utopia of achieved liberation could and would look like. Philosophers
of liberation argue, nevertheless, that this questioning takes on a
universal character only and precisely because it is taken up from
within a specific and unique existential, historical, and
geo-political situation.
2. Background
Like all philosophical movements and traditions, the philosophy of
liberation emerged out of both world historical and regional
socio-historical contexts. In terms of the world historical
background, World War II, and in particular the disclosures about the
genocide of the Jews, the Cold War, and the South East Asian wars,
created a world historical stage in which Europe and its intellectual
and moral traditions stood discredited. Whereas before, all things
European were regarded as the standard against which everything would
have to be measured, Europe had become suspect. Latin Americans had to
look elsewhere for inspiration and intellectual guidance.
 The regional socio-historical was framed on the one side by the
Cuban revolution and the numerous military dictatorships that took
place as a consequence of the Cold War and the failures of development
in Latin America. The Cuban revolution, however, had a profound impact
in the socio-political-cultural imagination throughout Latin
America. In the iconic image of Che Guevara (1928–1967), the
revolution promise a transformation of the Latin American human
being—el nuevo hombre—as it also raised the
possibility of political sovereignty for Latin American nations. The
decade of the sixties in Latin American was a time of political
turmoil, but above all of cultural renewal and utopian yearning.
 The philosophy of liberation, however, was above all an
intellectual and philosophical response and unquestionably synthesis
of a series of intellectual and cultural movements that had been
gestating for a decade throughout Latin America. The cultural context
was so ripe with proclamations and thinking about
“liberation” that if the philosophy of liberation had not
been so named in the late sixties and early seventies, today we would
have wondered whether philosophers had been abducted from this world
and sequestered in some time capsule. The philosophy of liberation was
both necessary and inevitable.
 Drawing on the work of Carlos Beorlegui, a historian of Latin
American philosophy, we can say that there are some identifiable
“matrixes”, or intellectual sources, from which liberation
philosophy emerged (Beorlegui 2004:
677–690).[2]
 Here, they will be characterized as follows.
 The Economic Matrix: The Theory of Dependence. After the
end of World War II, the United States undertook to finance the
“development” of Latin America on the model of
industrialized and capitalist nations. This is what the Alliance for
Progress (1961–1973) aimed to do this by granting loans that would
help economically underdeveloped nations to ascend the ladder of
economic development. This program was guided by the economic theory
called “desarrollismo”
or developmentalism. Yet, Latin American nations continue to
lag behind both socially and economically.
 It is in the face of this failure that a series of economists
began to develop “dependency theory”, or the “theory
of the development of underdevelopment”, among who were:
Theothonio dos Santos, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Enzo Falleto, Celso
Furtado, and Anibal Quijano. The core of this theory was that the
underdevelopment of the Latin American nation was not due to
endogenous factors, but rather was a direct consequence of economic
dependence on Europe and the United States. The model of development
that reigned during the fifties and sixties, according to these
theorists, had a double perverse effect: greater capital accumulation
in the metropolises and lending nations, and greater indebtedness and
impoverishment in the so-called underdeveloped nations. The economic
underdevelopment of Latin America was now to be understood in terms of
an economic theory that showed that underdevelopment is not a prior
stage in the natural economic development of nations, but rather an
integral dimension of the international economic order created by
colonialism, imperialism, and neo-imperialism.
 The Religious Matrix: The Theology of Liberation. The
emergence of Liberation Theology has been amply documented and studied
in the specialized literature. Yet, liberation theology is as much a
phenomenon of global Catholicism as it is a unique Latin American
development. The reforms began with Vatican II (1962–1965) and
the Second Latin American Bishops congregation in Medellín, Colombia
(1968), created the church context for the consolidation of what was
in effect a social movement, namely the “communidades de
base” (base communities). The theology of liberation
developed in response to a new understanding of the church’s
relationship to the “people” and the role of the faith in
a world of incredible poverty and social inequality.
 The theology of liberation forged a whole new language: the
“preferential option for the poor”, the “underside
of history”, “the church of the people”,
“orthopraxis is prior to orthodoxy” that influenced some
philosophers of liberation. Still, two of the most important
contributions of the theology of liberation to the philosophy of
liberation were the imperative that critical reflection had to emerge
out of committed praxis, and the problematization of the
concept of “el pueblo”. The theology of
liberation may be understood as theological reflection on what
constituted a people, a community of faith. In short, theology of
liberation asks: who is the subject of God’s soteriology. Most
noteworthy is that Gustavo Gutierrez published his Teología
de la liberación. Perspectivas (A Theology of Liberation)
in 1971 in Peru, while Hugo Assmann published
his Opresión-Liberación: desafío a los cristianos
 (Oppression-Liberation: Challenge to Christians) the
same year in Chile. The Catholic Church also provided an institutional
framework within which some of the work of philosophers of liberation
could be pursued by hosting “jornadas”,
sponsoring congresses, and providing teaching opportunities in its
affiliated universities for philosophers of liberation, many who had
been expelled from public universities.
The Educational Matrix: The Pedagogy of the Oppressed. In
1970, after nearly two decades of literacy work in the
Brazilian favelas and poor sectors of Brazil, Paulo Freire
published his paradigm shifting text Pedagogia del oprimido
(Pedagogy of the Oppressed) (1970), which was followed in 1972 by
his Education for the Praxis of Liberation. At the core of
Freire’s work were three key ideas: if the people are to
overcome their dependence, they can only do so through their own
agency, by becoming the subject of their own liberation; to become a
subject of one’s own liberation means to engage in a process
of conscientização, or consciousness raising,
that takes place through a pedagogy that rejects the notion of the
learner as a passive receptacle and instead departs from the
fundamental realization that learning is a dynamic process. Two key
notions of Freire’s pedagogy of liberation were that (1)
teaching requires listening to the people, and (2) schooling means
life, that is, learning is both indispensable to life and it takes
place in the midst of living. Freire’s key phrase
“conscientização” goes on to be
appropriated by liberation philosophers as their own goal: philosophy
is at the service of the raising of both individual and collective
consciousness.
The Literary-Artistic Matrix: The Boom and the
Muralists. It is often forgotten that the sixties were the time
of the Latin American literary Boom. This is the decade when
José M. Arguedas, Julio Cortázar, Carlos Fuentes,
Gabriel García-Márquez, Mario Vargas Llosa, Octavio Paz,
Juan Rulfo, Ernesto Sábato published their major works. During
this decade there also emerged a genre that gave expression to the
heavy consciousness of dependence and the spirit of rebellion and
quest for emancipation, namely the Novelas de Guerrilla;
among which are Julio de la Vega’s Matías, el
apóstol suplente (1971, Jesús
Lara’s Ñaucahuazú, Sueños (1969,
Renato Prada Oropeza’s, Los fundadores del alba (1969),
Gaby Vallejo de Bolívar’s Los Vulnerables (1973,
Oscar Uzin Fernández’s, La oscuridad radiante
(1976). Just as these writers demonstrated how a distinct Latin
American literary tradition could be forged, the muralists
demonstrated how standards of artistic beauty that celebrated proudly
the aesthetic sensibility and creativity of the
continent. The estética indigenista (indigeneous
aesthetics) celebrates by muralists like Diego Orozco, Rivera,
Siqueiros, and painters like Frida Kahlo, created a new iconic
representation of the Latin American people that more ecumenically
reflected the continent’s mestizaje, or racial mixing
and hybridity.
 The Sociological Matrix: The Sociology of Liberation.
The fifties and sixties, as was already noted, were decades of
tremendous social-economic-political turmoil throughout Latin America.
Latin American industrialization went in tandem with massive
urbanization and de-ruralization. Extensive migrations from the
countryside to the cities gave rise to the shantytowns that are so
distinctly visible in most Latin American metropolises. Sociologist
began to address the unique challenges of de-ruralization and
urbanization. In Colombia, sociologist Orlando Fals Borda, who worked
with Colombian peasants, began to develop what he called a
“sociology of liberation” that meant to address the very
unique situation of the urban and rural poor in contexts in which the
state was nearly absent. Fals Borda studied in particular the ways in
which the poor created their own institutions and norms of social
interaction. Combined with the theory of dependence, the sociology of
liberation, created an interdisciplinary matrix that sought to address
the conditions of systemic inequity, while raising the norm that
people could be the agents of their own liberation.
 It is clear that both dependence and liberation were in the lips
of economists, sociologists, theologians, and writers. The philosophy
of liberation gave expression in concepts what was clearly a lived
historical reality.
3. Currents
Like existentialism, hermeneutics, phenomenology, and
poststructuralism, the philosophy of liberation was never a
homogeneous or monolithic movement. From its inception the philosophy
of liberation was marked by internal tensions, which over time have
become more intense, but that have also led to philosophical
developments that have taken the original theses to new levels of
refinement and theoretical elaboration. Cerutti Guldberg, who has
written the most substantive and comprehensive study of liberation
philosophy, has offered a typology of the internal currents that names
four different currents (Cerutti Guldberg 1983, 1988–9,
2006). Beorlegui, writing more recently, argues that there are in fact
six currents, though he accepts Cerutti Guldberg’s four as being
the core and originating current (Beorlegui 2004:
695–727). These four currents will now be discussed
sequentially.
3.1 The Ontologicist
This current is generally associated with Mario Casalla, Carlos
Cullen, Gunther Rodolfo Kush, and Amelia Podetti. According to these
thinkers, a Latin American philosophy of liberation has to begin from
the ontological situation of the American people, which has a distinct
relationship to being. This distinct relationship to being is
expressed in the two forms of the verb “to be” in
Spanish: ser (to be) and estar (to be in). Authentic
Latin American philosophy begins from the estar of the
American people in its own being. At the same time, everything that is
either European or North American has to be rejected as manifestations
of a philosophy of oppression and philosophical hegemony. This new
philosophy that breaks with the past and everything that is allegedly
foreign must break with the “ontological dependence” that
has been suffered by Latin American in different ways. This current
rejects as much European liberalism, as a form of abstract
individualism, and Marxism, as a form of economic and inorganic
collectivism. It calls for a form of populism that is neither
nationalistic nor class oriented. Instead, “el
pueblo” is considered as an ontological entity, a community
of fate, and organic unity that is a pure manifestation of a being-in
that assumes distinct cultural characteristics. This
“pueblo” is not the nation, but the
American mestizo and Amerindian. It is for this reason that
Cerutti Guldberg also refers to this current as a manifestation of
“anti-historicist populism” (Cerutti Guldberg
1988–9: 46.
3.2 The Analectical
This current is associated with Enrique Dussel and Juan Carlos
Scannone. Like the ontologicist, the analectical also presents itself
as a critique of both Eurocentrism and North American
neo-colonialism. It presents itself as a critique of modernity,
conceived as a colonial and imperial ideology that has
“encubierto” or concealed what is distinctly
Latin American. More generally, however, the analectical current
articulates itself as a metaphysical critique of the thinking of the
totality, of all that is thought in terms of being, the whole that is
postulated as the true. At the same time, it also argues that
philosophy must “depart” or “locate” itself
with reference to both a subject and object of philosophizing. This
subject and object is also “el pueblo”, or the
people.
 In contrast to the ontologicist position, however, the people is
not understood ontologically, but metaphysically, or more precisely
analectically, (derived from “ana” or beyond, in
contrast to “dia” or through and between). This
strand of the philosophy of liberation aims to overhaul all of
philosophy by subsuming all Western philosophy under the logic of the
thinking of ontology and the dialectical totality that is always
self-referential, from Aristotle and Plato, to Hegel, Marx and
Habermas.
 For philosophers in the analectical current, the authentic people
is what is always outside the totality. Its form of being cannot be
determined once and for all. It is at a given time, as it gives
expression to its quest for justice that has left its own legacy and
memory of struggle. However, its continuing quest for justice and the
redress of past sufferings remain undetermined and unaccounted for. If
for the ontologicist current the role of the philosopher is to guide
the people to recognize its own deep and unsuspected wisdom, for the
analectical philosopher the role of philosopher is one that is focused
on being attentive to the clamoring, or “interpellations”,
of the people, so that he or she can give voice to their cry for
justice. That said, it must also be noted that both Dussel and
Scannone have moved beyond many of these ideas, as they were first
formulated in the early seventies (Dussel 1998, 2007; Scannone
1990). To this extent the analectical denomination may be already
anachronistic. While Scannone, remaining faithful to his Levinasian
philosophical commitments, has turned towards the development of
“inter-cultural philosophy”, Dussel’s engagement
with Karl-Otto Apel and Juergen Habermas has led him to develop a more
dialectical philosophy of liberation that has made the linguistic and
pragmatic turns (Vallega 2014).
3.3 The Historicist
This current is associated with the work of Horacio Cerutti
Guldberg, Arturo Roig, Arturo Ardao, and Leopoldo Zea. Like the
“problematizing” current (see below), it presents itself
as a critique of the two prior tendencies.  These thinkers argue that
it is neither possible nor desirable to set out from some absolute
unsoiled and authentic point of departure.  Instead, they argue that
we are always already immersed in a history of ideas, and the task is
thus to think the experience of Latin America from out its distinct
history as it has been already thought. Indeed, a lot of the work the
thinkers in this current have done is to engage in a rigorous
reconstruction of the history of ideas in Latin America, to see their
emergence out of unique process of social transformation, and their
continued dialogue and confrontation across the decades and
centuries. This history of ideas in Latin America has also been
presented as part of the project of political emancipation. It is for
this reason that the historical antecedents of Latin American
philosophy cannot be dismissed, for they are also part of a history of
the forging of political freedom in the subcontinent.
3.4 The Problematicizing
This current is associated with the work of Horacio Cerutti
Guldberg, José Severino Croatto, Manuel Ignacio Santos, and Gustavo
Ortiz. Cerutti Guldberg has also argued that Salazar Body and Hugo
Assmann ought to be considered as contributing to this current. For
this group of thinkers, the criteria of philosophy’s efficacy or
relevance cannot be authenticity, or how it relates or departs from
some “null” point of enunciation that either responds to
or is an interpellation of some “macro” subject. For this
current, the question is what could constitute a critical reflection,
without fetishes or mystifications, on the demanding crises and
challenges of Latin American social reality. Unlike the ontologizing
and the analectical currents, both the historicizing and the
problematicizing reject all ontological or metaphysical attempts to
fix “el pueblo” or what is properly “Lo
Americano”, (that is, what properly belong to the
“Americas”). Philosophy is caught in the river of history,
it cannot jump out of, or pretend that a “rupture” with
the past can be executed or proclaimed. For this group of thinkers,
the critical issues were twofold. First, how does philosophy respond
to a specific set of historical challenges, without falling pray to
the ideological prejudices that condition that presentation of that
very historical? Second, what is the language that will allow that
philosophical reflection to remain ever vigilant?
 Notwithstanding these substantive and often time irreconcilable
differences, the philosophy of liberation has been recognized as an
extremely important and representative philosophical movement that
synthesized and responded to distinctly Latin American intellectual
traditions and historical challenges. In nearly half a century, other
figures have aligned themselves with the movement, even if they were
not part of the founding cohort.
 This is the case with Franz Hinkelammert, who was born in Germany
in 1931, and was educated in the Free University in Berlin. In 1963,
he emigrated to Latin America, first to Chile and then to Costa Rica,
where along with Hugo Assmann, he funded the Departamento
Ecuménico de Investigaciones (DEI). His original training was
in economics, but over the last four decades he has produced a series
of influential books dealing with the relationship between theology,
economics, and philosophy. His work takes up liberation theology, but
from the perspective of political economy and aims to show that the
theology of liberation’s critique of religious idolatry are
matched by Marxism’s critique of the fetish of the commodity
form and exploitation. Hinkelammert has also produced a series of
monographs aimed at the critique of neoliberalism. Still, what he has
contributed is what he calls the Crítica de la razón
utópica (Critique of Utopian Reason) (1984), which is
operative as much in Marxism as it is in liberalism. To counter
unrealizable utopian projects, Hinkelammert introduced the principle
of “factibilidad” or feasibility, as criteria for
the evaluation of the ethicalness or morality of any transformative
moral-political project.
 Another figure that has contributed to the further refinement of
the philosophy of philosophy, mostly through his students, is the
Jesuit theologian Ignacio Ellacuría, born in 1930 in Viscaya,
Spain. He was a student of Karl Rahner and Xavier Zubiri. He moved to
El Salvador, to teach at the Universidad Centroamericana (UCA), where
he became rector in 1969, a position he led until 1989 when he was
assassinated by paramilitary forces trained by the United States
military.
 Ellacuría worked closely with the Spanish philosopher Zubiri,
whose work aimed to overcome the separation between epistemology and
ontology, knower and known, through the notion of what he called
“sentient intelligence”, or
“feeling logos”. Ellacuría took up Zubiri’s
ontological work and transformed it into a philosophy of
history. Reality is historical and thus it is dynamic. Dynamic
historical reality is where subjects are formed, but they are also the
ones that make historical reality transformative because of
their praxis, their practical engagement with the
world. The praxis of human, however, is also always the
expansion of the horizon of action. Praxis gives rise to more
possibilities for engagement historical reality. The telos
of praxis is thus greater liberty. His incomplete magnum
opus Filosofía de la realidad histórica (1991) aimed to
develop a philosophy of history that celebrated the “historical
intelligence” that is the sediment of praxical beings taking
charge of their historical reality that aims at greater liberty. It is
to be noted that Ellacuría’s philosophy of history and
“feeling logos” have been most effectively taken
up in Dussel’s most recent work on the ethics and politics of
liberation, which is one reason that, as was noted above, the
“analectical” designator may no longer be a useful
denomination for a current that has been influenced so profoundly by
recent developments in Latin American philosophy (Dussel
1998, 2007).
4. Themes and Debates
Philosophical currents have distinct profiles not only because of
the theses that define their methods and approaches, but also because
of the themes and problems that remain their preoccupations despite
changes and the incorporation of new methods and theses. The
philosophy of liberation has since its inception taken up the
following themes.
 The question of populism. At the heart of the philosophy
of liberation is the problem of the historical subject of
liberation. This problem has been addressed in terms of the idea of
the “pueblo” or people. Yet, this has been
defined in a variety of ways: as an ethnocultural historical
formation; as a socio-economic entity; as a cultural entity that
transcends both nations and classes; as what is to be forged through a
democratic political project. The problem of what or who is the
“people” has taken on a new urgency as new forms of
democratic participation have emerged, and as Latin American nations
find themselves more integrated economically and politically due to
hemispheric transformations. The political transformations of the last
decade throughout Latin America, away from revolutionary violence and
towards political participation, have been addressed in terms of the
need to rethink the issues of political representation and
participation.
 The question of the subject. This problem is the other
side of the question about the historical subject of liberation. What
is the relationship between the individual subject, whether it be
conceive as an epistemic or ethical agent, and their belonging to a
macro-historical subject, where this may be conceived as “el
pueblo” that is either a national-cultural unit, or a
transnational, cultural entity, such as the “Americas”. As
a chapter in phenomenological-hermeneutical philosophy, the philosophy
liberation has addressed the nature of the particular and distinct
embodied, free, historically located, and dependent subject. The
embodied and historical situatedness of the agent is continuously
addressed from the standpoint of the most deprived and most vulnerable
in the collective historical subject that is always under
question.
 The question of utopia. As a philosophical movement
defined by the quest for liberation, the philosophy of liberation has
had to always address the question of the role of utopia in energizing
individual and social movements. The question of utopia, however, is
the problem of the collective imaginary that projects goals that will
guide transformative movements. Yet, at the same time, such
transformative imaginaries are criticized because of their lack of
feasibility or operability.
 The question of history. The significance of history is a
problematic that threads the entire current and tradition of the
philosophy of liberation, not only because “dependency”
and “liberation” are understood as historical issues, but
because the very project of liberation is to be undertaken from within
history. Indeed, even in its most “ontological” and
“analectical” versions, the philosophy of liberation is
always addressing the historical character of human existence.
Collectively, philosophers of liberation affirm that historical
indexicality of freedom, that is, that human freedom cannot be
understood in the abstract, but only against a very specific
historical conditions that are material because they take the form of
socio-political institutions. For philosophers liberation, human
liberty must be embodied and material precisely because it is part of
a dynamic historical reality.
 The question of democracy and social order. The
philosophy of liberation was defined as much by its resistance to all
forms of authoritarianism as by the persecution that many of its
philosophers suffered at the hands of dictators and authoritarian
political figures.  In its early years question of democracy,
legitimacy and legality were subordinate to the metaphysical and
ontological questions of the subject of historical
emancipation. However, over the last two decades, the political future
of Latin American has become a more pressing issue. The quest for
national sovereignty and liberation from Euroamerican imperialism is
now framed in terms of ethnoracial democracies and the greater
participation of sectors of the Latin American people that were either
excluded or entirely ignored during the processes of national
independence and national-state formation. In the first
decades of the twenty-first century, philosophers
of liberation think of themselves as contributing to the elaboration
of what has been called “multicultural” democracy, and in
this way, more historically inflected and less
“ontological” notions of “el pueblo”
are being embraced and developed.
 To close, like most vibrant and still alive currents in world
philosophy, the philosophy of liberation has been contributing to
three key issues that are vital to all philosophy in general, namely:
the question of meaning, i.e., how we produce, reproduce and transmit
historically produced meaning across a variety of semiological and
hermeneutical practices. This is the general question of how humans
continue to communicate across time, even when their basic conditions
of the production of world-views has radically altered. In tandem, the
philosophy of liberation, which began partly as a challenge to a
certain historiography of ideas in Latin America, continues to raise
the question of how we write the history of philosophy, for whom and
for what purposes, in such a way that we surrender to neither
ideological distortions nor naïve purisms, neither Eurocentrism nor
thirdworldism. Finally, like all transformative and enduring
philosophical movements, the philosophy of liberation has since its
inception articulated itself as a metaphilosophical reflection, i.e.,
as a philosophy that reflects on its own practice and what merits the
dignity of being called philosophy tout court (Vallega
2014).