Many of the doctrines central to Christianity have important
philosophical implications or presuppositions. In this article, we
begin with a brief general discussion of the relationship between
philosophy and Christian dogma, and then we turn our attention to
three of the most philosophically challenging Christian doctrines: the
trinity, the incarnation, and the atonement. We take these three as
our focus because, unlike (for example) doctrines about providence or
the attributes of God, these are distinctive to Christian theology
and, unlike (for example) the doctrine of original sin or the Real
Presence of Christ in the eucharist, these have been the subject of a
great deal of discussion over the past couple of decades.
 
1. Philosophy and Christian Theology


In the history of Christian theology, philosophy has sometimes been seen as 
a natural complement to theological reflection, whereas at other times 
practitioners of the two disciplines have regarded each other as 
mortal enemies. Some early Christian thinkers such as Tertullian were
of the view that any intrusion of secular philosophical reason into 
theological reflection was out of order. Thus, even if certain 
theological claims seemed to fly in the face of the standards of 
reasoning defended by philosophers, the religious believer should not
flinch. Other early Christian thinkers, such as St. Augustine of 
Hippo, argued that philosophical reflection complemented theology, 
but only when these philosophical reflections were firmly grounded in
a prior intellectual commitment to the underlying truth of the 
Christian faith. Thus, the legitimacy of philosophy was derived from 
the legitimacy of the underlying faith commitments.


Into the High Middle Ages, Augustine's views were widely defended. It
was during this time however that St. Thomas Aquinas offered yet
another model for the relationship between philosophy and theology.
According to the Thomistic model, philosophy and theology are distinct
enterprises, differing primarily in their intellectual starting
points. Philosophy takes as its data the deliverances of our natural
mental faculties: what we see, hear, taste, touch, and smell. These
data can be accepted on the basis of the reliability of our natural
faculties with respect to the natural world. Theology, on the other
hand takes as its starting point the divine revelations contained in
the Bible. These data can be accepted on the basis of divine
authority, in a way analogous to the way in which we accept, for
example, the claims made by a physics professor about the basic facts
of physics.


On this way of seeing the two disciplines, if at least one of the 
premises of an argument is derived from revelation, the argument 
falls in the domain of theology; otherwise it falls into philosophy's
domain. Since this way of thinking about philosophy and theology 
sharply demarcates the disciplines, it is possible in principle that 
the conclusions reached by one might be contradicted by the other. 
According to advocates of this model, however, any such conflict must
be merely apparent. Since God both created the world which is 
accessible to philosophy and revealed the texts accessible to 
theologians, the claims yielded by one cannot conflict with the 
claims yielded by another unless the philosopher or theologian has 
made some prior error.


Since the deliverances of the two disciplines must then coincide,
philosophy can be put to the service of theology (and perhaps
vice-versa). How might philosophy play this complementary role?
First, philosophical reasoning might persuade some who do not accept
the authority of purported divine revelation of the claims contained
in religious texts. Thus, an atheist who is unwilling to accept the
authority of religious texts might come to believe that God exists on
the basis of purely philosophical arguments. Second, distinctively
philosophical techniques might be brought to bear in helping the
theologian clear up imprecise or ambiguous theological claims. Thus,
for example, theology might provide us with information sufficient to
conclude that Jesus Christ was a single person with two natures, one
human and one divine, but leave us in the dark about exactly how this
relationship between divine and human natures is to be understood.
The philosopher can provide some assistance here, since, among other
things, he or she can help the theologian discern which models are
logically inconsistent and thus not viable candidates for
understanding the relationship between the divine and human natures in
Christ.


For most of the twentieth century, the vast majority of English
language philosophy—including philosophy of religion—went
on without much interaction with theology at all. While there are a
number of complex reasons for this divorce, three are especially
important. 


The first reason is that atheism was the predominant opinion among
English language philosophers throughout much of that century. A
second, quite related reason is that philosophers in the twentieth
century regarded theological language as either meaningless, or, at
best, subject to scrutiny only insofar as that language had a bearing
on religious practice. The former belief (i.e., that theological
language was meaningless) was inspired by a tenet of logical
positivism, according to which any statement that lacks empirical
content is meaningless. Since much theological language, for example,
language describing the doctrine of the Trinity, lacks empirical
content, such language must be meaningless. The latter belief,
inspired by Wittgenstein, holds that language itself only has meaning
in specific practical contexts, and thus that religious language was
not aiming to express truths about the world which could be subjected
to objective philosophical scrutiny. 


A third reason is that a great many academic theologians also became
skeptical of our ability to think and speak meaningfully about God;
but, rather than simply abandon traditional doctrines of Christianity,
many of them turned away from more “metaphysical” and
quasi-scientific ways of doing theology, embracing instead a variety
of alternative construals and developments of these
doctrines—including, but not limited to, metaphorical,
existentialist, and postmodern construals. This, we might add, seems
to be one reason why the methodological rift between so-called
“analytic” and “non-analytic” philosophers has
to some extent been replicated as a rift between analytic philosophers
of religion and their counterparts in theology.


In the last forty years, however, philosophers of religion have
returned to the business of theorizing about many of the traditional
doctrines of Christianity and have begun to apply the tools of
contemporary philosophy in ways that are somewhat more eclectic than
what was envisioned under the Augustinian or Thomistic models. In
keeping with the recent academic trend, contemporary philosophers of
religion have been unwilling to maintain hard and fast distinctions
between the two disciplines. As a result, it is often difficult in
reading recent work to distinguish what the philosophers are doing
from what the theologians (and philosophers) of past centuries
regarded as strictly within the theological domain.  Indeed,
philosophers and theologians alike are now coming to use the term
“analytic theology” to refer to theological work that aims
to explore and unpack theological doctrines in a way that draws on the
resources, methods, and relevant literature of contemporary analytic
philosophy.  The use of this term reflects the heretofore largely
unacknowledged reality that the sort of work now being done under the
label “philosophical theology” is as
much theology as it is philosophical.


In what follows, we provide a brief survey of work on the three topics
in contemporary philosophical theology that—aside from general
issues concerning the nature, attributes, and providence of
God—have received the most attention from philosophers of
religion over the past quarter century. We thus leave aside such
staple topics in philosophy of religion as traditional arguments for
the existence of God, the problem of evil, the epistemology of
religious belief, the nature and function of religious language. We
also leave aside a variety of important but less-discussed topics in
philosophical theology, such as the nature of divine revelation and
scripture, original sin, the authority of tradition, and the
like. (For discussions of work falling under some of these topics, see
the Related Entries section below, as well as the works under the
“General” heading in the bibliography.)
2. Trinity


From the beginning, Christians have affirmed the claim that there is
one God, and three persons—Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit—each of whom is God. In 675 C.E., the Council of Toledo
framed this doctrine as follows:
Although we profess three persons we do not profess three
substances but one substance and three persons … If we
are asked about the individual Person, we must answer that he is God.
Therefore, we may say God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Spirit; but they are not three Gods, he is one God … Each single
Person is wholly God in himself and … all three persons together
are one God.


Cornelius Plantinga, Jr., reflecting on the Council of Toledo's
formulation, remarks that it “possesses great puzzling
power” (Plantinga 1989, 22). No doubt this is an
understatement. The doctrine of the trinity is deeply puzzling, and it
is so in a way that has led some of Christianity's critics to claim
that it is outright incoherent. Indeed, it looks like we can derive a
contradiction from the doctrine, as follows: The doctrine states that
there is exactly one God; that the Father is God, the Son is God, and
the Spirit is God; and that Father, Son, and Spirit are distinct. Now,
‘is God’ either means ‘is identical God’ or
‘is divine’.  Either way, however, we have a problem.  If
the Father is identical to God and the Son is identical to God, then
(by the transitivity of identity) the Father is identical to the Son,
contrary to the doctrine.  On the other hand, if the Father is divine
and the Son is divine and the Father is distinct from the Son, then
there are at least two divine persons—i.e., two Gods—also
contrary to the doctrine. Either way, then, the doctrine seems
incoherent. 


This puzzle is sometimes called “the threeness-oneness
problem”, or “the logical problem of the
trinity”. At first blush, it might seem rather easy to solve.
Why not say, for example, that God is the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
in much the same way that Clark Kent is the mild-mannered friend of
Lois Lane, the biological son of Jor-El the Kryptonian, and the Man of
Steel?  Or why not say that Father, Son, and Spirit count as one God
in just the way that the various items in your shopping cart might
count as “one order”?  The answer, in short, is that the
Christian tradition has set boundaries on how the doctrine is to be
explicated, and these sorts of models fall afoul of those
boundaries. Two of the most salient “errors” to be avoided
are modalism and tritheism.  In the words of the
so-called Athanasian Creed, the doctrine of the trinity is to be
understood without either “confounding the persons” or
“dividing the substance”.  Modalism confounds the
persons. It is the view that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are mere
manifestations, modes, or roles played by the one and only God. Ruling
out modalism thus rules out analogies like the Superman analogy just
given.  Tritheism divides the substance.  It is a bit tricky (because
controversial) to say exactly what tritheism, or polytheism more
generally, is. (For discussion, see Rea 2006.) But whatever else it
might be, it is certainly implied by the view that there are three
distinct divine substances. Assuming the items in your shopping cart
count as multiple distinct substances, then, the problem with the
shopping cart analogy is that it suggests polytheism. 


In what follows, we will consider several more sophisticated models of
the trinity: the social model, the psychological model, and the
constitution model.  These do not exhaust the field of possible
solutions, but they are the ones to which the most attention has been
paid in the recent literature. (For more detailed surveys, see Rea
(2009) and, at book length, McCall (2011).)
2.1 The Social Model


Throughout the gospels, the first two persons of the trinity are
referred to as ‘Father’ and ‘Son’. This
suggests the analogy of a family, or, more generally, a society. Thus,
the persons of the trinity might be thought of as one in just the way
that the members of a family are one: they are three individual human
beings, but taken together they are a single family. Since there is no
contradiction in thinking of a family as three and one in this way,
this analogy appears to solve the problem. Those who attempt to
understand the trinity primarily in terms of this analogy are
typically called social trinitarians. This approach has been
(controversially) associated with the Eastern Church, tracing its
roots to the Cappadocian Fathers—Basil of Caesarea, his brother
Gregory of Nyssa, and their friend Gregory Nazianzen. (Until recently,
it was fairly common to distinguish “Latin” or
“Western” models of the Trinity from “Greek”
or “Eastern” models.  Against this practice, see
especially Ayres 2004 and Barnes 1995b.)  


Critics point out that if ‘familial unity’ is all there is
to trinitarian oneness, and so all that is required for monotheism,
then it is hard to see why various polytheistic systems fail to count
as versions of monotheism.  Consider, for example, the children of
Chronos in Greek mythology, of whom Zeus was the liberator.  These
children included Zeus, Hera, Ares, and a variety of other Olympian
deities—all members of a divine family.  Nobody, however, thinks
that the fact that Zeus and his siblings (nor even, say, Zeus and his
begotten daughter Athena) count in any meaningful sense as one
god. 

For this reason, social trinitarians are often quick to note that
there are other relations that hold between members of the trinity
that contribute, along with their being members of a single divine
family, to their counting as one God. Richard Swinburne, for example,
has defended a version of this view according to which the unity among
the divine persons is secured by several facts in conjunction with one
another.  First, the divine persons share all of the essential
characteristics of divinity: omniscience, omnipotence, moral
perfection, and so forth. Second, unlike the deities of familiar
polytheistic systems, their wills are necessarily harmonious, so that
they can never come into conflict with one another. Third, they stand
in a relationship of perfect love and necessary mutual
interdependence. On this sort of view, there is one God because the
community of divine persons is so closely interconnected that,
although they are three distinct persons, they nonetheless function as
if they were a single entity. One might think that if we were to
consider a group of three human persons who exhibited these
characteristics of necessary unity, volitional harmony, and love, it
would likewise be hard to regard them as entirely distinct. And that
is, of course, just the intuition that the view aims to elicit.


Still, many regard the sort of unity just described as not strong
enough to secure a respectable monotheism. Thus, some social
trinitarians have attempted to give other accounts of what unifies the
divine persons.  Perhaps the most popular such account is the
part–whole model. C.S. Lewis's version of this analogy (Lewis
1958, Bk IV, Ch 2) has it that God is “three Persons while
remaining one Being, just as a cube is six squares while remaining one
cube”. More recently, J. P. Moreland and William Lane Craig
(2003) have argued that the relation between the persons of the
Trinity can be thought of as analogous to the relation we might
suppose to obtain between the three dog-like beings that compose
Cerberus, the mythical guardian of the underworld. One might say that
each of the three heads—or each of the three souls associated
with the heads—is a fully canine individual, and yet there is
only one being, Cerberus, with the full canine nature.  Three
“persons” of a sort, and yet just one dog.

The Moreland & Craig proposal is clearly quite different from
Swinburne's and, as should be obvious, it in no way invokes the
analogy of a family or a society.  At this point, therefore, it is
natural to wonder what exactly it is that makes both proposals count
as versions of social trinitarianism.  Unfortunately, this is
a question to which self-proclaimed social trinitarians have not given
a very clear answer. Perhaps the most common answer is that
part–whole models like Moreland & Craig's resemble society
and family models simply by virtue of “starting with the
threeness in the Trinity and trying to explain the
oneness”. However, this answer is less than fully illuminating.
What is needed is some characterization of the common core underlying
the diverse views that are generally regarded as versions of social
trinitarianism. The following two theses seem to capture that core:
(i) the divine persons are not numerically the same substance, and
(ii) monotheism does not require that there be exactly one divine
substance—rather, it can be secured by the obtaining of
relations like the part—whole relation, or necessary mutual
interdependence, or some other sort of relation among numerically
distinct divine substances. Together, these two theses seem to express
the central idea underlying both the family analogy and the models
developed by Swinburne and Moreland & Craig. As explained earlier,
this core idea provides a solution to the problem of the trinity by
showing how one might deny the inference from ‘the Father is
divine, the Son is divine, and the Spirit is divine; and Father, Son,
and Spirit are distinct from one another’ to the conclusion that
there is more than one God.


Still, despite its attractions, many critics remain unsatisfied by the
Moreland & Craig proposal. One of the more serious problems is
that it is inconsistent with the Nicene Creed.  The creed opens with
“I believe in God, the Father Almighty”; but proponents of
the Moreland & Craig model cannot say this because, on their view,
God (analogous to Cerberus) is not the Father Almighty
(analogous to one of the heads, or the soul of one of the heads).
Likewise, the Creed says that Father and Son are consubstantial. This
claim is absolutely central to the doctrine of the trinity, and the
notion of consubstantiality lay at the very heart of the debates in
the 4th Century C.E. that shaped the Nicene Creed's expression of the
doctrine.  But the three souls, or centers of consciousness, of the
heads of Cerberus are not in any sense consubstantial. If they are
substances at all (which Moreland & Craig take them to be), they
are three distinct substances. 

Other versions of the part–whole model raise further worries.  A
cube, for example, is a seventh thing in addition to its six sides;
but we do not want to say that God is a fourth thing in addition to
its three parts.  The reason is that saying this forces a dilemma:
Either God is a person, or God is not. If the former, then we have a
quaternity rather than a trinity. If the latter, then we seem to
commit ourselves to claims that are decidedly anti-theistic: God
doesn't know anything (since only persons can be knowers); God doesn't
love anybody (since only persons can love); God is amoral (since only
persons are part of the moral community); and so on. Bad news either
way, then. Thus, many are motivated to seek other models.
2.2 The Psychological Model


Many theologians have looked to features of the human mind or
“psyche” to find models to help illuminate the doctrine of
the trinity. Historically, the use of psychological analogies is
especially associated with thinkers in the Latin-speaking West,
particularly from Augustine onward. Augustine himself suggested
several important analogies, as did others in the medieval Latin
tradition. However, since our focus in this article is on more
contemporary models, we will pass over these here and focus instead on
two more recently developed psychological analogies.


Thomas V. Morris has suggested that we can find an analogy for the 
trinity in the psychological condition known as multiple personality 
disorder: just as a single human being can have multiple 
personalities, so too a single God can exist in three persons 
(though, of course, in the case of God this is a cognitive virtue, 
not a defect) (Morris 1986). Others—Trenton Merricks for 
example—have suggested that we can conceive of the divine persons on 
analogy with the separate spheres of consciousness that result from 
commissurotomy(Merricks 2006). Commissurotomy is a 
procedure, sometimes used to treat epilepsy, that involves cutting 
the bundle of nerves (the corpus callosum) by which the two 
hemispheres of the brain communicate. Those who have undergone this 
procedure typically function normally in daily life; but, under 
certain kinds of experimental conditions, they display psychological 
characteristics that suggest that there are two distinct spheres of 
consciousness associated with the two hemispheres of their brain. 
Thus, according to this analogy, just as a single human can, in that 
way, have two distinct spheres of consciousness, so too a single 
divine being can exist in three persons, each of which is a distinct 
sphere of consciousness.
As with social trinitarianism, each of these analogies solves the
problem of the trinity by offering a way of denying the inference from
‘the Father is divine, the Son is divine, and the Spirit is
divine; and Father, Son, and Spirit are distinct from one
another’ to the conclusion that there is more than one God.
Moreover, both analogies seem to have this advantage over social
trinitarianism: both seem to present real-life cases in which a
single rational substance is nonetheless “divided”
into multiple personalities or centers of consciousness. Precisely
this feature of the analogies, however, also raises the spectre of
modalism.  In the case of multiple personality disorder, there is no
real temptatiom to reify the distinct personalities, to treat them as
distinct person-like beings subsisting in or as a single
substance. They are, rather, quite straightforwardly understandable as
distinct aspects of a single, albeit fragmented,
psychological subject.  Similarly in the case of the commissurotomy
analogy. It is highly unnatural to treat the distinct centers of
consciousness as distinct persons; rather, it is most plausible to
treat them as mere aspects of a single subject. Note, too, that it is
hard to see how the personalities and centers of consciousness that
figure into these analogies could be viewed as the same
substance as one another, as the doctrine of the trinity requires
us to say of the divine persons. Again, it is natural to see them
merely as distinct aspects of a single substance.  This, then, seems
to be the primary objection that proponents of these sorts of
analogies need to overcome. 
2.3 The Constitution Model


The third and final solution to the problem of the trinity that we
want to explore invokes the notion of “relative sameness.”
This is the idea that things can be the same relative to one kind of
thing, but distinct relative to another. More formally:

Relative Sameness: It is possible that there are 
x, y, F, and G such that
x is an F, y is an F, x 
is a G, y is a G, x is the same 
F as y, but x is not the same G as 
y. 


If this claim is true, then it is open to us to say that the Father, 
Son, and Holy Spirit are the same God but distinct 
persons. Notice, however, that this is all we need to make sense of 
the trinity. If the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are the same God 
(and there are no other Gods), then there will be exactly one God; 
but if they are also distinct persons (and there are only three of 
them), then there will be three persons.


The main challenge for this solution is to show that the Relative
Sameness assumption is coherent, and to show that the doctrine of the
trinity can be stated in a way that is demonstrably consistent given
the assumption of relative identity. Peter van Inwagen's work on the
trinity (1988, 2003) has been mostly concerned with addressing this
challenge.  An additional, related challenge, however, is to provide
some further explanation or analogy that can help us to see what it
might mean to say that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit stand in
the relation of ‘relative sameness’. Initially, it is not
at all clear what this might mean, for it seems that the statement
‘x is the same F as y’ means
nothing more or less than ‘x is
an F, y is an F
and x=y’, contrary to the assumption of
Relative Sameness (above).  This challenge has been undertaken by
Michael Rea and Jeffrey Brower (2005a, b; Brower 2004; Rea
2009c). Their suggestion is that reflection on cases of material
constitution (e.g., statues and the lumps of matter that constitute
them) can help us to see how two things can be the same material
object but otherwise different entities. If this is
right, then, by analogy, such reflection can also help us to see how
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit can be the same God but three different
persons.


Consider Rodin's famous bronze statue, The Thinker. It is a
single material object; but it can be truly described both as a statue
(which is one kind of thing), and as a lump of bronze (which is
another kind of thing). A little reflection, moreover, reveals that
the statue is distinct from the lump of bronze. For example, if the
statue were melted down, we would no longer have both a lump and a
statue: the lump would remain (albeit in a different shape) but
Rodin's Thinker would no longer exist. This seems to show
that the lump is something distinct from the statue, since one thing
can exist apart from another only if they're distinct. If
this is right, then this is not a case in which one thing
simply appears in two different ways, or is referred to by
two different labels.  It is, rather, a case in which two distinct
things occupy exactly the same region of space at the same time.



Most of us readily accept the idea that distinct things,
broadly construed, can occupy the same place at the same time. The
event of your sitting, for example, occupies exactly the same place
that you do when you are seated.  But we are more reluctant to say
that distinct material objects occupy the same place at the
same time.  Philosophers have therefore suggested various ways of
making sense of the phenomenon of material constitution. One way of
doing so is to say that the statue and the lump are the same
material object even though they are distinct relative to some
other kind (e.g., hylomorphic compound). The advantage of
this idea is that it allows us to say that the statue and the lump
count as one material object, thus preserving the principle of one
material object to a place. The cost, however, is that we commit
ourselves to the initially puzzling idea that two distinct
things can be the same material object.  What, we might
wonder, would it even mean for this to be true? But suppose we add
that all it means for one thing and another to be “the same
material object” is just for them to share all of their matter
in common. It is hard to see why such a claim should be objectionable;
and if it is right, then our problem is solved. The lump of bronze in
our example is clearly distinct from The Thinker, since it
can exist without The Thinker; but it also clearly shares all
the same matter in common with The Thinker, and hence, on
this view, counts as the same material object.


Likewise, then, we might say that all it means for one person and
another to be the same God is for them to do something analogous to
sharing in common all of whatever is analogous to matter in divine
beings. On this view, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are the same
God but different persons in just the way a statue and its
constitutive lump are the same material object but different
form-matter compounds. Of course, God is not material; so this
can only be an analogy. But still, it helps to provide an
illuminating account of inter-trinitarian relations, and it does so in
a way that seems (at least initially) to avoid both modalism and
polytheism.  Brower and Rea maintain that each person of the
trinity is a substance; thus, none is a mere aspect of a
substance, and so modalism is avoided.  And yet they are the same
substance; and so polytheism is avoided.


This account is not entirely free of difficulties however. It is
tempting to see the view as simply playing a verbal trick: Brower and
Rea say that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are to be counted
as one God; but since the divine Persons are fully distinct from one
another, it is natural to take the admonition to ‘count them as
one’ as nothing more than the proposal of a mere linguistic
convention.  Critics also object that this view does not directly
answer the question of how many material objects are present for any
given region, lump, or chunk. Is there an objective way of deciding
how many objects are constituted by the lump of bronze that
composes The Thinker? Are there only two things (statue and
lump) or are there many more (paperweight, battering ram, etc.)? And
if there are more, what determines how many there are? Unless we can
answer this question it is hard to know why the “divine
matter” constitutes exactly three persons (and not more).
3. Incarnation


The doctrine of the Incarnation holds that, at a time roughly two
thousand years in the past, the second person of the trinity took on
himself a distinct, fully human nature. As a result, he was a single
person in full possession of two distinct natures, one human and one
divine. The Council of Chalcedon (451 C.E.) articulates the doctrine
as follows:
We confess one and the same our Lord Jesus Christ…
the same perfect in Godhead, the same in perfect manhood, truly God and
truly man … acknowledged in two natures without confusion,
without change, without division, without separation—the
difference of natures being by no means taken away because of the
union, but rather the distinctive character of each nature being
preserved, and combining into one person and hypostasis—not
divided or separated into two persons, but one and the same Son and
only begotten God, Word, Lord Jesus Christ.


Critics have held this doctrine to be “impossible,
self-contradictory, incoherent, absurd, and even
unintelligible.” (Morris 1986: 18) The central difficulty for
the doctrine is that it seems to attribute to one person
characteristics that are not logically compatible. For example, it
seems on the one hand that human beings are necessarily created
beings, and that they are necessarily limited in power, presence,
knowledge, and so on. On the other hand, divine beings are essentially
the opposite of all those things. Thus, it appears that one person
could bear both natures, human and divine, only if such a person could
be both limited and unlimited in various ways, created and uncreated,
and so forth. And this is surely impossible.


Two main strategies have been pursued in an attempt to resolve this
apparent paradox. The first is the kenotic view. The second
is the two-minds view.  We shall take each in turn.
3.1 The Kenotic View

The kenotic view (from the Greek kenosis meaning ’to 
empty’) finds its motivation in a New Testament passage which 
claims that Christ Jesus
“…though he was in the form of God, did not
regard equality with God as something to be exploited, but emptied
himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. And
being found in human form, he humbled himself and became obedient to
the point of death…”. (Phillipians 2:6–8,
NRSV).
 
According to this view, in becoming incarnate, God the Son 
voluntarily and temporarily laid aside some of his divine attributes 
in order to take on a human nature and thus his earthly mission.


If the kenotic view is correct, then (contrary to what theists are 
normally inclined to think) properties like omnipotence, omniscience,
and omnipresence are not essential to divinity: something can remain 
divine even after putting some or all of those properties aside. The 
problem, however, is that if these properties aren't essential to 
divinity, then it is hard to see what would be essential. 
The so-called ‘omni-properties’ seem to be constitutive 
of divinity; they are the properties in terms of which divinity is 
defined. If we say that something can be divine while lacking those 
properties, then we lose all grip on what it means to be divine. 


One might respond to this worry by saying that the only property that
is essential to divine beings as such is the property being
divine. This reply, however, makes divinity out to be a
primitive, unanalyzable property. Critics like John Hick (1993: 73)
complain that such a move makes divinity out to be unacceptably
mysterious. Alternatively, one might simply deny that any
properties are necessary for divinity. It is widely held in the
philosophy of biology, for example, that there are no properties
possession of which are jointly necessary andsufficient for membership
in, say, the kind humanity.  Moreover, it is very hard to
find any interesting properties—apart from properties like
‘having mass’ or ‘being an organism'—that are
even merely necessary for being human. That is, it seems that for any
(interesting) property you might think of as partly definitive of
humanity, there are or could be humans who lack that property. Thus,
many philosophers think that membership in the kind is determined
simply by family resemblance to paradigm examples of the
kind. Something counts as human, in other words, if, and only if, it
shares enough of the properties that are
typical of humanity. If we were to say the same thing about 
divinity, there would be no in-principle objection to the idea that 
Jesus counts as divine despite lacking omniscience or other 
properties like, perhaps, omnipotence, omnipresence, or even perfect 
goodness. One might just say that he is knowledgeable, powerful, and 
good enough that, given his other attributes, he bears the 
right sort of family resemblance to the other members of the Godhead 
to count as divine.


Some have offered more refined versions of the kenotic theory, arguing
that the basic view mischaracterizes the divine attributes.  According
to these versions of the kenotic view, rather than attribute to God
properties like ommniscience, omipotence, and the like, we should
instead say that God has properties like the following: being
omniscient-unless-temporarily-and-freely-choosing-to-be-otherwise,
being
omnipotent-unless-temporarily-and-freely-choosing-to-be-otherwise, and
so forth. These latter sorts of properties can be retained without
contradiction even when certain powers are laid aside. In this way,
then, Jesus can divest himself of some of his powers to become fully
human while still remaining fully divine. (Feenstra, 1989: 128–152)
Unfortunately, however, this response only raises a further question,
namely: if Christ's incarnation required his temporarily surrendering
omniscience, then his later exaltation must have involved continued
non-omniscience or the loss of his humanity. However, Christians have
typically argued that the exalted Christ is omniscient while retaining
his humanity. It is hard to see how this view can respond to such an
objection. (But for one response see Feenstra 2007: 539).


Moving away from the standard version of the kenotic theory, some 
philosophers and theologians endorse views according to which it only
seems as if Christ lacked divine attributes like omniscience, 
omnipotence, and so on. Views according to which it simply seems to 
us (ordinary human beings) as if he lacks those attributes are called
“krypsis” accounts of the incarnation. They are views according to 
which the apparent loss of divine attributes is only pretense or 
illusion. Among other things, this raises the concern that the 
incarnation is somehow a grand deception, thus casting doubt on 
Christ's moral perfection. More acceptable, then, are views according
to which it somehow seems even to Christ himself as if 
certain divine attributes which he actually possesses have been laid 
aside. On this view, the loss of omniscience, omnipotence, and so on 
is only simulated. Christ retains all of the traditional divine 
attributes.  But from his point of view it is, nevertheless, as if 
those attributes are gone. A view like this might be characterized as
positing a “functional kenosis.” (Cf. Crisp 2007, Ch. 2.)


One concern that might be raised with respect to the doctrine of
functional kenosis is that it is hard to see how a divine being could
possibly simulate (to himself, without outright pretense) the loss of
attributes like omniscience or omnipotence. But perhaps the resources
for addressing this worry are to be found in what is now widely seen
as the main rival to the traditional kenotic theory: Thomas
V. Morris's “two minds view.”
3.2 The Two Minds View


Morris (1986) develops the two minds view in two steps, one defensive, the 
other constructive. First, Morris claims that the incoherence charge 
against the incarnation rests on a mistake. The critic assumes that, 
for example, humans are essentially non-omniscient. But what are the 
grounds for this assertion? Unless we think that we have some special
direct insight into the essential properties of human nature, our 
grounds are that all of the human beings we have encountered have 
that property. But this merely suffices to show that the property is 
common to humans, not that it is essential. As Morris points out, it 
may be universally true that all human beings, for example, were born
within ten miles of the surface of the earth, but this does not mean 
that this is an essential property of human beings. An offspring of 
human parents born on the international space station would still be 
human. If this is right, the defender of the incarnation can reject 
the critic's characterization of human nature, and thereby eliminate 
the conflict between divine attributes and human nature so 
characterized.


This merely provides a way to fend off the critic, however, without 
supplying any positive model for how the incarnation should be 
understood. In the second step, then, Morris proposes that we think 
about the incarnation as the realization of one person with two 
minds: a human mind and a divine mind. If possession of a human mind 
and body is sufficient for something's being human, then 
“merging” the divine mind with a human mind and 
conjoining both to a human body will yield one person with two 
natures. During his earthly life, Morris proposes, Jesus Christ had 
two minds, with consciousness centered in the human mind. This human 
mind had partial access to the contents of the divine mind, while God
the Son's divine mind had full access to the corresponding human 
mind.


The chief difficulty this view faces concerns the threat of
Nestorianism (the view, formally condemned by the Church, that there
are two persons in the incarnate Christ).  It is natural simply to
identify persons with minds—or, at the very least, to assume
that the number of minds equals the number of persons.  If we go with
such very natural assumptions, however, the two minds view leads
directly to the view that the incarnation gives us two persons,
contrary to orthodoxy. Moreover, one might wonder whether taking the
two minds model seriously leads us to the view that Christ suffers
from something like multiple personality disorder.  In response to
both objections, however, one might note that contemporary psychology
seems to provide resources which support the viability of the two
minds model. As Morris points out elsewhere, the human mind is
sometimes characterized as a system of somewhat autonomous
subsystems. The normal human mind, for example, includes (on these
characterizations) both a conscious mind (the seat of awareness) and
an unconscious mind. It does not really matter for present purposes
whether this psychological story is correct; the point is
just that it seems coherent, and seems neither to involve multiple
personality nor to imply that what seems to be a single subject is, in
reality, two distinct persons.  Morris proposes, then, that similar
sorts of relations can be supposed to obtain between the divine and
human mind of Christ.
4. Atonement

Traditional Christianity maintains that human beings are subject to
death and eternal separation from God as a result of their sinfulness,
but that they can be saved from this condition somehow as a result of
what we might refer to as “the work of Jesus”, which work
includes at least his suffering and death on the cross, and perhaps
also his sinless life, resurrection, and ascension.  The so-called
‘theories of the atonement’ are theories about how the
work of Jesus contributes to human salvation.


First, a brief note about terminology.  We have used the term
‘theories of the atonement’ here because that is the term
most commonly used in the philosophical literature on this topic, and
it is a term often enough used in theology as well. But it is not a
neutral term. Rather, it already embodies a partial theory about what
human salvation involves and about what the work of Christ
accomplishes.  In particular, it presupposes that saving human beings
from death and separation from God primarily involves atoning for
sin rather than (say) delivering human beings from some kind of
bondage, repairing human nature, or something else. In the New
Testament we find various terms and phrases (in addition to
‘salvation’) used to characterize or describe what the
work of Jesus accomplished on behalf of humanity—e.g.,
justification, redemption or ransom, reconciliation, deliverance from
sin, re-creation or rebirth, the offering of an atoning sacrifice,
abundant life, and eternal life. Obviously these terms are not all
synonymous; so part of the task of an overall theology of
salvation—a soteriology—is to sort out the relations among
these various terms and phrases (is salvation simply to be identified
with eternal life, for example?), to determine which are to be taken
literally and which are mere metaphors, and to explain which
effects have been brought about by Jesus' life, which by his death,
which by his resurrection, and so on. In light of all this, some
theologians and philosophers deliberately avoid talking about
‘theories of the atonement’ and talk instead about (e.g.)
‘the theology of reconciliation’ or theories about
‘the redemption’, etc. That said, however, we do not
ourselves intend to advocate on behalf of any particular
terminology. Instead, we simply note the issue and move on, retaining
the language of ‘atonement’, but without intending to
prejudge questions about what is primarily accomplished by the work of
Christ.

In what follows, we shall discuss only three of the most well-known
and widely discussed theories (or families of theories) about what the
work of Jesus accomplishes on behalf of human beings. All take the
suffering and death of Jesus to be an integral part of his work on our
behalf; but the first theory holds Jesus' resurrection and ascension
also to be absolutely central to that work, and the second theory
holds his sinless life to be of near-equal importance.  Discussing
these theories under three separate headings as we do below may foster
the illusion that what we have are three mutually exclusive
views, each marking off a wholly distinct camp in the history of
soteriological theorizing, and each aiming to provide a full
accounting of what Jesus' work contributes to human salvation from
death and separation from God.  As we have already indicated, however,
a variety of terms and images are used in the Bible to characterize
what Jesus accomplished and, in contrast with the doctrines of the
trinity and incarnation, we do not have for the doctrine of salvation
an ecumenical conciliar prononouncement (i.e., a pronouncement from a
Church Council whose authority will be recognized by the Roman
Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant churches alike) that tells us how
exactly we are to understand the images and events that are generally
associated with salvation. Consequently, it is no surprise that many
thinkers appropriate imagery from more than one of the theories
described below (or others besides) to explain their understanding of
the nature and efficacy of Jesus' work.
4.1 The Ransom Theory


The ransom theory, also known as the Christus Victor theory
is generally regarded as the dominant theory of the Patristic period, and has been attributed to such early Church Fathers as Origen, Athanasius, and especially Gregory of Nyssa. (One might question, however, whether any of these theologians ever intended to offer the ransom story about to be described as a theory of the atonement, rather than simply an extended metaphor. What does seem clear, however, is that they at least intended to emphasize victory over sin, death, and so on as one of the principle salvific effects of the work of Christ.) The theory was revived more recently by Gustaf Aulén (1931), and was given popular expression in C.S. Lewis's The Lion, The Witch, and the Wardrobe. 

The ransom theory takes as its point of departure the idea that human beings are in a kind of bondage to sin, death, and the Devil. The basic view, familiar enough now from
literature and film, is that God and the Devil are in a sort of
competition for souls, and the rules of the competition state that
anyone stained by sin must die and then forever exist as the Devil's
prisoner in hell. As the view is often developed, human sin gives the
Devil a legitimate right to the possession of human souls. Thus, much
as God loves us and would otherwise desire for us never to die and,
furthermore, to enjoy life in heaven with him, the sad fact is that
we, by our sins, have secured a much different destiny for
ourselves.


But here is where the work of Christ is supposed to come in. According
to the ransom view, it would be unfitting for God simply to violate
the pre-ordained rules of the competition and snatch our souls out of
the Devil's grasp. But it is not at all unfitting for God to pay the
Devil a ransom in exchange for our freedom. Christ's death is that
ransom. By living a sinless life and then dying like a sinner, Christ
pays a price that, in the eyes of all parties to the competition,
earns back for God the right to our souls, and thus effects a great
triumph over the Devil, sin, and death.  
4.2 The Moral Exemplar Theory


The moral exemplar theory, pioneered by Peter Abelard, holds that the
work of Christ is fundamentally aimed at bringing about moral and
spiritual reform in the sinner—a kind of reform that is not
fully possible apart from Christ's work. The Son of God became
incarnate, on this view, in order to set this example and thus provide
a necessary condition for the moral reform that is, in turn, necessary
for the full restoration of the relationship between creature and
Creator.  On this picture, Jesus' sinless life is as much a part of
his soteriologically relevant work as his suffering and death on the
cross.

Thus far, it may sound as if the exemplar theory says
that all there is to the efficacy of Jesus' life and death
for salvation is the provision of a fine example for us to imitate.
According to Philip L. Quinn (1993), however, to present the theory
this way is simply to caricature it.  According to Quinn, the dominant
motif in Abelard's exemplar theory is one according to which human
moral character is, in a very robust sense transformed by
Christ's love.  He writes: 
My suggestion is that what Abelard has to contribute to
our thinking about the atonement is the idea that divine love, made
manifest throughout the life of Christ but especially in his suffering
and dying, has the power to transform human sinners, if they
cooperate, in ways that fit them for everlasting life in intimate
union with God. ... On [this] view, the love of God for us exhibited
in the life of Christ is a good example to imitate, but it is not
merely an example.  Above and beyond its exemplary value, there is in
it a surplus of mysterious causal efficacy that no merely human love
possesses.  And the operation of divine love in that supernatural mode
is a causally necessary condition of there being implanted or kindled
in us the kind of responsive love of God that, as Abelard supposes,
enables us to do all things out of love and so to conquer the motives
that would otherwise keep us enslaved to sin.

In Quinn's hands, then, the exemplar theory is one according to which
the life and death of Christ do indeed provide an example for us to
imitate--and an example that plays an important role in effecting the
transformation that will make us fit for fellowship with God.  But, in
contrast to the usual caricature of that theory, the exemplary nature
of Christ's love does not exhaust its transformative power.
4.3 Satisfaction Theories


Satisfaction theories start from the idea that human sin constitutes a
grave offense against God, the magnitude of which renders forgiveness
and reconciliation morally impossible unless something is done either
to satisfy the demands of justice or to compensate God for the wrong
done to him. These theories go on to note that human beings are
absolutely incapable on their own of compensating God for the wrong
they have done to him, and that the only way for them to satisfy the
demands of justice is to suffer death and eternal separation from
God. Thus, in order to avoid this fate, they are in dire need of
help. Christ, through his death (and, on some versions, through his
sinless life as well) has provided that help. The different versions
of the satisfaction theory are differentiated by their claims about
what sort of help the work of Christ has provided. Here we'll discuss
three versions: St. Anselm's debt-cancellation theory, the
penal substitution theory defended by John Calvin and many others in
the reformed tradition, and the penitential substitution
theory, attributed to Thomas Aquinas and defended most recently by
Eleonore Stump and Richard Swinburne.


According to Anselm, our sin puts us in a kind of debt toward God. As
our creator, God is entitled to our submission and obedience. By 
sinning, we therefore fail to give God something that we owe him. 
Thus, we deserve to be punished until we do give God what we
owe him. Indeed, on Anselm's view, not only is it just for God to 
punish us; it is, other things being equal, unfitting for him 
not to punish us. For as long as we are not giving God his 
due, we are dishonoring him; and the dishonoring of God is maximally 
intolerable. By allowing us to get away with dishonoring him, then, 
God would be tolerating what is maximally intolerable. Moreover,
he would be behaving in a way that leaves sinners and the sinless in 
substantially the same position before him, which, Anselm thinks, is 
unseemly. But, of course, once we have sinned, it is impossible for 
us to give God the perfect life that we owe him. So we are left in 
the position of a debtor who cannot, under any circumstances, repay 
his own debt and is therefore stuck in debtor's prison for the 
remainder of his existence.


By living a sinless life, however, Christ was in a different position 
before God. He was the one human being who gave God what God was 
owed. Thus, he deserved no punishment; he did not even deserve 
death. And yet he submitted to death anyway for the sake of obeying 
God. In doing this, he gave God more than he owed God; and 
so, on Anselm's view, put God in the position of owing him 
something. According to Anselm, just as it would be unfitting for God
not to punish us, so too it would be unfitting for God not to 
reward Jesus. But Jesus, as God incarnate, has already at 
his disposal everything he could possibly need or desire. So what 
reward could possibly be given to him? None, of course. But, Anselm 
argues, the reward can be transferred; and, under the circumstances, 
it would be unfitting for God not to transfer it. Thus, the reward 
that Jesus claims is the cancellation of the collective debt of his 
friends. This allows God to pay what he owes, and it allows him to 
suffer no dishonor in failing to collect what is due him from us.


As should be clear, the notion of substitution isn't really a
part of Anselm's theory of the atonement. (Contrary to the more common
view in the liteature, Richard Cross (2001) doesn't even
take satisfaction to be part of Anselm's theory. Instead, he
characterizes Anselm's view as a ‘merit’ theory. Perhaps
he is right—the question seems to turn on whether part of what
God the Father receives in the overall transaction with Jesus is a
kind of compensation for the harm done by human sin.  Many take the
answer to be ‘yes’, and we shall not dispute that
here.)

Nevertheless, substitution is a central part of other satisfaction
theories. Thus, consider the penal substitution theory. According to
this theory, the just punishment for sin is death and separation from
God. Moreover, on this view, though God strongly desires for us not to
receive this punishment it would be unfitting for God simply to waive
our punishment. But, as in the case of monetary fines, the punishment
can be paid by a willing substitute. Thus, out of love for us, God the
Father sent the willing Son to be our substitute and to satisfy the
demands of justice on our behalf.


Richard Swinburne's (1988, 1989) version of the satisfaction theory
also includes a substitutionary element. (See also Stump 1988. The
views defended by Stump and Swinburne are quite similar, and both
attribute the same basic view to Aquinas. Here we focus on Swinburne's
development of the view.)  According to Swinburne, in human
relationships, the process of making atonement for one's sin has four
parts: apology, repentance, reparation (where possible), and (in case
of serious wrongs) penance. Thus, suppose you angrily throw a brick
through the window of a friend's house. Later, you come to seek
forgiveness. In order to receive forgiveness, you will surely have to
apologize and repent—i.e., you will have to show regret and some
sort of change of attitude toward your past behavior. You ought also
to agree to fix the broken window. Depending on the circumstance,
however, even this might not be enough. It might be that, in addition
to apologizing, repenting, and making reparations, you ought to do
something further to show that you are quite serious about your
apology and repentance. Perhaps, for example, you will send flowers
every day for a week; perhaps you will stand outside your friend's
window with a portable stereo playing a meaningful song; perhaps you
will offer some other sort of gift or sacrifice.  This something
further is penance. Importantly, penance isn't punishment:
it's not a bit of suffering that you deserve to have inflicted upon
you by someone else for the purpose of retribution, rehabilitation,
deterrence, or compensation. Rather, it's a bit of suffering that you
voluntarily undergo or a sacrifice that you voluntarily make in order
to repair your relationship with someone.


According to Swinburne, the same four components are involved in our 
reconciliation with God. Apology and repentance we can do on our own,
but reparation and penance we cannot. We owe God a life of perfect 
obedience. By sinning we have made it impossible for God to get that 
from us. If, upon apologizing to God and repenting of our sins we 
were thereafter to live a life of perfect obedience, we would only be
giving God what we already owe him; we would not thereby be giving 
back to him anything that we have taken away. Thus, our very best 
efforts would not suffice even to make reparations for what we have 
done. There is nothing we can give God to compsensate him for his 
loss, and there is no extra gift we can give or extra sacrifice we 
can make in order to do penance.


According to Swinburne, it would be unfitting for God simply to 
overlook our sins, ignoring the need for reparation and penance. It 
would also be unfitting for God to leave us in the helpless situation
of being unable to reconcile ourselves to him. Thus, on his view, God
sent Christ to earth so that Christ might willingly offer his own 
sinless life and death as restitution and penance for the sin of the 
world. In this way, then, God helps us to make restitution and 
penance. We must apologize and repent on our own; we must also 
recognize our own helplessness to make up for what we have done. But 
then we can look to the life and death of Christ and offer that up to
God on our own behalf as reparation and penance.
4.4 Objections


Although the Christus Victor theory is of historical importance and
has exerted a great deal of literary influence, it has been widely
rejected since the middle ages, in no small part because it is hard to
take seriously the idea that God might be in competition with or have
obligations toward another being (much less a being like the Devil) in
the ways described above. Critics object to the idea, which is
typically part of this view, that salvation involves a sort
of transaction between God and the Devil; they object to the
idea, present particularly in Gregory of Nyssa's version of the view,
that Christ's victory over the Devil comes partly through divine
deception (with Christ's divinity being hidden from the Devil until
after Christ's death, when he triumphantly rises from the grave); and
they sometimes also object to the reification and personification of
the forces of sin, death, and evil.  For this reason, the Abelardian
and Anselmian views have been far and away the more popular theories
for the past millenium.  But each of these remaining theories faces
its share of difficulties as well.


Penal substitutionary theories, for example, maintain that it is
morally impossible for God simply to forgive our sins without exacting
reparation or punishment. Some have argued that this entails that God
does not forgive sin at all. (Stump, 1988: 61–5) Forgiveness involves
a refusal to demand full reparation and a willingness to let an
offense go without punishment. Moreover, the penal substitution theory
faces the challenge of explaining how it could possibly be just to
allow a substitute to bear someone else's punishment. As David Lewis
(1997) notes, we do allow for penal substitution in the case of
serious fines. But the idea of allowing a substitute to bear someone
else's death sentence (or similarly serious punishment)
seems, on the face of it, to be morally repugnant. Indeed, the penal
substitution model is seen by critics to be morally offensive on
multiple counts. Objectors claim that at the heart of the model is the
image of a wrathful deity who can be appeased by violent and bloody
sacrifice, and who has made the violent death of his own incarnate Son
the necessary condition for showing love and forgiveness to his human
creatures. (Cf. Finlan 2005, 2007) On this score, Swinburne's theory
of penitential substitution is on somewhat surer footing; but
one problem with Swinburne's view is that it is hard, ultimately, to
see what it would even mean to offer up another person's life and
death as one's own reparation or penance.


The Anselmian version of the satisfaction theory does not quite
encounter these difficulties. But, together with the moral exemplar
theory and various other versions of the satisfaction theory, it faces
a different sort of problem. Both views seem unable to account for the
Biblical emphasis on the necessity of Christ's passion to remedy the
problems brought forth by sin. It is hard to see why Christ's death
plays any essential role in establishing him as moral
exemplar. Further, it is hard to see why it would be needed in order
for him to merit the sort of reward that Anselm thinks the Father owes
him. Given that Christ is a man, he owes it to the Father to live a
sinless life; but why isn't the incarnation itself sufficiently
supererogatory to merit the debt-cancelling reward? Moreover, even if
we can discover some reason why Christ's death would be necessary
under these theories, it is hard to see why it would have to involve
such horrible suffering. For purposes of meriting a reward or for
serving as an exemplar, why would it not suffice for Christ to dwell
among us, live a perfect human life resisting all earthly temptation,
and then die a quiet death at home? Indeed, these theories seem unable
to account even for the value in Christ's passion, much less its
necessity.
There are, of course, responses to these objections in the
literature; and each of the theories just discussed has had able and
prominent defenders within the past century.  Moreover, insofar as
there is no well-developed and formally recognized orthodoxy with
respect to these matters, those who remain unsatisfied with the
theories just described have populated the literature with a variety
of alternative stories about the salvific efficacy of the work of
Jesus.  Thus, even more than the other two theological loci we have
discussed in this article, the doctrine of salvation seems ripe for
substantial further research.