The growth of philosophical interest in biology over the past thirty 
years reflects the increasing prominence of the biological sciences 
in the same period. There is now an extensive literature on many 
different biological topics, and it would be impossible to summarise 
this body of work in this single entry. Instead, this entry sets out 
to explain what philosophy of biology is. Why does biology 
matter to philosophy and vice versa? A list of the entries in the 
encyclopedia which address specific topics in the philosophy of 
biology is provided at the end of the entry.


Three different kinds of philosophical enquiry fall under the general
heading of philosophy of biology. First, general theses in the 
philosophy of science are addressed in the context of biology. 
Second, conceptual puzzles within biology itself are subjected to 
philosophical analysis. Third, appeals to biology are made in 
discussions of traditional philosophical questions. The first two 
kinds of philosophical work are typically conducted in the context of
a detailed knowledge of actual biology, the third less so. 


Philosophy of biology can also be subdivided by the particular areas 
of biological theory with which it is concerned. Biology is a diverse
set of disciplines, ranging from historical sciences such as 
paleontology to engineering sciences such as biotechnology. Different
philosophical issues occur in each field. The latter part of the 
entry discusses how philosophers have approached some of the main 
disciplines within biology.
 
1. Pre-history of Philosophy of Biology


As is the case for most apparent novelties, closer inspection reveals
a prehistory for the philosophy of biology. In the 1950's the 
biologist J. H Woodger and the philosopher Morton Beckner both 
published major works on the philosophical of biology (Woodger 1952; 
Beckner 1959), but these did not give rise to a subsequent 
philosophical literature. Some philosophers of science also made 
claims about biology based on general epistemological and 
metaphysical considerations. Perhaps the most famous example is J. J.
C Smart's claim that the biology is not an autonomous science, but a 
technological application of more basic sciences, like 
‘radio-engineering’ (Smart 1959, 366). Like engineering, 
biology cannot make any addition to the laws of nature. It can only 
reveal how the laws of physics and chemistry play out in the context 
of particular sorts of initial and boundary conditions. Even in 1969 
the zoologist Ernst Mayr could complain that books with 
‘philosophy of science’ in the title were all misleading 
and should be re-titled ‘philosophy of physics’ (Mayr 
1969). The encouragement of prominent biologists such as Mayr and F.J
Ayala (Ayala 1976; Mayr 1982) was one factor in the emergence of the 
new field. The first sign of philosophy of biology becoming a 
mainstream part of philosophy of science was the publication of David
Hull's Philosophy of Biological Science in the prominent 
Prentice-Hall Foundations of Philosophy series (Hull 1974). From then
on the field developed rapidly. Robert Brandon could say of the late 
1970's that “I knew five philosophers of biology: Marjorie 
Grene, David Hull, Michael Ruse, Mary Williams and William 
Wimsatt.” (Brandon 1996, xii–xiii) By 1986, however, 
there were more than enough to fill the pages of Michael Ruse's new 
journal Biology and Philosophy. 
2. Three Types of Philosophy of Biology


Three different kinds of philosophical enquiry fall under the general
heading of philosophy of biology. First, general theses in the 
philosophy of science are addressed in the context of biology. 
Second, conceptual puzzles within biology itself are subjected to 
philosophical analysis. Third, appeals to biology are made in 
discussions of traditional philosophical questions. The first major 
debate in the philosophy of biology exemplified the first of these, 
the use of biological science to explore a general theme in 
philosophy of science. Kenneth F. Schaffner applied the logical 
empiricist model of theory reduction to the relationship between 
classical, Mendelian genetics and the new molecular genetics 
(Schaffner 1967a; Schaffner 1967b; Schaffner 1969). David Hull argued
that the lesson of this attempt was that Mendelian genetics is 
irreducible to molecular genetics (Hull 1974; Hull 1975). This debate
reinforced the near-consensus in the 1970's and 1980's that the 
special sciences are autonomous from the more fundamental sciences 
(Fodor 1974; Kitcher 1984). However, the apparent absurdity of the 
claim that the molecular revolution in biology was not a successful 
instance of scientific reduction also led the formulation of 
increasingly more adequate models of theory reduction (Wimsatt 1976; 
Wimsatt 1980; Schaffner 1993; Waters 1994; Sarkar 1998). 


In another important early debate philosophers set out to solve a 
conceptual puzzle within biology itself. The concept of reproductive 
fitness is at the heart of evolutionary theory, but its status has 
always been problematic. It has proved surprisingly hard for 
biologists to avoid the criticism that, “[i]f we try to make 
laws of evolution in the strict sense we seem to reduce to 
tautologies. Thus suppose we say that even in Andromeda ‘the 
fittest will survive’ we say nothing, for ‘fittest’
has to be defined in terms of ‘survival’” (Smart 
1959, 366). In the 1970's the new generation of philosophers of 
biology began by noting that fitness is a supervenient property of 
organisms: the fitness of each particular organism is a consequence 
of some specific set of physical characteristics of the organism and 
its particular environment, but two organisms that have identical 
levels of fitness may do so in virtue very different sets of physical
characteristics (Rosenberg 1978). Alexander Rosenberg and Mary B. 
Williams went on to argue that fitness is an irreducible primitive 
which derives its meaning from its place in an axiomatic formulation 
of evolutionary theory (Rosenberg 1983; Sober 1984a; Williams and 
Rosenberg 1985). But by far the most widely-favoured solution to the 
‘tautology problem’ was to argue that this supervenient 
property is a propensity—a probability distribution over 
possible numbers of offspring (Mills and Beatty 1979). Although 
fitness is defined in terms of reproductive success, it is not a 
tautology that the fittest organisms have the most offspring, any 
more than it is a tautology that dice produce even numbers more often
than they produce sixes. The propensities of fit organisms to survive
and of dice to fall equally often on each side both allow us to make 
fallible predictions about what will happen, predictions that become 
more reliable as the size of the sample increases. It remains 
unclear, however, whether it is possible to specify a probability 
distribution or set of distributions that can play all the roles 
actually played by fitness in population biology.


The phrase ‘conceptual puzzles’ should be understood very
broadly. The conceptual work done by philosophers of biology in many 
cases merges smoothly into theoretical biology. It also sometimes 
leads philosophers to criticise the chains of argument constructed by
biologists, and thus to enter directly into ongoing biological 
debates. In the same way, the first kind of philosophy of biology I 
have described—the use of biological examples to work through 
general issues in the philosophy of science—sometimes feeds 
back into biology itself through specific recommendations for 
improving biological methodology. It is a striking feature of the 
philosophy of biology literature that philosophers often publish in 
biology journals and that biologists often contribute to philosophy 
of biology journals. The philosophy of biology also has a potentially
important role as a mediator between biology and society. Popular 
representations of biology derive broad lessons from large swathes of
experimental findings. Philosophers of science have an obvious role 
in evaluating these interpretations of the significance of specific 
biological findings (Stotz and Griffiths 2008). 


A third form of philosophy of biology occurs when philosophers appeal
to biology to support positions on traditional philosophical topics, 
such as ethics or epistemology. The extensive literature on biological
teleology is a case in point. After a brief flurry of interest in the
wake of the ‘modern synthesis’, during which the term 
‘teleonomy’ was introduced to denote the specifically 
evolutionary interpretation of teleological language (Pittendrigh 
1958), the ideas of function and goal directedness came to be 
regarded as relatively unproblematic by evolutionary biologists. In 
the 1970's, however, philosophers started to look to biology to 
provide a solid, scientific basis for normative concepts, such as 
illness or malfunction (Wimsatt 1972; Wright 1973; Boorse 1976). 
Eventually, the philosophical debate produced an analysis of 
teleological language fundamentally similar to the view associated 
with modern synthesis biology (Millikan 1984; Neander 1991). 
According to the ‘etiological theory’ of function, the 
functions of a trait are those activities in virtue of which the 
trait was selected. The idea of ‘etiological’ or 
‘proper’ function has become part of the conceptual 
toolkit of philosophy in general and of the philosophy of language 
and the philosophy of mind in particular.
3. Philosophy of Evolutionary Biology


Philosophy of biology can also be subdivided by the particular areas 
of biological theory with which it is concerned. Until recently, 
evolutionary theory has attracted the lion's share of philosophical 
attention. This work has sometimes been designed to support a general
thesis in the philosophy of science, such as the ‘semantic 
view’ of theories (Lloyd 1988). But most of this work is 
concerned with conceptual puzzles that arise inside the theory 
itself, and the work often resembles theoretical biology as much as 
pure philosophy of science. Elliott Sober's classic study The 
Nature of Selection: Evolutionary theory in philosophical focus 
(Sober 1984b) marks the point at which most philosophers became aware
of the philosophy of biology. Sober analyzed the structure of 
explanations in population genetics via an analogy with the 
composition of forces in dynamics, treating the actual change in gene
frequencies over time as the result of several different 
‘forces’, such as selection, drift, and mutation. This 
sort of careful, methodological analysis of population genetics, the 
mathematical core of conventional evolutionary theory, continues to 
give rise to interesting results (Pigliucci and Kaplan 2006; Okasha 
2007).


The intense philosophical interest in evolutionary theory in the 
1980's can partly be explained by the controversies over 
‘sociobiology’ that were provoked by the publications of 
E.O. Wilson's eponymous textbook (Wilson 1975) and still more by 
Richard Dawkins's The Selfish Gene (Dawkins 1976). The claim
that the real unit of evolution is the individual Mendelian allele 
created an explosion of philosophical work on the ‘units of 
selection’ question (Brandon and Burian 1984) and the issue of 
‘adaptationism’ (Dupré 1987). Arguably, 
philosophers made a significant contribution to the rehabilitation of
some forms of ‘group selection’ within evolutionary 
biology in the 1990's, following two decades of neglect (Sober and 
Wilson 1998).


The debates over ‘adaptationism’ turned out to involve a 
diffuse set of worries about whether evolution produces optimal 
designs, the methodological role of optimality assumptions, and the 
explanatory goals of evolutionary theory. Philosophical work has 
helped to distinguish these strands in the debate and reduce the 
confusion seen in the heated and polemical biological literature for 
and against ‘adaptationism’ (Orzack and Sober 2001).
4. Philosophy of Systematic Biology


Philosophical discussion of systematics was a response to a 
‘scientific revolution’ in that discipline in the 1960's 
and 1970's, a revolution which saw the discipline transformed first 
by the application of quantitative methods, and then by the 
‘cladistic’ approach, which argues that the sole aim of 
systematics should be to represent the evolutionary relationships 
between groups of organisms (phylogeny). Ideas from the philosophy of
science were used to argue for both transformations, and the 
philosopher David L. Hull was an active participant in scientific 
debates throughout these two revolutions (Hull 1965; Hull 1970; Hull 
1988; see also Sober 1988).


The biologist Michael Ghiselin piqued the interest of philosophers 
when he suggested that systematics was fundamentally mistaken about 
the ontological status of biological species (Ghiselin 1974). Species
are not types of organisms in the way that chemical elements are 
types of matter. Instead, they are historical particulars like 
nations or galaxies. Individual organisms are not instances of 
species, as my wedding ring is an instance of gold. Instead, they are
parts of species, as I am a part of my family. As Smart had earlier 
noticed, this has the implication that there can be no ‘laws of
nature’ about biological species, at least in the traditional 
sense of laws true at every time and place in the universe (Smart 
1959). This has led some philosophers of biology to argue for a new 
conception of laws of nature (Mitchell 2000).


However, the view that species are ‘individuals’ leaves 
other important questions about species unsolved and raises new 
problems of its own. Around twenty different so-called ‘species
concepts’ are represented in the current biological literature,
and the merits, interrelations, and mutual consistency or 
inconsistency of these has been a major topic of philosophical 
discussion.


Biological species are one of the classic examples of a 
‘natural kind’. The philosophy of systematics has had a 
major influence on recent work on classification and natural kinds in
the general philosophy of science (Dupré 1993; Wilson 1999). 
5. Philosophy of Molecular Biology


I mentioned above that the reduction of Mendelian genetics to 
molecular genetics was one of the first topics to be discussed in the 
philosophy of biology. The initial debate between Schaffner and Hull 
was followed by the so-called ‘anti-reductionist 
consensus’ (Kitcher 1984). The reductionist position was 
revived in a series of important papers by Kenneth Waters (Waters 
1990; Waters 1994) and debate over the cognitive relationship between
the two disciplines continues today, although the question is not now
framed as a simple choice between reduction and irreducibility. 
Lindley Darden, Schaffner and others have argued that explanations in
molecular biology are not neatly confined to one ontological level, 
and hence that ideas of ‘reduction’ derived from 
classical examples like the reduction of the phenomenological gas 
laws to molecular kinematics in nineteenth century physics are simply
inapplicable (Darden and Maull 1977; Schaffner 1993). Moreover, 
molecular biology does not have the kind of grand theory based around
a set of laws or a set of mathematical models that is familiar from 
the physical sciences. Instead, highly specific mechanisms that have 
been uncovered in detail in one model organism seem to act as 
‘exemplars’ allowing the investigation of similar, 
although not necessarily identical, mechanisms in other organisms 
that employ the same, or related, molecular interactants. Darden and 
others have argued that these ‘mechanisms’—specific
collections of entities and their distinctive activities—are 
the fundamental unit of scientific discovery and scientific 
explanation, not only in molecular biology, but in a wide range of 
special sciences (Machamer, Darden et al. 2000; see also 
Bechtel and Richardson 1993).


Another important topic in the philosophy of molecular biology has 
been the definition of the gene (Beurton, Falk and Rheinberger 2000; 
Griffiths and Stotz 2007). Philosophers have also written extensively
on the concept of genetic information, the general tenor of the 
literature being that it is difficult to reconstruct this idea 
precisely in a way that does justice to the apparent weight placed on
it by molecular biologists (Sarkar 1996; Maynard Smith 2000; 
Griffiths 2001; Jablonka 2002).
6. Philosophy of Developmental Biology


The debates over ‘adaptationism’ in the 1980's made 
philosophers familiar with the complex interactions between 
explanations of traits in evolutionary biology and explanations of 
the same traits in developmental biology. Developmental biology 
throws light on the kinds of variation that are likely to be 
available for selection, posing the question of how far the results 
of evolution can be understood in terms of the options that were 
available (‘developmental constraints’) rather than the 
natural selection of those options (Maynard Smith, Burian et 
al. 1985). The debate over developmental constraints looked at 
developmental biology solely from the perspective of whether it could
provide answers to evolutionary questions. However, as Ron Amundson 
pointed out, developmental biologists are addressing questions of 
their own, and, he argued, a different concept of 
‘constraint’ is needed to address those questions 
(Amundson 1994). The emergence in the 1990's of a new field promising
to unite both kinds of explanation, evolutionary developmental 
biology, has given rise to a substantial philosophical literature 
aimed at characterizing this field from a methodological viewpoint 
(Maienschein and Laubichler 2004; Robert 2004; Amundson 2005; Brandon
and Sansom 2007). 
7. Philosophy of Ecology and Conservation Biology


Until recently this was a severely underdeveloped field in the 
philosophy of biology. This is surprising, because there is obvious 
potential for all three of the approaches to philosophy of biology 
discussed above. There is also a substantial body of philosophical 
work in environmental ethics, and it seems reasonable to suppose that
answering the questions that arise there would require a critical 
examination of ecology and conservation biology. In fact, an 
important book which sought to provide just those 
underpinnings—Kristin Shrader-Frechette and Earl McCoy's 
Method in Ecology: Strategies for Conservation 
(1993)—was an honorable exception to the philosophical neglect 
of ecology in earlier decades.


In the past decade philosophers have started to remedy the neglect of
ecology and a number of major books have appeared (Cooper 2003, 
Ginzburg and Colyvan 2004, Sarkar 2005, MacLaurin and Sterelny 2008).
Discussion has focused on the troubled relationship between 
mathematical models and empirical data in ecology, on the idea of 
ecological stability and the 'balance of nature', and on the 
definition of biodiversity.
8. Methodology in Philosophy of Biology


Most work in the philosophy of biology is self-consciously 
naturalistic, recognizing no profound discontinuity in either method 
or content between philosophy and science. Ideally, philosophy of 
biology differs from biology itself not in its knowledge base, but 
only in the questions it asks. The philosopher aims to engage with 
the content of biology at a professional level, although typically 
with greater knowledge of its history than biologists themselves, and
less hands-on skills. It is common for philosophers of biology to 
have academic credentials in the fields that are the focus of their 
research, and to be closely involved with scientific collaborators. 
Philosophy of biology's naturalism and the continuity of its concerns
with science itself is shared with much other recent work in the 
philosophy of science, perhaps most notably in the philosophy of 
neuroscience (Bechtel, Mandik et al. 2001).


Even the distinction between the questions of biology and 
those of philosophy of biology is not absolutely clear. As noted 
above, philosophers of biology address three types of questions: 
general questions about the nature of science, conceptual puzzles 
within biology, and traditional philosophical questions that seem 
open to illumination from the biosciences. When addressing the second
sort of question, there is no clear distinction between philosophy of
biology and theoretical biology. But while this can lead to the 
accusation that philosophers of biology have abandoned their calling 
for ‘amateur hour biology’ it can equally well be said 
that a book like The Selfish Gene (Dawkins 1976) is 
primarily a contribution to philosophical discussion of biology. 
Certainly, the professional skills of the philosopher are as relevant
to these internal conceptual puzzles as they are to the other two 
types of question. All three types of questions can be related to the
specific findings of the biological sciences only by complex chains 
of argument.