Mexican philosophy has received the influence of different traditions
of thought. These sources have been combined and transformed according
to the specific problems and circumstances of Mexican life. The result
has been a rich and original tradition of thought of over five
centuries that, together with Peruvian philosophy, is the oldest of
the Americas.

Mexican philosophy has been concerned with all sorts of theoretical
questions, however, it could be characterized by its peculiar interest
in ethical and political issues. The theme of the nature of man and of
reason and its connection to the realms of power and domination has
been a central line of thought of Mexican philosophy, from the early
reflections about the justification of the Spanish conquest to the
recent debates about the demands of a democratic reform or the Indian
insurgence in Chiapas. The criticism of philosophical eurocentrism has
been another central feature of Mexican philosophy due to its links to
some of the main political events of Mexican history, such as the
Conquest, the Independence and the Revolution.. 

The Bibliography includes all the books and articles mentioned in this
article and a selection of secondary bibliography in English.
 
1. Some Metaphilosophical Questions

A common feature of Latin American philosophy is that it has raised
metaphilosophical questions about its originality and peculiarity (see
the related entry on
 Latin American philosophy).
 In that vein, it is often claimed that philosophy in Mexico
is not the same as Mexican philosophy.

Philosophy in México has a long and distinguished history, but
some experts maintain that we cannot speak of a Mexican philosophy,
that is, of a tradition of philosophy that is defined on account of
the originality of its discussions and propositions, of the soundness
of its doctrines or schools of thought, or of the characteristic
features of its style or terminology. Other experts consider that
there are certain thematic similarities that underlie philosophy in
Mexico, and even some original philosophical concepts that allow us to
speak of an authentic tradition of Mexican philosophy. Others believe
that although a Mexican philosophy is not yet a reality, if more work
is done to consolidate its tradition and community, in a near future
we would be able to speak of a genuine Mexican philosophy.

However, not all Mexican philosophers today think that developing a
distinctive Mexican philosophy is a worthy task. Some claim that
philosophy in the 21st century has left behind the stage of national
philosophies. Roger Bartra has coined the concept of a
post-Mexican condition (see Bartra 2002) and in the same
guise we could talk of a post-Mexican philosophy, that is, of
a philosophy made in Mexico that has nothing to do with Mexican
culture.

On the other hand, the recent links between Mexican philosophy and
Latino/a philosophy in the United States might motivate us to consider
the beginning of something like a trans-Mexican philosophy
that goes beyond geographical borders. What I call here trans-Mexican
philosophy should not be confused with a proper
Mexican-American or Chicano/a philosophy, although
it might have strong links to it.

I will not consider these metaphilosophical issues here (see the
related entry on
 Latin American philosophy: metaphilosophical foundations).
 My only concern will be to provide a sketch of the history of Mexican
philosophy.

A problem for the study of Mexican philosophy in the United States so
far has been the scarcity of translations of its main works. However,
a group of scholars are working in new translations that will be
available soon (see 20th century Mexican philosophy in
 Other Internet Resources).
 It is foreseeable that with the increase of Mexican-American and
Latino students in North American universities, the demand for more
information about Mexican philosophy will increase in the near future
(one example of this trend is the Newsletter on Hispanic and
Latino issues in Philosophy of the American Philosophical
Association).
2. Pre-Hispanic Philosophy

From the early years of the Conquest, it became clear to the Spaniards
that pre-Columbian Mexicans had a complex and sophisticated system of
beliefs regarding human beings and the universe. In his Historia
general de las cosas de la Nueva España (1585 [2006]),
Franciscan missionary Bernardino de Sahagún (1499–1590)
reproduced the corpus of beliefs of the ancient Mexicans, collected in
documents and testimonials. Years later, the discovery of new
documents and a deeper knowledge of local languages have enabled us to
have a better understanding of how the original inhabitants of
Mesoamerica viewed the world.

The first historians of Mexican philosophy recognized the richness and
sophistication of native cosmology, but they did not consider it
philosophy. The publication of Miguel León Portilla’s
(1926) influential book La filosofía náhuatl
(1955), a collection of texts recovered and translated into Spanish
dealing with cosmology, metaphysics, anthropology, ethics, and
aesthetics, would result in a new appreciation. In his book,
León Portilla compares the ancient Mexican texts to the western
philosophical tradition. Some years later, others authors followed his
example studying Mayan texts such as Popol Vuh, which
provided a deeper understanding of Classical Mayan cosmology and
anthropology.

The use of the term “philosophy” to speak of pre-Columbian
thought has been applauded by those who believe it is necessary to put
an end to the predominance of the western concept of philosophy; but
it has also been criticized because it seems to confuse western
philosophy with a series of cultural practices and epistemologies that
are entirely something else. Some people have gone so far as to
suggest that to interpret philosophically these pre-Columbian texts
that have survived to the present day is an act of
over-interpretation. Others have even questioned the authenticity of
historical sources.

It is not clear whether Quetzalcóatl was a historical figure or
a mythical character. However, the ideas attributed to him were
fundamental in the development of what we may consider as
Náhuatl philosophy. Quetzalcóatl goes beyond the
traditional religious myths and offers an original conception of
divinity, the universe and man. According to Quetzalcóatl, the
supreme god is Ometéotl, the god of duality. Ometéotl
was masculine and feminine, the creator of all things, and had an
active role in all aspects of reality.

Among the tlamatinime—wise men who followed the
intellectual tradition of Quetzalcóatl—Tezcoco’s
King Nezahualcóyotl (1402–1472) was the most prominent.
Tezcoco was a small kingdom and a military ally of the Aztecs. King
Nezahualcóyotl followed a line of thought that has been
preserved in his poems and narrative texts, in which he questioned the
permanence of human life in a world where everything changes and
everything dies. If even gold and jade can splinter, then human beings
must accept that their passage on this earth is transitory. However,
that must not be an excuse to feel overwhelmed by sadness: the human
heart can find a meaning to life in flor y canto (songs
and flowers), which is how he referred to art and beauty. Poetry
shall persevere even as flowers wither and die: songs will be
preserved. In the meantime, people must learn patience. Our heart and
our eyes will never see the gods. Their plans are shrouded in mystery.
Nezahualcóyotl asks the kind of questions that cannot be
adequately satisfied with religious answers. His thoughts on essence
and change, as well as his questions about the meaning of life, are
very similar to those of other philosophical traditions. It seems
perfectly reasonable, for example, to compare him to Heraclitus or
Parmenides.

The relationship between pre-Hispanic thought and Mexican philosophy
has become stronger in recent years. One example of this is the
concept of “nepantla”, which was recovered by
Emilio Uranga (1921–1988) in his book Análisis del
ser del mexicano (1952). According to Uranga, being
nepantla is an ontological condition of existence that not
only captures the nature of Mexican being, but also, ultimately, the
condition of all humans. nepantla means to be “in
between” two different options without fully rejecting or
adopting any of them. The concept of nepantla has since been
used in an original and creative way by many authors from Mexico as
well as from the United States, to describe various aspects of our
existence (e.g., Gloria Anzaldúa).

Other authors have contributed to a recovery of categories coined by
the survivors of the indigenous peoples and have made proposals to
create a non-western philosophy that can offer alternative answers to
our questions. For example Carlos Lenkesdorf’s (1926–2010)
Una filosofía en clave tojolabal (2002) makes a
philosophical reconstruction of the ways of the Tojolabal natives that
inhabit in the state of Chiapas, Mexico. Lenkesdorf’s point of
departure is the study of language and everyday practices of the
Tojolabal people to propose an entirely different way of understanding
the relationship between subjects, community and nature.

In the political thought of the members of the Zapatista Army of
National Liberation (EZLN) it is also possible to find a contemporary
development of key concepts of the native population.

A recent contribution to this topic is James Maffie’s Aztec
Philosophy (2015). On the basis of a wide selection of sources,
old and new, Maffie has offered a reconstruction of Aztec philosophy
using categories and concepts that belong to western metaphysics but
that attempt to explain in a new vein the originality of Nahuatl
thinking.

3. The Philosophy of the Conquest and Renaissance Humanism

The Conquest of America and, in particular, of the Aztec Empire, was
an event with global repercussions that immediately awoke in
philosophers and theologians a need for reflection.

Francisco de Vitoria (1483–1546) was a professor at the
University of Salamanca when he put into question whether the Spanish
Colonization of the American continent was a “just war”.
Vitoria, however, was never in America, and thus had no direct
experience in the matter. Other authors who had witnessed the cruelty
of Spanish dominion also raised the question of the justification of
the Conquest.

Father Bartolomé de las Casas (1484–1566) objected to the
Spanish dominion in America and engaged in a famous debate with Juan
Ginés de Sepúlveda about whether the indigenous people
were fully human or not. Las Casas claimed that the natives were
rational beings, and thus should be considered as human as any person
from Europe, with the same right to be protected by natural law, to
choose their own form of Government, and to be free. The Spaniards did
not have the right to make slaves of them or even to rule them. The
ideas of Las Casas proved crucial in the creation in 1542 of the Laws
of the Indies that protected the indigenous people of the
Americas.

The influence of Erasmus’ humanism was clear in many of those
authors who wanted to return to the doctrinal simplicity and moral
purity of early Christianity, a neo-stoic reconciliation between Plato
and Aristotle, with an emphasis on human dignity. We can also trace
the influence of Thomas More’s Utopia, which inspired
some of the social experiments conducted in New Spain.

Father Juan de Zumárraga (1468–1548) founded El Colegio
de Tlatelolco, a school in which the natives were instructed in
Christian theology and philosophy; he also helped install the first
press in 1539, and conceived the creation of the Royal and Pontifical
University of Mexico. Zumárraga wrote several books where we
can find the influence of Erasmus as well as that of the Spanish
humanist Constantino Ponce, who was a chaplain in Charles I’s
court and later accused by the Inquisition of being a Protestant. 

Vasco de Quiroga (died 1565) founded hospital-towns in
Michoacán that were inspired by the communities described in
Thomas More’s Utopia. According to Vasco de Quiroga,
the natives lived in a golden age just as described by Lucian of
Samosata in his Saturnalia.

Phillip II of Spain sent Francisco Hernández (died 1578) to
study the flora and fauna of New Spain. Once in Mexico,
Hernández wrote several philosophical works with commentaries
on Plato, Aristotle and the Stoics.

Not only the Spaniards thought about the philosophical consequences of
the conquest, in 1959 Miguel León Portilla published a book
called La visión de los vencidos where he recovered
documents of the native population that describe the Conquest from
their own perspective. In the 20th century, the principal
work that examines the historical and ontological dimension of the
Conquest is La invención de América (1958) by
Edmundo O’Gorman (1906–1995), who contends against the
assumption that America was discovered, that is, that America existed
as a reality on its own account before the arrival of the Spaniards.
O’Gorman claims that America was invented by the Europeans, on
the basis of the premises of their own conceptual schemes.

4. The 16th Century: Scholasticism

The type of philosophy taught and learned in New Spain was
Scholasticism, which was the only kind of philosophy approved by the
Colonial authorities and the Catholic Church. The Spanish Empire was
characterized by its Catholic zeal, hence it did not allow Protestant
or pagan philosophies to be propagated or studied in its
territories.

Friar Alonso de la Veracruz (1507–1584) was the first
philosopher of New Spain; a disciple of Vitoria, he taught the first
lessons of Scholastic philosophy. Alonso de la Veracruz was also the
first published philosopher of New Spain. He wrote several
commentaries on Aristotle, such as Recognitio summularum
(1554a), Dialectica resolutio (1554b) and Physica
speculatio (1557), used as textbooks in schools. Just like his
teacher Vitoria, Alonso also discussed the just causes of the
Conquest, but with even stronger sympathy for the indigenous
population. Alonso contested the argument that the natives had lost
their right to their lands because they were pagans, and he claimed
that the Spanish Crown had stolen them from their lawful owners. He
also sustained that sovereignty ultimately belongs to the people, not
the king.

The Jesuit priest Antonio Rubio stands out among the philosophers of
the 16th century. Born in Spain, he established himself in
New Spain from 1576 to 1600, where he wrote a famous treatise of logic
known as Lógica mexicana (1603). The University of
Alcalá adopted Lógica mexicana as a textbook
and many re-editions of an abridged version were printed elsewhere in
Europe. It is a known fact, for instance, that Descartes studied the
book when he was a pupil in La Fleche. Rubio wrote other books in
which he wanted to offer a complete course on philosophy and, although
his works on natural philosophy were published, his metaphysics were
not, perhaps due to the popularity of Francisco Suárez’s
Disputationes metaphysicae.

Another philosopher from the 16th century in New Spain is
Tomás Mercado, who wrote several studies on logic and matters
relating to the philosophy of economics, in which he analyses the
rationality and justice of commercial trade.
5. The 17th Century: Scholasticism and the Baroque

In the 17th century, the religious orders of the
Dominicans, the Augustinians, the Jesuits, and the Franciscans
continued to cultivate scholastic philosophy, as dictated by their
specific orientation. However, the practice of philosophy was almost
always lacking in originality and critical dimension. A paradigmatic
example of this particular way in which philosophy was understood is
Francisco Naranjo, a scholar who was known for his ability to recite
by heart the entirety of Thomas Aquinas’ Summa
Theologica. Other philosophers from that same period were Diego
Basalenque, Juan de Rueda, Alonso Guerrero, and Diego Martín
Alcázar.

The 17th century in Spain is known as the Spanish Golden
Age, with figures such as Francisco de Quevedo and Luis de
Góngora in literature and Diego Velázquez and
Bartolomé Murillo in painting. We can also talk of a Golden Age
in New Spain. Three extraordinary personalities of the 17
th century’s Mexican baroque culture cannot be
omitted from a history of Mexican philosophy: Father Miguel
Sánchez, Carlos de Sigüenza y Góngora, and Sister
Juana Inés de la Cruz. All of them were born in Mexico, wrote
their central works in Spanish, and also were familiar with
Náhuatl language and culture.

Father Miguel Sánchez (1594–1674) studied at the
University de Mexico, but later was not accepted as member of its
academic staff. Sánchez is the author of Imagen de la
Virgen María (1648) a book in which he interprets the
apparition of Virgin of Guadalupe from a biblical, theological, and
philosophical point of view. The influence of Saint Augustine in his
book is conspicuous. Sánchez is one of the first thinkers to
conceive human history from a Latin American perspective.

Carlos Sigüenza y Góngora (1645–1700) was a
remarkable scientist, historian, and philosopher. He taught astronomy
and mathematics at the Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico, and
he became known for his opposition to the belief that comets were
harbingers of catastrophes. In his book, Libra astronómica
y filosófica (1690 [1984]), Sigüenza y Góngora
quoted Galileo Galilei, Descartes, and Kepler with scientific rigor.
He was well versed in pre-Columbian culture, and rescued the moral and
political virtues of the ancient Aztecs, presenting them as an example
to be followed in his own day.

Sister Juana Inés de la Cruz (1651–1695) was not allowed
in to the Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico because she was a
woman; however, she became world-famous for her wisdom and her
literary talent. Although Juana Inés de la Cruz was not a
philosopher, her writings contain elements of philosophy, from
stoicism and hermeticism to post-Cartesian philosophy. Her long poem
Primero sueño (1692) is an erudite reflection on
epistemology and theology that was based on several classical and
contemporary works. One of the outstanding features of Juana
Inés de la Cruz is her study of the circumstances under which
women could study philosophy and even produce philosophical writings
on their own account. This makes her a pioneer of feminism. Her
“Respuesta a Sor Filotea de la Cruz” (1691) is a feminist
reflection avant la lettre where she speaks in favor of a
woman’s right to develop fully, just as any other person, in the
same conditions as men. In that brilliant and erudite text, she
claims: “if Aristotle would have been a cook, he would have
written even more”.
6. The 18th Century: The Difficult Reception Of Modernity

Just as in the 17th century, in the 18th century
it was responsibility of the main religious orders to teach philosophy
in New Spain, in accordance to their specific doctrinal orientations.
Franciscans adopted the philosophy of Duns Scotus and Dominicans that
of Thomas Aquinas. The Jesuits were more receptive to modern
philosophy.

In the 17th century, the Jesuits led the trends in
education and culture in New Spain. Their work is of central
importance, not only because they adopted in an original way modern
European thought and because they creatively adapted it to their own
circumstances, but because they were pioneers in the creation of a
nationalism that would result in political independence from Spain, in
the 19th century. However, in 1767, when the Jesuit order
was in its zenith, it was expelled from the territories belonging to
the Spanish Crown. This was a heavy blow to Mexican intellectuals, and
it fueled a growing sense of Mexican nationalism, opposed to Spanish
rule.

Among the main Jesuits of New Spain who were forced to leave their
homeland were two philosophers: Diego José Abad and Francisco
Javier Clavijero. Diego José Abad taught a complete course on
philosophy in which he studied Descartes and Gassendi. However, Abad
tried to reconcile scholasticism and modern philosophy, as for example
atomism and Aristotelian hylomorphism. Francisco Javier Clavijero
(1731–1787) wrote Storia antica del Messico (1780
[2006]) where he examines pre-Columbian history following the model of
Greco-Roman classical history. He also wrote a Cursus
philosophicus, of which only one section has been preserved:
Physica particularis (1765).

Each one of these authors tried to combine scholastic philosophy with
the advances of philosophy and modern science. This critical
eclecticism can be identified in Juan Benito Díaz de Gamarra
(1745–1783), author of Elementa recentioris
philosophiae (1774), which helped promote the philosophical
thought of his times. Others who studied modern thought, particularly
in relation to science, were polygraph author José Antonio
Alzate (1737–1799), a ferocious critic of Aristotle’s
authority, and José Mariano Mociño (1757–1820), a
distinguished botanical expert.
7. The 19th Century: Liberals and Positivists

The 19th century was a time of upheaval for Mexico. The
Napoleonic Invasion and the abdication of King Ferdinand VII in 1808
forced the citizens of Spanish America to re-examine the concept of
sovereignty. If a monarch was absent, could the colonies govern
themselves until the monarch returned to the throne?

Several Mexican thinkers appealed to scholastic political philosophy
to answer affirmatively to the question, and also—though not
always explicitly— to the philosophy of the Enlightenment. Such
was the case of Miguel Hidalgo (1753–1811), father of Mexican
Independence. Hidalgo’s predilection for French ideas was well
known, but he was also known for his opposition to Aristotelian-based
scholastic theology displayed in his Disertación sobre el
verdadero método de estudiar teología
escolástica (1784).

Francisco Severo Maldonado (1775–1832) was also a priest and a
philosopher that wrote in favor of the Independence and about the
philosophical foundations of the new nation.

After Mexico’s Independence in 1821, and throughout the
19th century, a very intense debate took place regarding
the principles of liberal philosophy and their applications to Mexican
reality. Among the authors who stood up for liberal ideas were
José María Luis Mora (1794–1850), Melchor Ocampo
(1814–1851), Ignacio Ramírez (1818–1879), and
Ignacio Manuel Altamirano (1834–1893). Liberals wanted the
Mexican Constitution to emulate the Constitution of the United States,
which defended individual rights, as well as freedom of speech and
freedom of press. They also believed in the separation between Church
and State, and argued that all the wealth and the huge territories
owned by the Mexican Church should be expropriated as a way to promote
economic development. Liberals believed all people were equal before
the law and thus tried to erase the cultural differences that
prevailed in the nation, particularly with indigenous communities.

But the conservatives also had eminent supporters, such as Lucas
Alamán (1792–1853), who believed Mexico had to preserve
the best of its Spanish heritage. For instance, they argued that
Catholicism functioned as an element of national cohesion.
Conservatives also defended a special legislation to protect
indigenous people, and demanded protection for the local industry.
During the 19th century, scholastic philosophy was affected
by the political turmoil, and in response developed a defensive
attitude. The most important scholastic philosopher of the
19th century was Clemente de Jesús Munguía
(1810–1868). Munguía wrote extensively on various topics.
Del pensamiento y su enunciación (1852) is his most
ambitious theoretical book.

The debate between liberals and conservatives would define Mexican
history in the first decades of its independent life. The controversy
soon passed from words to guns. From 1862 to 1867, during the French
Intervention, conservatives supported the government of Maximilian of
Hapsburg. After he was defeated, the Conservative Party lost all
chance of regaining power.

During the 19th century, apart from liberalism, currents
like utilitarianism, sensualism, materialism, socialism, anarchism,
and romanticism were known in Mexico. Juan Nepomuceno Adorno was a
romantic thinker that proposed a deistic philosophy and an utopian
conception of man and society. His main work is La armonía
del universo (1862).

However, the philosophy that prevailed in the second half of the
century was positivism, understood in a broad sense which encompassed
authors like Auguste Comte, Herbert Spencer, Hyppolite Taine, and John
Stuart Mill. 

The main representative of positivism in Mexico was Gabino Barreda
(1818–1881). In his “Oda cívica” (1867), he
offered an interpretation of Mexico’s history that was inspired
by Comte’s philosophy of history. Barreda believed that the
victory of the Liberal Party was a victory of positivism. He also
believed that a national reconstruction should not be founded in
religion or speculative philosophy, but in the experimental method of
science. With this in mind, he led an educational reform that excluded
theology and philosophy from government-sponsored schools. 

For Mexican positivists the challenge was to find a way to reconcile
freedom and order. In his essay “De la educación
moral” (1863), Barreda sustained that it was a mistake to assume
that freedom consists in doing whatever one wants to do. True freedom,
he said, is always limited by the law. Moral progress is always the
consequence of a scientific knowledge of moral law.

Spencer’s evolutionism had a strong influence in Mexico’s
social and historical thought, as can be seen in the works of Justo
Sierra (1848–1912), and Francisco Bulnes (1847–1924).
According to social evolutionism, nations are very much like animal
species: they are in a constant fight for survival, and the stronger
nations prevail. In his book El porvenir de las naciones
hispanoamericanas (1899), Bulnes claimed that Mexico would have
to make drastic changes to survive in its struggle against the
Anglo-Saxons. From a political point of view, Spencer’s social
evolutionism was the foundation of the gradualist ideology that said
Mexico did not need another revolution but an orderly, planned
evolution. Justo Sierra’s Evolución política
del pueblo mexicano (1902) was used by supporters of the
dictatorship of General Porfirio Díaz, who ruled Mexico for
almost three decades, until the Mexican Revolution began in 1910.

In the fields of logic and epistemology, Mill’s influence was
unchallenged. Porfirio Parra (1845–1912) wrote Nuevo sistema
de lógica inductiva y deductiva (1903), the most relevant
work within this current of thought; in it, he defends an idealist
version of empiricism.
8. The 20th Century
8.1 Philosophy and the Mexican Revolution (1910–1930)

The Mexican Revolution was a social movement influenced by a myriad of
ideologies: classical liberalism, social liberalism, the social
doctrine of the Catholic Church, socialism, anarchism, spiritism,
Bergsonism, and pragmatism.

Ricardo Flores Magón was an activist that struggled against the
dictatorship of Porfirio Díaz. From 1904 until his death in
1922 he lived in the United States, first as an exile and then as a
prison inmate. In many of his writings, distributed through the
clandestine journal Regeneración, he developed a
concept of society based on socialist and anarchist philosophy.

In 1909, a group of young students formed the “Ateneo de la
Juventud”. Antonio Caso (1883–1946) and José
Vasconcelos (1882–1959) were two of its most prominent members.
Both promoted a renewal of Mexican philosophy. They rejected the
positivist doctrines of humanity as being moved by selfish
calculation, of morality as being accountable by the laws of nature,
and of the universe as governed by deterministic laws. The members of
the Ateneo stated that humans were free, creative and spiritual,
capable of using intuition to understand the world, and inspired by
moral feelings that went beyond the laws of nature. This conception of
human beings and the world can be considered one of the ideological
currents of the Mexican Revolution.

Antonio Caso was the leading figure of Mexican philosophy in the first
decades of the 20th century. He created the Department of
Philosophy in the National University of Mexico, tutored several
generations of philosophers, promoted the work of the main authors and
trends of thought of European philosophy in his time, and acted as one
of the moral and intellectual authorities of the period. His most
important work, Existencia como economía, como
desinterés y como caridad responded to Darwin’s
theory of biology, Spencer’s social evolutionism,
Nietzsche’s doctrine of the Übermensch, and Max
Stirner’s extreme egoism, while drawing inspiration from sources
as diverse as Bergson, Tolstoy, and Christian morality. According to
Caso, human existence has three levels: the biological or economic,
the disinterested or aesthetic, and—the highest—the
charitable. Towards the 1930s, Caso became more open to other trends,
such as axiology, phenomenology, and personalism, although these did
not alter his main philosophical ideas. In La persona humana y el
estado totalitario (1941), Caso makes a brave defense of
democracy against fascism and communism. Some years before, he debated
with Vicente Lombardo Toledano (1894–1968) about the national
plan to make public education socialist. Caso defended the autonomy of
the university and academic freedom.

José Vasconcelos was one of the central thinkers of Mexican
culture in the 20th century. His reputation as an
intellectual, politician and writer is stronger than his reputation as
philosopher. However, he cannot be ignored in a history of Mexican
philosophy. His theoretical works can be divided into two groups. The
first group includes the writings in which he developed a
philosophical system, from Lógica (1945) to
Estética (1936), that contain a metaphysical proposal
already laid out in his Pitágoras, una teoría del
ritmo (1916). Vasconcelos believed that his main contribution to
philosophy was the notion of an aesthetic a priori. His
legacy was somewhat hurt by his personality, by his self-alienation
and because he was not, like Caso, a teacher of philosophy. The second
group, which includes Vasconcelos’ texts on Latin American
history and culture, was considered by Vasconcelos himself as
secondary to his philosophical work. Nevertheless, the works on Latin
American history and culture have been more influential than his work
on Latin American philosophy. His most important work, La raza
cósmica (1925), is a prophetic essay in which Latin
America becomes the source of a mixed race that synthesizes the four
human races and will lead humanity to the height of its development:
the aesthetic level. Although Vasconcelos said that philosophy should
be studied for its own sake, and for the universality of its ideas, he
also claimed that philosophy should be used as an ideological
instrument of Latin American nations to stand against political,
economical and intellectual domination of the countries to the North
(see his Ética, 1932).

In the late 1920’s the pedagogical and social ideas of John
Dewey were very influential in the Mexican education system.
Vasconcelos considered that Dewey’s philosophy was a vehicle of
United States influence in Mexico and wrote a book against Dewey
called De Robinson a Odiseo (1935).
8.2 The Forming of Professional Philosophy (1930–1960)

The intellectual atmosphere in the 1930s saw dramatic changes: the new
generation, students and protegés of both Caso and Vanconcelos,
were not interested in the debate between determinism and freedom,
materialism and spirit. To them, values, objectivity, and social
responsibility, are the central issues of their time. They reacted to
the intuitionism and the irrationalism of Caso and Vasconcelos, with a
renewed rationalism and universalism. Critical reflection on being
Mexican started to gain importance, although it would not be until the
end of the 1940s that it would reach full prominence. 

In the 1930s and 1940s, former students of Caso, such as José
Romano Muñoz (1890–1967), Samuel Ramos (1897–1959),
Adalberto García de Mendoza (1900–1963), Oswaldo Robles
(1905–1969), Edmundo O’Gorman (1906–1995), Francisco
Larroyo (1908–1981), Eduardo García Máynez
(1908–1993), Antonio Gómez Robledo (1908–1994), and
Guillermo Héctor Rodríguez (1910–1988) adopted and
promoted philosophical currents from Germany, such as Neo-Kantianism
of the Marburg and Baden schools, Dilthey’s historicism,
Husserl’s phenomenology, Heidegger’s existentialism,
Kelsen’s legal positivism and, above all, the philosophy of
values of Scheler and Hartmann. José Ortega y Gasset and
specifically his journal Revista de Occidente also influenced
that generation.

Samuel Ramos was an outstanding philosopher and intellectual. He
criticized Caso’s philosophical style and his defense of
irrationality. Ramos believed the country needed a new philosophy, one
that could detect the flaws of Mexicans and which was capable of
imbuing them with strong values and instilling in them the use of
reason. Thus, Mexican philosophy ought to be dedicated to the rigorous
study of human being and the objective field of values. Ramos also
became interested in aesthetics, and was a promoter of professional
philosophy. Some of his most important works are: Perfil del
hombre y la cultura en México (1934), Hacia un nuevo
humanismo (1940), and Filosofía de la vida
artística (1950).

Francisco Larroyo was the main representative of Neo-Kantianism. He
wrote many books in which he invariably defended the Neo-Kantian
position towards the problems of philosophy, science and education.
Some of his books are La filosofía de los valores
(1936) and La lógica de las ciencias (1938). Larroyo
claimed that Mexico’s progress required a rigorous, rationalist
and scientific philosophy. Another well-known Neo-Kantian and
Kelsenian was Guillermo Héctor Rodríguez.

Oswaldo Robles connected Neo-Thomism to phenomenology and
psychoanalysis. Among his books we can remember La teoría
de la idea en Malebranche y la tradición filosófica
(1937) and Esquema de antropología filosófica
(1942).

Edmundo O’Gorman was a distinguished historian and philosopher.
In his essay “Del arte o de la monstruosidad” (1940), he
maintained that the study of Pre-Columbian art should be based on
different categories from those used to interpret European art. In
Crisis y porvenir de la ciencia histórica (1947), he
criticized positivist historiography from the point of view of
historicism and existentialism. This book set the theoretical
foundations for his subsequent notion of the invention of America.

Eduardo García Máynez was one of the main promoters of
the professionalization of Mexican philosophy in the 20th
century. His book Los principios de la ontología formal del
derecho y su expresión simbólica (1953) marked the
beginning of the logical turn in Mexican philosophy, which anticipated
the linguistic turn of the analytical philosophers about a decade
later. Some of his works include: La definición del
derecho. Ensayo de perspectivismo jurídico (1948) and
Filosofía del derecho (1974). García
Máynez claimed that the legitimacy of law depends on the
existence of objective values, but he added that, in spite of their
objectivity, values are subjected to several forms of relativity in
relation to people, concrete actions, space, and time. Like Ramos,
García Máynez believed objectivist axiology was what
Mexico needed to advance in its social progress. He also claimed that
legal freedom consisted in a “second order” right, that
is, in the normative possibility to choose the alternative to exercise
certain independent faculties. The development of this thesis forced
him to sustain that there are some a priori necessary
principles to any normative system which is axiomatic and, most
particularly, formal. His “theory of the three circles”
maintains that the definitions of law as formally valid, as
intrinsically valid, and as a positive right, were not compatible in
the field of theory, although they were compatible in the field of
practice.
8.3 The Spanish Exiles

The Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) forced some of the most
prominent Spanish philosophers to move to Mexico. Joaquín Xirau
(1895–1943), José Gallegos Rocafull (1895–1963),
Wenceslao Roces (1897–1992), José Gaos (1900–1969),
Luis Recasens Siches (1903–1977), and Eduardo Nicol
(1907–1990), would live and die in Mexico. Juan David
García Bacca (1901–1992) and María Zambrano
(1907–1991) would spend part of their exile in Mexico. Adolfo
Sánchez Vázquez (1915–2011) and Ramón Xirau
(1924) arrived in Mexico at a young age, and completed their studies
in their new country. All of them left a valuable philosophical legacy
through their creativity, teaching and translation.

Joaquín Xirau wrote several books on metaphysics, history of
philosophy, and philosophy of education. When he was already in
Mexico, he wrote Amor y mundo (1940), in which he reflects on
love understood as Eros and caritas. His ontology is
dialectical, and he claims that being and value, as well as subject
and object, are abstract ideas if they are considered as static
realities outside change. His premature death prevented his influence
to grow further.

José Gaos wrote while in Mexico the largest part of his works,
but he is remembered, above all, for his extraordinary contribution in
the training forming of philosophers. Gaos defended a radical version
of perspectivism: to him, philosophy is a personal confession, so
there can be no philosophy that is worse or better than another as
they are all, in the end, the expression of an individual. His most
important works are: Del hombre (1970) and De la
filosofía (1962). His research and his teaching of the
history of ideas in Mexico and the rest of the Americas were extremely
influential. His ideas on how to teach philosophy were included in the
curricula of several departments of philosophy in the country. Among
his disciples were some of the most important philosophers of the
second half of the 20th century.

Luis Recasens Siches, a philosopher of law, wrote many books in which
the influence of José Ortega y Gasset was visible. Among them
is Vida humana, sociedad y derecho (1940).

Eduardo Nicol founded the Metaphysics Seminar at the Department of
Philosophy of the National Autonomous University of Mexico where he
taught with rigor and brilliance. For him, philosophy ought to recover
its place as the primary science. His metaphysics, dialectical in
essence, wanted to find a way to reconcile being and the expression,
and truth and history. All of his works were written in Mexico, and
among them are: La idea del hombre (1946),
Metafísica de la expresión (1957), and Los
principios de la ciencia (1965).
8.4 The Hiperión Group

In 1934, Samuel Ramos published one of the central books of Mexican
culture, Perfil del hombre y la cultura en México, an
analysis of history, culture and the personality of Mexicans, who
endure, he claims, an inferiority complex. According to Ramos,
Mexicans have set for themselves goals that are impossible to
accomplish, particularly because they have tried to imitate more
developed nations, and this has imbued in them a feeling of
inferiority that explains their individual and collective behavior.
Ramos’ book was very controversial, and sparked other similar
studies about Mexican being, like Octavio Paz’s El laberinto
de la soledad (1950).

The Hiperión Group was an association of young philosophers
from the National Autonomous University of Mexico that included
Leopoldo Zea (1912–2006), Jorge Portilla (1918–1963),
Emilio Uranga (1921–1988), and Luis Villoro (1922–2014).
The Hiperión Group was active between 1948 and 1952, and its
purpose was to use the categories of existentialism to perform an
analysis of Mexico and of Mexican being that would enable them not
only to really know Mexico and Mexicans but also to shake them up and
to transform them.

Jorge Portilla’s posthumous book Fenomenología del
relajo (1966) is a phenomenological study about the complex
relations that Mexicans have to moral behavior.

Arguably the most important work of the Hiperión was
Análisis del ser del mexicano (1952), by Emilio
Uranga. This book proposed an ontology of mexicanidad and a
philosophy of Mexican culture. According to Uranga, our negative
traits, such as resentment, melancholy and zozobra, are
superficial expressions of what he calls “accidentality”,
a constitutive existential mode of Mexicans. Uranga believes that
historically Mexicans were denied full humanity because of their
differences with Europeans. However, because human traits are defined
as accidental, Mexicans are in fact closer to full humanity and
Europeans could achieve such a status when they resemble the being of
Mexicans. If the Conquest of Mexico tried to assimilate Mexicans to
Europe, what Uranga did was try to assimilate the whole of humanity to
Mexico, that is, to make humanity recognize and value its repressed
accidentality. By identifying Mexicanidad with accidentality,
Uranga transforms Mexican being into an ontological category.
8.5 Leopoldo Zea

Leopoldo Zea was the most recognized and influential Mexican
philosopher of the second half of the 20th century,
particularly in Latin America and the former Soviet Bloc. Some of his
books are:El positivismo en México (1943),
América en la historia (1957), La filosofía
americana como filosofía sin más (1969), and
Discurso desde la marginación y la barbarie
(1988).

In his essay “En torno a una filosofía americana”
(1945), Zea sustained that Latin American philosophy could and should
devote itself to topics that are specifically Latin American, apart
from the universal problems of any other philosophy. In “La
filosofía como compromiso” (1948), he claims that Latin
American philosophy should not settle with understanding its reality:
it also needs to transform it. From then on, Zea’s work adopts a
clearly defined ideological and political purpose to favor the
emancipation of Latin America and what is generally called the
“Third World”.

To Zea, philosophy should be an instrument of freedom. He strongly
objected to the Eurocentric vision of human beings, history and
reason, a critique that would fully evolve decades later with
Post-Modernism and Post-Colonialism. During most of the second half of
the 20th century, Zea promoted what today is known as Latin
American philosophy, which combines an interdisciplinary study of
society, thought, and history in this region of the world.

Other Mexican philosophers that have worked in this area are
Joaquín Sánchez McGregor (1925-2008), Abelardo Villegas
(1934–2001), Mario Magallón Anaya (1946), and Horacio
Cerutti (1950).
8.6 Luis Villoro

The works of Luis Villoro were influenced by the most important
philosophical currents of the second half of the 20th
century: existentialism, phenomenology, Marxism, analytic philosophy,
and multiculturalism. However, in his reflections one can observe a
continuity of his central concerns: the metaphysical understanding of
alterity, the limits and boundaries of reason, the relationship
between knowledge and power, the search of a communion with others, an
ethical reflection of injustice, the defense of respect for cultural
diversity, and a critical dimension of philosophical thought. Some of
his books are: Los grandes momentos del indigenismo en
México (1950), Creer, saber, conocer (1982),
El concepto de ideología (1985), and El poder y el
valor (1997).

In Creer, saber, conocer, a book that belongs to the
analytical tradition, Villoro produced an epistemology that eliminated
the clause of truth from the definition of knowledge, in order to
understand the epistemic practice in its historical and political
dimension. Villoro analyzes “to know p” as “to
believe p with sufficiently objective reasons”. One
reason to think that p is sufficiently objective is that it is
conclusive, complete and coherent, regardless of who sustains
p. However, one reason can be objectively sufficient in an
epistemic community but not in another. This leads to an epistemic
relativity accepted by Villoro as the only way to respond to the
challenge of skepticism.

In El poder y el valor, Villoro reflects on the nature of
political power and moral values. After performing an extensive and
deep analysis, Villoro sustains that the values that bind individuals
to a community should be a priority, without opposing the principles
of liberty and social order. This leads him to defend a radical
democracy, where power is in the hands of people immersed in concrete
social networks in the places where they live and work. Villoro
believed that indigenous communities of Mexico are a living example of
such egalitarian society. In “Filosofía y
dominación”, Villoro sustained that philosophy must be a
permanent critique of inherited and imposed beliefs. However, he
insisted that philosophy should not be an ideology, but a rigorous and
independent exercise of reason.
8.7 The Years of Expansion (1960–2000)

In the 20th century, several Mexican philosophers
cultivated humanism and metaphysics from as perspectives as dissimilar
as Hellenism, Thomism, and existentialism.

Antonio Gómez Robledo (1908–1994) was a distinguished
humanist and jurist who studied and defended the value of Greco-Latin
and Christian cultures in an elegant and anti-dogmatic way. Among his
works are: Ensayo sobre las virtudes intelectuales (1957),
Meditación sobre la justicia (1963), and
Sócrates y el socratismo (1966). He also translated
Plato’s Republic, Aristotle’s Politics,
Marcus Aurelius’ Meditations, and other classics. His
studies of the principles of international law and the Spanish
tradition of law are also worthy of being included in the history of
Mexican philosophy.

Ramón Xirau cultivated philosophy, literary criticism, and
poetry, and he has combined all three in very enriching ways. Xirau
wrote about the relationship between philosophy and poetry as two
different forms of knowledge, and about the ontological nature of
human being, understanding ser and estar as
different categories. Among his best-known books are:
Introducción a la historia de la filosofía
(1964), Poesía y conocimiento (1979), and El
tiempo vivido (1985).

Juliana González (1936) is a disciple of Eduardo Nicol. She has
taught and written about the main problems of philosophical and moral
anthropology as well as about Nietzsche, Freud and Heidegger.
González’s ethics are grounded on her complex vision of
the human being, which underscores our capacity to choose.
González has also dealt with the ethical and metaphysical
dimension of psychoanalysis and genomics. Some of her books include
Ética y libertad (1989a), El malestar en la
moral (1989b), and El poder del Eros (1999).

Neo-Thomism was taught at the Universidad Iberoamericana by
José Sánchez Villaseñor (1911–1961),
Fernando Sodi Pallares (1917–1980), Héctor
González Uribe (1918–1988), José Sanabria
(1924–2002), and Miguel Mansur (1928–1993). The
Aristotelian tradition has been studied at the Universidad
Panamericana by Carlos Llano (1932–2010), Virginia Aspe (1952),
Héctor Zagal (1963), and Luis Xavier López Farjeat
(1973). In Monterrey, Agustín Basave Fernández del Valle
(1923–2006), developed what he called an integralismo
metafísico antroposófico. Among his many books we
can single out Tratado de metafísica. Teoría de la
habencia (1982).

Socialist and Marxist thought was one of the ideological currents of
the Mexican Revolution. Vicente Lombardo Toledano was a promoter of
Marxism and used it to explain national reality. José Revueltas
(1914–1976) was an unorthodox Marxist who discussed
philosophical themes in his literary and political writings. However,
Marxism was relatively ignored by the academia before the 1970s. Two
central figures of Marxism in the academy in Mexico during that period
were Eli de Gortari (1918–1991) and Adolfo Sánchez
Vázquez.

De Gortari was the first systematic philosopher of science in Mexico.
He studied the foundation of dialectic logic and the applications of
such logic to the sciences. He also worked on the philosophy of
mathematics and physics, the mechanization of propositional calculus,
and the history of science in Mexico. In 1955 he founded the Seminar
of Scientific and Philosophical Problems. Among his books are La
ciencia de la lógica (1950), and Dialéctica de
la Física (1964).

Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez was very young when he arrived in
Mexico and, like Ramón Xirau, he became a philosopher in
Mexico. He produced a very solid body of works that dealt with some of
the central notions of Marxist ethics and aesthetics. His critical
reflections on the concept of praxis were a contribution to Marxist
philosophy. He was also quite critical of the aesthetic doctrine of
Socialist realism. Among his main books we can mention: Las ideas
estéticas de Marx (1965), Una filosofía de la
praxis (1967), and Ética (1969). Many Mexican
Marxist philosophers of the next generations were his disciples.

After the 1960s, the list of teachers and researchers of Marxism
increased exponentially and Marxism became the most active
philosophical current in some Mexican universities. It was at that
time that both inside and outside the universities Marx was studied,
along with Althusser, Gramsci, Bloch, and Marcuse. Some of the main
Mexican Marxist philosophers of that period were: Porfirio Miranda
(1924–2001), Enrique González Rojo (1928), Cesáreo
Morales (1936), Jaime Labastida (1940), and Gabriel Vargas Lozano
(1947). Carlos Pereyra (1940–1988) was a rigorous philosopher of
history and a well-known left-wing intellectual; his philosophical
papers were collected in Filosofía, historia y
política (2010). Bolívar Echeverría
(1941–2010), wrote La modernidad de lo barroco (1998),
where he offered a critique of capitalist modernity from a Latin
American perspective.

A famous disciple of the Mexican school of Marxist philosophy is
Rafael Sebastián Guillén Vicente (1957), also know as
“Subcomandante Marcos” of the EZLN. His correspondence
with Luis Villoro is included in the book La alternativa.
Perspectiva y posibilidades de cambio (Villoro 2015).

After the fall of the Berlin wall there was a decline of Marxist
philosophy. What came instead was an interest in non-Marxist political
philosophy that coincided with the public debate about the reform of
the Mexican State at the end of the last century. Among the most
studied foreign authors were Weber, Arendt, Rawls, Bobbio and
Habermas. Democracy, justice, citizenship and multiculturalism were
some of the topics of discussion for philosophers such as: Luis
Aguilar Villanueva (1938), Paulette Dieterlen (1947), Luis Salazar
(1949), León Olivé (1950), Griselda Gutiérrez
(1951), María Pía Lara (1954), Ambrosio Velasco (1954),
Rodolfo Vázquez (1956), Mario Teodoro Ramírez (1958),
and Enrique Serrano (1958).

Philosophy of liberation was a movement that originated in South
America in 1976; in the beginning, it mixed elements of liberation
theology, dependence theory, and Latin American philosophy. Enrique
Dussel (1934) is the main representative of that current in Mexico.
Among his numerous works, which have been translated extensively to
other languages, are Filosofía de la liberación
(1977) and Ética de la liberación en la edad de la
globalización y la exclusión (1998). Dussel has
offered a critique of western philosophy from the point of view of the
poor and the excluded. Like Liberation Theology, Philosophy of
Liberation seemed to be declining in recent years; however, Pope
Francis has renewed the interest in this movement.

Towards the end of the 1950s and the beginning of the 1960s, there was
an interest in analytical philosophy and, in particular, in Russell,
Carnap, Wittgenstein, Strawson, and Quine. The creation of the journal
Crítica in 1967 triggered the development of this
current. At the end of the 1960s, the Institute for Philosophical
Research of the National Autonomous University of Mexico became the
main center of analytical philosophy in the country and the whole of
Latin America. The main promoters of analytic philosophy during that
period were Fernando Salmerón (1925–1997) and Alejandro
Rossi (1932–2009), author of Lenguaje y significado
(1969).

At the end of the 1970s, a group of analytical philosophers had
already consolidated: Enrique Villanueva (1938), José Antonio
Robles (1938–2014), Javier Esquivel (1941–1992), and Hugo
Margáin (1942–1978). In the 1980s, more analytic
philosophers joined the Institute, among them: Raúl Orayen
(1942–2003), who wrote Lógica, significado y
ontología (1989), Ulises Moulines (1946), a structuralist
philosopher of science, Mark Platts (1947), author of Ways of
Meaning (1979), León Olivé (1950), who wrote
several books of philosophy of science and culture, and Adolfo
García de la Sienra (1951), philosopher of economics and
theological reformer.

Mexican analytic philosophy has followed the main trends of the
analytic current since the 1960s. In its beginning, it had strong
links to Oxford philosophy, but today it has developed ties with other
centers around the world. Some Mexican analytic philosophers have
studied abroad and have remained outside Mexico, such as
Agustín Rayo, author of The Construction of Logical
Space (2013); others work in Mexico but publish mainly in
English, such as Maite Ezcurdia (1966), Mario Gómez-Torrente
(1967), or Axel Barceló (1970). To some extent, they could be
considered as post-Mexican philosophers. But some others write
analytic philosophy in Spanish, like Alejandro Tomasini (1952), author
of a vast number of books that develop an original interpretation of
Wittgenstein’s philosophy.

The main proponent of feminist philosophy was Graciela Hierro
(1928–2003), founder of the Centro de Estudios de Género
of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. Two of her books are
Ética y feminismo (1985), and De la
domesticación a la educación de las mexicanas
(1989). 

As in other Latin American countries, history of philosophy is a
strong field or research in Mexico. Among the main scholars in this
area we can mention: Laura Benitez (1944), Alberto Constante (1949),
Enrique Hülsz (1954), Gustavo Leyva, Pedro Stepanenko (1960),
Efraín Lazos (1962), Ricardo Salles (1965), Faviola Rivera
(1967), and Ángel Xolocotzi (1969).
9. The 21st Century (2000–2015)

Mexican philosophy today is a professional, pluralistic and vibrant
field of study, with the participation of hundreds of scholars and
students. It would be impossible to describe current Mexican
philosophy in such a brief space.

The Mexican philosophical community has very strong links to the
philosophical communities of Spain and the rest of Latin America.
Almost all the philosophical publications are in Spanish. However,
some books of contemporary Mexican philosophers can be found in
English. For example: Paulette Dieterlen, Poverty: A Philosophical
Approach (2005), Ricardo Salles, The Stoics on Determinism
and Compatibilism (2005), Atocha Aliseda, Abductive
Reasoning: Logical Investigations into Discovery and Explanation
(2006), María Pía Lara, Narrating Evil: A
Postmetaphysical Theory of Reflective Judgement (2007), Guillermo
Hurtado and Oscar Nudler (eds.), The Furniture of the World
(2012), and Enrique Dussel, Ethics of Liberation: In the Age of
Globalization and Exclusion (1998 [2013]).

As in other areas of Mexican culture, philosophy is highly
concentrated in Mexico City. However, there are dozens of departments
of philosophy in universities scattered in different regions of the
Mexican Republic. Many of these universities offer graduate degrees
and some publish their own reviews and books, for example, the state
universities of Puebla, Michoacán, and Veracruz.

Philosophy has been taught in secondary education since the
19th century. However, in 2009 there was an attempt by the
Government to eliminate philosophy from the curriculum. The national
philosophical community gathered around the Observatorio
filosófico de México and successfully stopped that
initiative (see
 Other Internet Resources)

There are several philosophical associations in the country:
Asociación filosófica de México is the
largest of all. Since 1975, it is responsible for the celebration of a
bi-annual congress that has been essential to the forming of a
national philosophical community (see
 Other Internet Resources).

I will limit the rest of my commentary to two of the Mexican
philosophers that are in their creative peak. 

Carlos Pereda (1944) has written several important books, including
Vértigos argumentales (1994), Crítica de la
razón arrogante (1999), and Sobre la confianza
(2009). He adopts the idea of phronesis from Aristotle, and
the idea of the universality of practical reason from Kant.
Pereda examines the vices and confusion of our life and our thought in
order to recommend subtle strategies to help us navigate through the
difficulties he has discovered. To do so, Pereda has offered us a
peculiar diagnostic of the entanglements and pathologies of reason.
One of the concepts he discusses is that of argumentative
vertigoes: a vortex into which our thinking and acting fall,
making us see things only in one direction, wrapping around us like a
frenzy of stubbornness and obstinacy that leaves us blind to the
motives and feelings of others.

The main exponent of philosophical hermeneutics, Mauricio Beuchot
(1950), distinguished himself in his early years for his prolific work
as a historian and a translator of the philosophy of New Spain and
medieval philosophy (i.e., La filosofía del lenguaje en la
Edad Media, 1981), as well as for his synthesis of Thomism and
analytic philosophy (i.e., Lógica y ontología,
1986), but in the beginning of the 1990s, he turned to hermeneutics.
In his Tratado de hermenéutica analógica
(1997), he created a system he called “analogical
hermeneutics”. His thesis is that analogy must be adopted as the
main instrument of interpretation in order to avoid the excesses of
positivist “univoicism” or postmodern
“equivocalism”. The analogical hermeneutics of Beuchot has
inspired a philosophical movement with hundreds of followers around
the world.