Porphyry (234?–305? C.E.) was a Neoplatonist philosopher born in
Tyre in Phoenicia. He studied with Longinus in Athens and then with
Plotinus in Rome from 263–269 C.E. and became a follower of the
latter's version of Platonism. Porphyry wrote in just about every
branch of learning practiced at the time but only a portion of his
large output is extant. Porphyry was an influential thinker. He
applied Neoplatonism to pagan religion and other spheres and is, as
such, a key figure in the promulgation of Neoplatonic thought. His
writings on Aristotle's logical works, preserved in part and
influential in the Latin West through Boethius' translations, contain
attempts to harmonize Aristotle's logical writings with Platonism.
 
1. Life


Porphyry was born in Tyre in Phoenicia (now in Lebanon), probably in
234 C.E. His name was ‘Malcus’, ‘king’ in his
native tongue, hence he became ‘Basileus’
(‘king’) in Greek. He, however, calls himself Porphyry,
which supposedly was a common name in Tyre, the city of purple, and is
commonly known under that name.  Little is known with certainty
about his life, except what can be gleaned from his own account of
Plotinus' life, The Life of Plotinus. Before he came to study
with Plotinus in Rome in 263 C.E. he studied with the Middle Platonist
Longinus in Athens. In Rome he stayed for some five years and
converted to Plotinus' version of Platonism. On Plotinus' advice he
left Rome for Sicily in order to recover from a bout of depression in
268 C.E. He must have stayed there for some time, even beyond
Plotinus' death in 270 C.E. There are some untrustworthy reports about
a school of Porphyry in Rome after Plotinus' death. In reality we do
not know anything with certainty about where he lived in the latter
half of his life. He may have been Iamblichus' teacher. The evidence
for this, however, is not beyond dispute. It is clear, though, that
Iamblichus was strongly influenced by Porphyry, even if he turned
vehemently against him. Towards the end of his life (301 C.E.),
Porphyry edited Plotinus' writings, the Enneads, dividing
them into six books of nine treatises each, which he prefaced with his
Life of Plotinus. The latter is the most reliable and the
most informative source about his life and attitudes. He married
fairly late an older wife, for whom one of his extant writings, the
Letter to Marcella, is written.
2. Works and Profile


Porphyry was a prolific author who wrote about a whole range of
topics. There are some sixty works attributed to him, but most of them
are now lost or survive in mere fragments. Extant (though not all
complete) are: Life of Plotinus, Life of Pythagoras,
Letter to Marcella, On Abstinence from Eating Food from
Animals, Starting-points leading to the intelligibles
(usually called the Sententiae; in Latin the work is called
Sententiae ad intelligibilia ducentes), the Isagoge
(Introduction), On the cave of the Nymphs, and
commentaries on Aristotle's Categories and Ptolemy's
Harmonics. An extant work attributed to Galen, To
Gaurus, is most probably by him. There are fragments of a history
of philosophy and fragments of a number of works on psychology. It has
been argued in Hadot 1968 that Porphyry is the author of the
incomplete “Anonymous Commentary on Plato's
Parmenides”. This attribution has been widely accepted
but also forcefully challenged. In addition we know that Porphyry
wrote on such diverse subjects as grammar, philology, rhetoric, and
geometry. Against the Christians is perhaps Porphyry's best
known title. Of this large work only some fragments have survived.


In his monumental study, La vie de Porphyre (1913), Bidez
portrayed the young Porphyry as someone prone to religion and
superstition. He was supposed to have become a more rational thinker
during his sojourn with Plotinus, though later to have relapsed to
some extent into his previous mode. Later research has found that
there is no clear support for such a view of Porphyry's
development. He may throughout his life have used different styles,
perhaps aiming at different readerships, while maintaining somehow
both his proneness for religion and superstition and his rational
tendencies.


It is clear that Porphyry was a very learned man. He is sometimes
claimed as a highly important promulgator of the late ancient branch
of Platonism (usually called ‘Neoplatonism’) rather than
as an original philosopher. The former claim is certainly true: He
applied Neoplatonic doctrines to traditional pagan religion and myths
and was in many respects a more extrovert thinker interested in
applying Platonic philosophy to various spheres than his master,
Plotinus. The judgment that he was unoriginal may, however, be
overhasty, since the sample of his writings we are left with is very
small and among these his more theoretical works are clearly
underrepresented. What we have and know to be his, however, does not
indicate drastic theoretical innovations, except perhaps in the sphere
of the philosophy of logic and language. To judge from the evidence of
subsequent ancient Platonists, Porphyry was an independent philosopher
whose views were taken very seriously indeed. Late ancient Platonists,
however, often mention him in the pair “Plotinus and
Porphyry”. So, as should be clear from what already has been
said, Porphyrian scholarship, when soberly done, is filled with
caveats: we rarely know when he wrote what, and we do not know for
sure what his philosophical doctrines were. What is extant suggests a
close doctrinal affinity with Plotinus, except for the fragment of the
Parmenides commentary for which the authorship and
relationship to Porphyry is disputed. Thus, we are faced with a figure
whom we know to have been respected in late antiquity, who was
influential long beyond then, but we do not know with any certainty
what he stood for philosophically or what, if anything, was original
with him, in the central areas of philosophy.
3. Philosophical Views


It seems safe to assume that before his encounter with Plotinus,
Porphyry's philosophical views were shaped by Longinus, Numenius and
other Middle Platonists, in addition to Plato, Aristotle and other
classics of Greek philosophy. After meeting with him he turned into a
follower of Plotinus, even if some of his Middle Platonist background
shows through also in his post-Plotinian phase. This picture is
strongly suggested both by his Life of Plotinus and the
Sententiae, the only extant work in which he lays out his
basic philosophical views that is with certainty attributable to
him.


For Plotinus and Porphyry, there is a categorical gap between two
realms, the sensible and the intelligible. The latter realm contains
three “hypostases” (three different ontological levels), the
One, Intellect and Soul. Of these, the One is the first cause of
everything else; it is characterized by sheer unity which renders it
beyond thought and beyond description in language. Intellect is the
sphere of real being, identified with the Platonic Forms, which are
the thoughts of a universal intellect. Soul, the lowest of the
intelligible hypostases, is the intelligible item directly responsible
for the sensible realm. The sensible realm, which is an imperfect
image of the intelligible, also consists of levels: There are
organisms, of which the sensible cosmos is one, comprising the other,
lesser organisms.  Organisms are ensouled beings and thus include an
intelligible component. Below them on the scale are forms in matter,
bodies, and matter itself. These too are results of Soul's creative
activity but are not intelligible entities.


The relationship between these levels is in general described in terms
of a doctrine of double activity: each higher level has its
characteristic internal activity which is accompanied by an external
power or activity which constitutes the level below. This talk of
internal and external activities (powers) is equivalent to what is
known as the relationship between paradigms and imitations in
traditional Platonism.


Human beings have, so to speak, one leg in each realm: Through the
body and its non-rational soul (the seat of appetitive and spirited
desires and sense-perception) they belong to the sensible realm,
through their higher soul (intellect) to the intelligible. Actually,
the true human being is to be identified with the intellect and the
intelligible Man. It follows from this that the task set for human
beings is to free themselves from the sensible and live by the
intelligible, which after all is their true or real nature.


This is Plotinus' philosophy, which Porphyry shares, in broad outline
(see entry on Plotinus). There are,
however, some differences in terminology, which show Porphyry to have
a certain scholarly bent that Plotinus avoids, and Porphyry is in
general more interested in reconciling Aristotle with Platonism than
Plotinus was. This is seen, for example, in Porphyry's more positive
attitude towards the doctrine of Aristotele's Categories. In
what follows, we focus on some points where Porphyry diverges from
Plotinus or has been taken to diverge from him, or may seem to develop
his thought.
3.1 Religion


In the Platonic tradition before Porphyry, Plutarch and Plotinus
already interpreted classical Greek mythology as philosophical
allegories (the Stoics were first to establish this practice).
Porphyry, however, takes this much further than his Platonic
predecessors and does it more systematically. This is revealed e.g.,
in his attitude towards Homer, whose texts he takes to have a hidden,
philosophical meaning behind the literal one (see The Cave of the
Nymphs). He also was the first Platonist to comment on the
Chaldean Oracles, a pagan religious text in verse
compiled in the 2nd century AD that the later Neoplatonists
took for a divine revelation. It is a characteristic of
post-Iamblichean Neoplatonism (330 AD onwards) that religion,
religious rites and even magic (theurgy) were taken to be an
alternative way to the soul's salvation, beside philosophy. Porphyry
did not share this view. He did not reject magic outright, but he
seems to have restricted its efficacy to the sphere of nature and not
to have regarded it as a means to establish contact with the
intelligible realm as philosophy could do. His interpretation and
concerns with religious matters, however, opened for the developments
undertaken by Iamblichus and the subsequent tradition of pagan
Neoplatonism.
3.2 Psychology and Ethics


As regards his views on the soul, Porphyry seems in all essentials to
follow Plotinus. In addition to the Sententiae, On
Abstinence and To Gaurus, there are quite a few
fragments of other works bearing on his psychological views, preserved
especially in Stobaeus, Nemesius, and St. Augustine.


The soul is an intelligible entity but, as noted above, it is the
intelligible entity that is directly engaged with the sensible realm.
Intelligible entities are incorporeal and without extension. Certain
problems arise in accounting for how something which in itself is
incorporeal can be present in an extended body, as the soul must be.
Porphyry resolves this by saying that the soul is not locally present
in the body but is present to it by a certain disposition or
inclination towards the body (Sent. 3; 4). In a passage
preserved in Nemesius, he says that when something intelligible enters
into a relation to some place or to a thing in a place, it is by a
misuse of language that we say that it is there. Because its activity
is there, we speak of the place when we should speak of the relation
to it and the activity. When one should say “it acts
there” we say “it is there” (Nem. 136, 11; p. 99
Dörrie).


The soul's inclination towards the body constitutes “a second
power” that relates directly to the body. As noted above,
Porphyry distinguishes between the rational (higher) soul and the
non-rational (lower) soul. The lower soul is presumably identical with
this second power that originates in the soul's inclination toward the
body. The higher soul is the same as reason, whereas the lower is
responsible for soul-functions that directly involve the body, such as
perception and desire. In the tradition before him, this distinction
sometimes became so sharp that it was supposed that each person has
two distinct souls.  Porphyry, by contrast, insists on the unity of
the human soul: the lower functions are powers that depend on the
rational soul (see Deuse and Karamanolis (2007).


The distinction between the soul itself and its powers (the lower
soul) is an instance of the distinction between internal and external
acts, mentioned above. Thus, the soul itself has an intellectual
activity that has the second powers or lower soul as its external
act.


For Porphyry, as for Plotinus, what matters most in life is to free
one's soul from the calamities of the body and the sensible world in
general so that it may become purely what it originally and
essentially is, viz., a part of the intelligible world. Thus, reason
should endeavor to elevate itself to the level of the Intellect, which
is distinguished by a much higher degree of unity than the mere
ordinary use of reason is capable of. It may even be possible to rise
above this to the level of the One itself. There seems to be a certain
difference in Porphyry's and Plotinus' emphasis here, however. Whereas
Plotinus stresses episodic escapes in this life by means of
philosophy, Porphyry, while admitting this possibility, seems to
suppose that the soul may, after successive reincarnations, free
itself from the sensible for good. He, however, at least according to
some of the evidence, rejects the incarnation of human souls into
animal bodies and interprets Platonic passages suggesting this as not
literally intended (see Smith 1974 and Deuse).


Porphyry is on record for his defence of vegetarianism in his On
Abstinence. This work is addressed to a friend (an associate of
Plotinus’ circle in Rome) and former vegetarian who has resumed
the consumption of meat. On the one hand, Porphyry's abstinence from
eating animals is motivated by the goal, mentioned above, of freeing
oneself from the body and the sensible realm as much as possible. The
exhortation is addressed to those who have set themselves such a
goal. There are, however, ethical concerns as well. Porphyry accords
certain rationality to the animals and in general emphasizes what they
have in common with us humans. He claims that it is plainly unjust to
harm those who intend no harm against us, and this applies to the
animals. So his vegetarianism is also a matter of justice.


In Sententiae 32 Porphyry presents his views on the virtues,
which, though a development of Plotinus' account in Ennead
I. 2, are interesting in their own right. He distinguishes between
four kinds of virtue: civic, purgative, contemplative and
paradigmatic. The four kinds of virtue are hierarchically ordered so
that paradigmatic virtue comprises in some way all the rest
(paradigmatic virtues are the Platonic Forms, or paradigms, of the
different virtues). On the other hand, even if e.g., civic virtue
naturally leads to purgative virtue, a person may be virtuous at the
civic level without possessing the higher forms. On all four levels
Porphyry posits the four cardinal virtues of Plato's Republic
(wisdom, temperance, justice and courage). The civic virtues are
concerned with the virtuous actions of ordinary life—wise,
temperate, just and courageous. These cardinal virtues are
differently, albeit analogously, defined in the case of each level.
Thus, e.g., wisdom as a purgative virtue is defined as the soul's
“not forming opinions in accordance with the body, but acting on
its own”, whereas wisdom as a contemplative virtue consists in
the contemplation of the essences inherent in the Intellect. Thus, the
virtues form a hierarchy where the inferior may be seen as a weaker
manifestation of the superior. This theory of virtue is a clever
attempt at reconciling the Republic, the Phaedo and
the Theaetetus and fitting their teaching about virtue into a
coherent Platonic metaphysics.
3.3 Metaphysics


The hierarchy of hypostases the One, Intellect and Soul has already
been sketched. Given the available other texts, there would be no
strong reason for supposing Porphyry's metaphysics to differ
significantly from that of Plotinus. However, as mentioned above,
Hadot 1968 made a case for identifying Porphyry as the author of the
so-called Anonymous commentary on Plato's Parmenides. The
late ancient author of this commentary takes the Parmenides
to present Plato's ontological view. The commentary employs a notion
of the One as an ineffable first principle that according to Hadot
makes it post-Plotinian. However, in the commentary the distinction
between the first and the second hypostasis is somewhat blurred: the
ineffable One is somehow also at the same time the first member
(“Father”) in
a triad of being, life and intelligence and in this context
identical with being. Positing a first principle that is a part of
such a composite is surely un-Plotinian. Although Hadot's hypothesis
about Porphyry as the author of the commentary has had wide
acceptance, it is by no means universally accepted (see Bechtle 1999),
and there are reasons to consider the commentary as pre-Plotinian,
i.e., Middle-Platonist. Porphyrian or not, the Anonymous commentary on
Plato's Parmenides exerted considerable influence on the
Christian theology of Marius Victorinus, who employed it in his
doctrine of the Trinity.
3.4 Aristotle and the Philosophy of Language


Porphyry wrote a commentary on Aristotle's Categories that is
extant and another longer one, Ad Gedalium, that is lost
except for some fragments. He also wrote the Isagoge, which
is an introduction to Aristotle's logical works in general. Through
these logical writings Porphyry established himself as an important
figure in the history of logic. He established the tradition followed
by subsequent Neoplatonists of taking Aristotle's Categories
as a fundamental introductory text and his Isagoge in
particular served as a standard introductory text in Byzantium, the
Arabic world and in the Latin West through Boethius' translations and
commentary. These texts served as a basic introductory texts in
philosophy for at least 1000 years.


Platonists before Plotinus differed in their attitude towards
Aristotle (see Karamanolis). Porphyry belongs to those who believed
that Plato and Aristotle were essentially in agreement. A preserved
title of a lost works of his, On the differences between Plato and
Aristotle, may seem to give contrary indications (he is also
supposed to have written a work about the unity of their
thought). Admitting some differences is compatible with a
fundamentally reconciliatory attitude (cf. Karamanolis,
pp. 243ff.). In some respects Plotinus too showed such reconciliatory
attitudes but Porphyry takes this trend much further. He was the first
Platonist to write a proper commentary on the Categories, and
he does so without assuming a strong Platonist point of view. The
question arises how such an attitude can be reconciled with those
passages in Aristotle that seem to disagree with Plato, sometimes
expressly. We do not know how Porphyry dealt with others of these,
besides Aristotle's Categories, which appears to modern
readers in many respects to be an anti-Platonic work. This is
especially notable in its claim that particulars are prior to
universals. Porphyry solves this dilemma by insisting that the
so-called Aristotelian categories—substance, quality, quantity
etc., dealt with in the Categories—are
“significant expressions”. That is to say, the
Categories is not a work in primary ontology but rather a
work about the expressions used to signify the sensible things around
us. The class of beings signified by a universal term of this sort is
indeed prior to the universal term, e.g., the class of pale things to
the universal term ‘pale’. As Strange 1987, 1992 notes,
this, however, does not affect the basic ontology. So interpreted the
Categories is innocuous from a Platonic point of view: The
realm of Platonic intelligible Forms, which are universals of a
different kind than the expressions involved in the
Categories, can be kept intact.


The extant commentary on the Categories mentions only a dual
relation, that between words and things, whereas other sources
attribute to Porphyry a triadic relation between words, concepts and
things. This is probably the doctrine of the longer lost
commmentary. The reason for the difference may be that in the short
commentary he wanted to keep matters as simple as possible or as
Griffin (2012)has proposed that the two views build on different
traditions.


Porphyry's interpretation of the Categories is, however, not
free from ontological commitments. He thought that the categories
reflect the structure of the sensible world, which in turn is an image
of the intelligible realm. As Chiaradonna (2002, pp. 48-54) shows this
involves a breach with Plotinus but Porphyry's line won the day in
late antiquity.


The Isagoge does not claim originality but on the contrary
Porphyry says in his introductory note that in it he will rehearse
“what the ancient masters say” and avoid the deep
questions. As an example of the latter, he mentions questions about
the ontological status of genera and species—whether they exist
or depend on thought; and if they exist, whether they are bodies or
incorporeal; and if the latter, whether they are sensible items or
exist separately from such. These questions Porphyry wishes to
shun. Nevertheless, his formulations of them constitute the most
influential part of his work, since it was these questions that formed
the basis of medieval debates about the status of universals.