Negative liberty is the absence of obstacles, barriers or constraints.
One has negative liberty to the extent that actions are available to
one in this negative sense. Positive liberty is the possibility of
acting — or the fact of acting — in such a way as to take
control of one's life and realize one's fundamental purposes. While
negative liberty is usually attributed to individual agents, positive
liberty is sometimes attributed to collectivities, or to individuals
considered primarily as members of given collectivities.

The idea of distinguishing between a negative and a positive sense of
the term ‘liberty’ goes back at least to Kant, and was
examined and defended in depth by Isaiah Berlin in the 1950s and
’60s. Discussions about positive and negative liberty normally
take place within the context of political and social philosophy. They
are distinct from, though sometimes related to, philosophical
discussions about
 free will.
 Work on the nature of positive liberty often overlaps, however, with
work on the nature of
 autonomy.

As Berlin showed, negative and positive liberty are not merely two
distinct kinds of liberty; they can be seen as rival, incompatible
interpretations of a single political ideal. Since few people claim to
be against liberty, the way this term is interpreted and defined can
have important political implications. Political
 liberalism
 tends to presuppose a negative definition of liberty: liberals
generally claim that if one favors individual liberty one should place
strong limitations on the activities of the state. Critics of
liberalism often contest this implication by contesting the negative
definition of liberty: they argue that the pursuit of liberty
understood as self-realization or as self-determination (whether of
the individual or of the collectivity) can require state intervention
of a kind not normally allowed by liberals.

Many authors prefer to talk of positive and negative freedom.
This is only a difference of style, and the terms
‘liberty’ and ‘freedom’ are normally used
interchangeably by political and social philosophers. Although some
attempts have been made to distinguish between liberty and freedom
(Pitkin 1988; Williams 2001; Dworkin 2011), generally speaking these
have not caught on. Neither can they be translated into other European
languages, which contain only the one term, of either Latin or
Germanic origin (e.g. liberté, Freiheit), where English
contains both.
 
1. Two Concepts of Liberty

Imagine you are driving a car through town, and you come to a fork in
the road. You turn left, but no one was forcing you to go one way or
the other. Next you come to a crossroads. You turn right, but no one
was preventing you from going left or straight on. There is no traffic
to speak of and there are no diversions or police roadblocks. So you
seem, as a driver, to be completely free. But this picture of your
situation might change quite dramatically if we consider that the
reason you went left and then right is that you're addicted to
cigarettes and you're desperate to get to the tobacconists before it
closes. Rather than driving, you feel you are being
driven, as your urge to smoke leads you uncontrollably to turn
the wheel first to the left and then to the right. Moreover, you're
perfectly aware that your turning right at the crossroads means you'll
probably miss a train that was to take you to an appointment you care
about very much. You long to be free of this irrational desire that is
not only threatening your longevity but is also stopping you right now
from doing what you think you ought to be doing.

This story gives us two contrasting ways of thinking of liberty. On
the one hand, one can think of liberty as the absence of obstacles
external to the agent. You are free if no one is stopping you from
doing whatever you might want to do. In the above story you appear, in
this sense, to be free. On the other hand, one can think of liberty as
the presence of control on the part of the agent. To be free, you must
be self-determined, which is to say that you must be able to control
your own destiny in your own interests. In the above story you appear,
in this sense, to be unfree: you are not in control of your own
destiny, as you are failing to control a passion that you yourself
would rather be rid of and which is preventing you from realizing what
you recognize to be your true interests. One might say that while on
the first view liberty is simply about how many doors are open to the
agent, on the second view it is more about going through the right
doors for the right reasons.

In a famous essay first published in 1958, Isaiah Berlin called these
two concepts of liberty negative and positive respectively (Berlin
 1969).[1]
 The reason for using these labels is that in the first case liberty
seems to be a mere absence of something (i.e. of obstacles,
barriers, constraints or interference from others), whereas in the
second case it seems to require the presence of something
(i.e. of control, self-mastery, self-determination or
self-realization). In Berlin's words, we use the negative concept of
liberty in attempting to answer the question “What is the area
within which the subject — a person or group of persons —
is or should be left to do or be what he is able to do or be, without
interference by other persons?”, whereas we use the positive
concept in attempting to answer the question “What, or who, is
the source of control or interference that can determine someone to
do, or be, this rather than that?” (1969, pp. 121–22).

It is useful to think of the difference between the two concepts in
terms of the difference between factors that are external and factors
that are internal to the agent. While theorists of negative freedom
are primarily interested in the degree to which individuals or groups
suffer interference from external bodies, theorists of positive
freedom are more attentive to the internal factors affecting the
degree to which individuals or groups act autonomously. Given this
difference, one might be tempted to think that a political philosopher
should concentrate exclusively on negative freedom, a concern with
positive freedom being more relevant to psychology or individual
morality than to political and social institutions. This, however,
would be premature, for among the most hotly debated issues in
political philosophy are the following: Is the positive
concept of freedom a political concept? Can individuals or groups
achieve positive freedom through political action? Is it possible for
the state to promote the positive freedom of citizens on their behalf?
And if so, is it desirable for the state to do so? The classic texts
in the history of western political thought are divided over how these
questions should be answered: theorists in the classical liberal
tradition, like Constant, Humboldt, Spencer and Mill, are typically
classed as answering ‘no’ and therefore as defending a
negative concept of political freedom; theorists that are critical of
this tradition, like Rousseau, Hegel, Marx and T.H. Green, are
typically classed as answering ‘yes’ and as defending a
positive concept of political freedom.

In its political form, positive freedom has often been thought of as
necessarily achieved through a collectivity. Perhaps the clearest case
is that of Rousseau's theory of freedom, according to which individual
freedom is achieved through participation in the process whereby one's
community exercises collective control over its own affairs in
accordance with the ‘general will’. Put in the simplest
terms, one might say that a democratic society is a free society
because it is a self-determined society, and that a member of that
society is free to the extent that he or she participates in its
democratic process. But there are also individualist applications of
the concept of positive freedom. For example, it is sometimes said
that a government should aim actively to create the conditions
necessary for individuals to be self-sufficient or to achieve
self-realization. The welfare state has sometimes been defended on
this basis, as has the idea of a universal basic income. The negative
concept of freedom, on the other hand, is most commonly assumed in
liberal defences of the constitutional liberties typical of
liberal-democratic societies, such as freedom of movement, freedom of
religion, and freedom of speech, and in arguments against paternalist
or moralist state intervention. It is also often invoked in defences
of the right to private property. This said, some philosophers have
contested the claim that private property necessarily enhances
negative liberty (Cohen 1991, 1995), and still others have tried to
show that negative liberty can ground a form of egalitarianism
(Steiner 1994).

After Berlin, the most widely cited and best developed analyses of the
negative concept of liberty include Hayek (1960), Day (1971),
Oppenheim (1981), Miller (1983) and Steiner (1994). Among the most
prominent contemporary analyses of the positive concept of liberty are
Milne (1968), Gibbs (1976), C. Taylor (1979) and Christman (1991,
2005).
2. The Paradox of Positive Liberty

Many liberals, including Berlin, have suggested that the positive
concept of liberty carries with it a danger of authoritarianism.
Consider the fate of a permanent and oppressed minority. Because the
members of this minority participate in a democratic process
characterized by majority rule, they might be said to be free on the
grounds that they are members of a society exercising self-control
over its own affairs. But they are oppressed, and so are surely
unfree. Moreover, it is not necessary to see a society as democratic
in order to see it as self-controlled; one might instead adopt an
organic conception of society, according to which the collectivity is
to be thought of as a living organism, and one might believe that this
organism will only act rationally, will only be in control of itself,
when its various parts are brought into line with some rational plan
devised by its wise governors (who, to extend the metaphor, might be
thought of as the organism's brain). In this case, even the majority
might be oppressed in the name of liberty.

Such justifications of oppression in the name of liberty are no mere
products of the liberal imagination, for there are notorious
historical examples of their endorsement by authoritarian political
leaders. Berlin, himself a liberal and writing during the cold war,
was clearly moved by the way in which the apparently noble ideal of
freedom as self-mastery or self-realization had been twisted and
distorted by the totalitarian dictators of the twentieth century
— most notably those of the Soviet Union — so as to claim
that they, rather than the liberal West, were the true champions of
freedom. The slippery slope towards this paradoxical conclusion
begins, according to Berlin, with the idea of a divided self. To
illustrate: the smoker in our story provides a clear example of a
divided self, for she is both a self that desires to get to an
appointment and a self that desires to get to the tobacconists, and
these two desires are in conflict. We can now enrich this story in a
plausible way by adding that one of these selves — the keeper of
appointments — is superior to the other: the self that is a
keeper of appointments is thus a ‘higher’ self, and the
self that is a smoker is a ‘lower’ self. The higher self
is the rational, reflecting self, the self that is capable of moral
action and of taking responsibility for what she does. This is the
true self, for rational reflection and moral responsibility are the
features of humans that mark them off from other animals. The lower
self, on the other hand, is the self of the passions, of unreflecting
desires and irrational impulses. One is free, then, when one's higher,
rational self is in control and one is not a slave to one's passions
or to one's merely empirical self. The next step down the slippery
slope consists in pointing out that some individuals are more rational
than others, and can therefore know best what is in their and others'
rational interests. This allows them to say that by forcing people
less rational than themselves to do the rational thing and thus to
realize their true selves, they are in fact liberating them from their
merely empirical desires. Occasionally, Berlin says, the defender of
positive freedom will take an additional step that consists in
conceiving of the self as wider than the individual and as represented
by an organic social whole — “a tribe, a race, a church, a
state, the great society of the living and the dead and the yet
unborn”. The true interests of the individual are to be
identified with the interests of this whole, and individuals can and
should be coerced into fulfilling these interests, for they would not
resist coercion if they were as rational and wise as their coercers.
“Once I take this view”, Berlin says, “I am in a
position to ignore the actual wishes of men or societies, to bully,
oppress, torture in the name, and on behalf, of their
‘real’ selves, in the secure knowledge that whatever is
the true goal of man ... must be identical with his freedom”
(Berlin 1969, pp. 132–33).

Those in the negative camp try to cut off this line of reasoning at
the first step, by denying that there is any necessary relation
between one's freedom and one's desires. Since one is free to the
extent that one is externally unprevented from doing things, they say,
one can be free to do what one does not desire to do. If being free
meant being unprevented from realizing one's desires, then one could,
again paradoxically, reduce one's unfreedom by coming to desire fewer
of the things one is unfree to do. One could become free simply by
contenting oneself with one's situation. A perfectly contented slave
is perfectly free to realize all of her desires. Nevertheless, we tend
to think of slavery as the opposite of freedom. More generally,
freedom is not to be confused with happiness, for in logical terms
there is nothing to stop a free person from being unhappy or an unfree
person from being happy. The happy person might feel free,
but whether they are free is another matter (Day, 1970).
Negative theorists of freedom therefore tend to say not that having
freedom means being unprevented from doing as one desires, but that it
means being unprevented from doing whatever one might desire to do
(Steiner 1994. Cf. Van Parijs 1995; Sugden 2006).

Some theorists of positive freedom bite the bullet and say that the
contented slave is indeed free — that in order to be free the
individual must learn, not so much to dominate certain merely
empirical desires, but to rid herself of them. She must, in other
words, remove as many of her desires as possible. As Berlin puts it,
if I have a wounded leg ‘there are two methods of freeing myself
from pain. One is to heal the wound. But if the cure is too difficult
or uncertain, there is another method. I can get rid of the wound by
cutting off my leg’ (1969, pp. 135–36). This is the
strategy of liberation adopted by ascetics, stoics and Buddhist sages.
It involves a ‘retreat into an inner citadel’ — a
soul or a purely noumenal self — in which the individual is
immune to any outside forces. But this state, even if it can be
achieved, is not one that liberals would want to call one of freedom,
for it again risks masking important forms of oppression. It is, after
all, often in coming to terms with excessive external limitations in
society that individuals retreat into themselves, pretending to
themselves that they do not really desire the worldly goods or
pleasures they have been denied. Moreover, the removal of desires may
also be an effect of outside forces, such as brainwashing, which we
should hardly want to call a realization of freedom.

Because the concept of negative freedom concentrates on the external
sphere in which individuals interact, it seems to provide a better
guarantee against the dangers of paternalism and authoritarianism
perceived by Berlin. To promote negative freedom is to promote the
existence of a sphere of action within which the individual is
sovereign, and within which she can pursue her own projects subject
only to the constraint that she respect the spheres of others.
Humboldt and Mill, both advocates of negative freedom, compared the
development of an individual to that of a plant: individuals, like
plants, must be allowed to grow, in the sense of developing their own
faculties to the full and according to their own inner logic. Personal
growth is something that cannot be imposed from without, but must come
from within the individual.
3. Two Attempts to Create a Third Way

Critics, however, have objected that the ideal described by Humboldt
and Mill looks much more like a positive concept of liberty than a
negative one. Positive liberty consists, they say, in exactly this
growth of the individual: the free individual is one that develops,
determines and changes her own desires and interests autonomously and
from within. This is not liberty as the mere absence of obstacles, but
liberty as autonomy or self-realization. Why should the mere absence
of state interference be thought to guarantee such growth? Is there
not some third way between the extremes of totalitarianism and the
minimal state of the classical liberals — some non-paternalist,
non-authoritarian means by which positive liberty in the above sense
can be actively promoted?
3.1 Positive Liberty as Content-neutral

Much of the more recent work on positive liberty has been motivated by
a dissatisfaction with the ideal of negative liberty combined with an
awareness of the possible abuses of the positive concept so forcefully
exposed by Berlin. John Christman (1991, 2005, 2009), for example, has
argued that positive liberty concerns the ways in which
desires are formed — whether as a result of rational reflection
on all the options available, or as a result of pressure, manipulation
or ignorance. What it does not regard, he says, is the
content of an individual's desires. The promotion of positive
freedom need not therefore involve the claim that there is only one
right answer to the question of how a person should live, nor need it
allow, or even be compatible with, a society forcing its members into
given patterns of behavior. Take the example of a Muslim woman who
claims to espouse the fundamentalist doctrines generally followed by
her family and the community in which she lives. On Christman's
account, this person is positively unfree if her desire to conform was
somehow oppressively imposed upon her through indoctrination,
manipulation or deceit. She is positively free, on the other hand, if
she arrived at her desire to conform while aware of other reasonable
options and she weighed and assessed these other options rationally.
Even if this woman seems to have a preference for subservient
behavior, there is nothing necessarily freedom-enhancing or
freedom-restricting about her having the desires she has, since
freedom regards not the content of these desires but their mode of
formation. On this view, forcing her to do certain things rather than
others can never make her more free, and Berlin's paradox of positive
freedom would seem to have been avoided.

It remains to be seen, however, just what a state can do, in practice,
to promote positive liberty in Christman's sense without encroaching
on any individual's sphere of negative liberty: the conflict between
the two ideals seems to survive his alternative analysis, albeit in a
milder form. Even if we rule out coercing individuals into specific
patterns of behavior, a state interested in promoting autonomy in
Christman's sense might still be allowed considerable space for
intervention of an informative and educational nature, perhaps
subsidizing some activities (in order to encourage a plurality of
genuine options) and financing this through taxation. Liberals might
criticize this on anti-paternalist grounds, objecting that such
measures will require the state to use resources in ways that the
supposedly heteronomous individuals, if left to themselves, might have
chosen to spend in other ways. Some liberals will make an exception in
the case of the education of children (in such a way as to cultivate
open minds and rational reflection), but even here other liberals will
object that the right to negative liberty includes the right to decide
how one's children should be educated.
3.2 Republican Liberty

Other theorists of liberty have remained closer to the negative
concept but have attempted to go beyond it, saying that liberty is not
merely the enjoyment of a sphere of non-interference but the enjoyment
of certain conditions in which such non-interference is guaranteed
(see especially Pettit 1997, 2001, 2014, and Skinner 1998, 2002).
These conditions may include the presence of a democratic constitution
and a series of safeguards against a government wielding power
arbitrarily, including the separation of powers and the exercise of
civic virtues on the part of citizens. As Berlin admits, on the
negative view, I am free even if I live in a dictatorship just as long
as the dictator happens, on a whim, not to interfere with me (see also
Hayek 1960). There is no necessary connection between negative liberty
and any particular form of government. On the alternative view
sketched here, I am free only if I live in a society with the kinds of
political institutions that guarantee the independence of each citizen
from exercises of arbitrary power. Quentin Skinner has called this
view of freedom ‘neo-Roman’, invoking ideas about freedom
both of the ancient Romans and of a number of Renaissance and early
modern writers. Philip Pettit has called the same view
‘republican’, and this label has tended to dominate in the
recent literature (Weinstock and Nadeau 2004; Larmore 2004; Laborde
and Maynor 2008).

Republican freedom can be thought of as a kind of status: to
be a free person is to enjoy the rights and privileges attached to the
status of republican citizenship, whereas the paradigm of the unfree
person is the slave. Freedom is not simply a matter of
non-interference, for a slave may enjoy a great deal of
non-interference at the whim of her master. What makes her unfree is
her status, such that she is permanently liable to interference of any
kind. Even if the slave enjoys non-interference, she is, as Pettit
puts it, ‘dominated’, because she is permanently subject
to the arbitrary power of her owner.

Contemporary republicans therefore claim that their view of freedom is
quite distinct from the negative view of freedom. As we have seen, one
can enjoy non-interference without enjoying non-domination;
conversely, according to Pettit, one can enjoy non-domination while
nevertheless being interfered with, just as long as the interference
in question is constrained, through republican power structures, to
track one's interests. Only arbitrary power is inimical to freedom,
not power as such. On the other hand, republican freedom is also
distinct from positive freedom as expounded and criticized by Berlin.
First, republican freedom does not consist in the activity of virtuous
political participation; rather, that participation is seen as
instrumentally related to freedom as non-domination. Secondly, the
republican concept of freedom cannot lead to anything like the
oppressive consequences feared by Berlin, because it has a commitment
to non-domination and to liberal-democratic institutions already built
into it.

It remains to be seen, however, whether the republican concept of
freedom is ultimately distinguishable from the negative concept, or
whether republican writers on freedom have not simply provided good
arguments to the effect that negative freedom is best promoted, on
balance and over time, through certain kinds of political
institutions rather than others. While there is no necessary
connection between negative liberty and democratic government, there
may nevertheless be a strong empirical correlation between the two.
Ian Carter (1999, 2008), Matthew H. Kramer (2003, 2008), and Robert
Goodin and Frank Jackson (2007) have argued, along these lines, that
republican policies are best defended empirically on the basis of the
standard negative ideal of freedom, rather than on the basis of a
conceptual challenge to that ideal. An important premise in such an
argument is that the extent of a person's negative freedom is a
function not simply of how many single actions are prevented, but of
how many different act-combinations are prevented. On this
basis, people who can achieve their goals only by bowing and scraping
to their masters must be seen as less free than people who can achieve
those goals unconditionally. Another important premise is that the
extent to which a person is negatively free depends, in part, on
the probability with which he or she will be constrained from
performing future acts or act-combinations. People who are subject to
arbitrary power can be seen as less free in the negative sense even if
they do not actually suffer interference, because the probability of
their suffering constraints is always greater (ceteris
paribus, as a matter of empirical fact) than it would be if they
were not subject to that arbitrary power. Perhaps this non-trivial
probability is sufficient to explain the sense of exposure and
precariousness of the ‘dominated’. In reply, Pettit
(2008a, 2008b) and Skinner (2008) have insisted that what matters for
an agent's freedom is the impossibility of others interfering with
impunity, not the improbability of their doing so.

Much of the most recent literature on political and social freedom has
concentrated on the above debate over the differences between the
republican and liberal (i.e. negative) conceptions of freedom.
Critiques of the republican conception that build on, or are otherwise
sympathetic to, those of Carter and Kramer, can be found in Bruin
(2009), Lang (2012) and Shnayderman (2012). Pettit himself has
continued to refine his position, and has further discussed its
relation to that of Berlin (Pettit 2011). Berlin's own conception of
negative liberty, he argues, occupies an inherently unstable position
between the more restrictive Hobbesian view and the more expansive
view of freedom as non-domination.

Pettit's analysis of freedom has inspired a number of recent works by
political theorists sympathetic to the republican tradition. Frank
Lovett has developed an account of domination as a descriptive
concept, and of justice as the minimization of domination (Lovett
2010). Several other authors have made use of the concept of
domination in addressing more specific problems in normative political
theory, such as disability rights, workplace democracy, social
equality, and education policy (De Wispelaere and Casassas 2014; Breen
and McBride 2015). 

4. One Concept of Liberty: Freedom as a Triadic Relation

The two sides identified by Berlin disagree over which of two
different concepts best deserves the name of ‘liberty’.
Does this fact not denote the presence of some more basic
agreement between the two sides? How, after all, could they
see their disagreement as one about the definition of liberty if they
did not think of themselves as in some sense talking about the
same thing? In an influential article, the American legal
philosopher Gerald MacCallum (1967) put forward the following answer:
there is in fact only one basic concept of freedom, on which both
sides in the debate converge. What the so-called negative and
positive theorists disagree about is how this single concept of
freedom should be interpreted. Indeed, in MacCallum's view, there are
a great many different possible interpretations of freedom, and it is
only Berlin's artificial dichotomy that has led us to think in terms
of there being two.

MacCallum defines the basic concept of freedom — the concept on
which everyone agrees — as follows: a subject, or agent, is free
from certain constraints, or preventing conditions, to do or become
certain things. Freedom is therefore a triadic relation — that
is, a relation between three things: an agent, certain
preventing conditions, and certain doings or becomings of the agent.
Any statement about freedom or unfreedom can be translated into a
statement of the above form by specifying what is free or
unfree, from what it is free or unfree, and what it is free
or unfree to do or become. Any claim about the presence or
absence of freedom in a given situation will therefore make certain
assumptions about what counts as an agent, what counts as a constraint
or limitation on freedom, and what counts as a purpose that the agent
can be described as either free or unfree to carry out.

The definition of freedom as a triadic relation was first put forward
in the seminal work of Felix Oppenheim in the 1950s and 60s. Oppenheim
saw that an important meaning of ‘freedom’ in the context
of political and social philosophy was as a relation between two
agents and a particular (impeded or unimpeded) action. This
interpretation of freedom remained, however, what Berlin would call a
negative one. What MacCallum did was to generalize this triadic
structure so that it would cover all possible claims about freedom,
whether of the negative or the positive variety. In MacCallum's
framework, unlike in Oppenheim's, the interpretation of each of the
three variables is left open. In other words, MacCallum's position is
a meta-theoretical one: his is a theory about the differences between
theorists of freedom.

To illustrate MacCallum's point, let us return to the example of the
smoker driving to the tobacconists. In describing this person as
either free or unfree, we shall be making assumptions about each of
MacCallum's three variables. If we say that the driver is
free, what we shall probably mean is that an agent,
consisting in the driver's empirical self, is free from external
(physical or legal) obstacles to do whatever he or she might want to
do. If, on the other hand, we say that the driver is unfree,
what we shall probably mean is that an agent, consisting in a higher
or rational self, is made unfree by internal, psychological
constraints to carry out some rational, authentic or virtuous plan.
Notice that in both claims there is a negative element and a positive
element: each claim about freedom assumes both that freedom
is freedom from something (i.e., preventing conditions)
and that it is freedom to do or become something.
The dichotomy between ‘freedom from’ and ‘freedom
to’ is therefore a false one, and it is misleading to say that
those who see the driver as free employ a negative concept and those
who see the driver as unfree employ a positive one. What these two
camps differ over is the way in which one should interpret each of the
three variables in the triadic freedom-relation. More precisely, we
can see that what they differ over is the extension to be
assigned to each of the variables.

Thus, those whom Berlin places in the negative camp typically conceive
of the agent as having the same extension as that which it is
generally given in ordinary discourse: they tend to think of the agent
as an individual human being and as including all of the empirical
beliefs and desires of that individual. Those in the so-called
positive camp, on the other hand, often depart from the ordinary
notion, in one sense imagining the agent as more extensive than in the
ordinary notion, and in another sense imagining it as less extensive:
they think of the agent as having a greater extension than in ordinary
discourse in cases where they identify the agent's true desires and
aims with those of some collectivity of which she is a member; and
they think of the agent as having a lesser extension than in ordinary
discourse in cases where they identify the true agent with only a
subset of her empirical beliefs and desires — i.e., with those
that are rational, authentic or virtuous. Secondly, those in Berlin's
positive camp tend to take a wider view of what counts as a constraint
on freedom than those in his negative camp: the set of relevant
obstacles is more extensive for the former than for the latter, since
negative theorists tend to count only external obstacles as
constraints on freedom, whereas positive theorists also allow that one
may be constrained by internal factors, such as irrational desires,
fears or ignorance. And thirdly, those in Berlin's positive camp tend
to take a narrower view of what counts as a purpose one can be free to
fulfill. The set of relevant purposes is less extensive for them than
for the negative theorists, for we have seen that they tend to
restrict the relevant set of actions or states to those that are
rational, authentic or virtuous, whereas those in the negative camp
tend to extend this variable so as to cover any action or state the
agent might desire.

On MacCallum's analysis, then, there is no simple dichotomy between
positive and negative liberty; rather, we should recognize that there
is a whole range of possible interpretations or
‘conceptions’ of the single concept of liberty. Indeed, as
MacCallum says and as Berlin seems implicitly to admit, a number of
classic authors cannot be placed unequivocally in one or the other of
the two camps. Locke, for example, is normally thought of as one of
the fathers or classical liberalism and therefore as a staunch
defender of the negative concept of freedom. He indeed states
explicitly that ‘[to be at] liberty is to be free from restraint
and violence from others’. But he also says that liberty is not
to be confused with ‘license’, and that “that ill
deserves the name of confinement which hedges us in only from bogs and
precipices” (Second Treatise, parags. 6 and 57). While
Locke gives an account of constraints on freedom that Berlin would
call negative, he seems to endorse an account of MacCallum's third
freedom-variable that Berlin would call positive, restricting this to
actions that are not immoral (liberty is not license) and to those
that are in the agent's own interests (I am not unfree if prevented
from falling into a bog). A number of contemporary libertarians have
provided or assumed definitions of freedom that are similarly morally
loaded (e.g. Nozick 1974; Rothbard 1982). This would seem to confirm
MacCallum's claim that it is conceptually and historically misleading
to divide theorists into two camps — a negative liberal one and
a positive non-liberal one.
5. The Analysis of Constraints: Their Types and Their Sources

To illustrate the range of interpretations of the concept of freedom
made available by MacCallum's analysis, let us now take a closer look
at his second variable — that of constraints on freedom.

Advocates of negative conceptions of freedom typically restrict the
range of obstacles that count as constraints on freedom to those that
are brought about by other agents. For theorists who conceive of
constraints on freedom in this way, I am unfree only to the extent
that other people prevent me from doing certain things. If I
am incapacitated by natural causes — by a genetic handicap, say,
or by a virus or by certain climatic conditions — I may be
rendered unable to do certain things, but I am not, for that
reason, rendered unfree to do them. Thus, if you lock me in
my house, I shall be both unable and unfree to leave. But if I am
unable to leave because I suffer from a debilitating illness or
because a snow drift has blocked my exit, I am nevertheless not
unfree, to leave. The reason such theorists give, for restricting the
set of relevant preventing conditions in this way, is that they see
unfreedom as a social relation — a relation between
persons (see Oppenheim 1961; Miller 1983; Steiner 1983;
Kristjánsson 1996; Kramer 2003; Morriss 2012; Shnayderman 2013;
Schmidt forthcoming). Unfreedom as mere inability is thought by such
authors to be more the concern of engineers and medics than of
political and social philosophers. (If I suffer from a natural or
self-inflicted inability to do something, should we to say that I
remain free to do it, or should we say that the inability
removes my freedom to do it while nevertheless not implying that I am
unfree to do it? In the latter case, we shall be endorsing a
‘trivalent’ conception, according to which there are some
things that a person is neither free nor unfree to do. Kramer 2003
endorses a trivalent conception according to which freedom is
identified with ability and unfreedom is the prevention (by others) of
outcomes that the agent would otherwise be able to bring about.) 

In attempting to distinguish between natural and social obstacles we
shall inevitably come across gray areas. An important example is that
of obstacles created by impersonal economic forces. Do economic
constraints like recession, poverty and unemployment merely
incapacitate people, or do they also render them unfree? Libertarians
and egalitarians have provided contrasting answers to this question by
appealing to different conceptions of constraints. Thus, one way of
answering the question is by taking an even more restrictive view of
what counts as a constraint on freedom, so that only a subset of the
set of obstacles brought about by other persons counts as a
restriction of freedom: those brought about intentionally. In
this case, impersonal economic forces, being brought about
unintentionally, do not restrict people's freedom, even
though they undoubtedly make many people unable to do many
things. This last view has been taken by a number of market-oriented
libertarians, including, most famously, Friedrich von Hayek (1960,
1982), according to whom freedom is the absence of coercion, where to
be coerced is to be subject to the arbitrary will of another. (Notice
the somewhat surprising similarity between this conception of freedom
and the republican conception discussed earlier, in section 3.2)
Critics of libertarianism, on the other hand, typically endorse a
broader conception of constraints on freedom that includes not only
intentionally imposed obstacles but also unintended obstacles for
which someone may nevertheless be held responsible (for Miller and
Kristjánsson and Shnayderman this means morally
responsible; for Oppenheim and Kramer it means causally
responsible), or indeed obstacles created in any way whatsoever, so
that unfreedom comes to be identical to inability (see Crocker 1980;
Cohen 1988; Sen 1992; Van Parijs 1995).

This analysis of constraints helps to explain why socialists and
egalitarians have tended to claim that the poor in a capitalist
society are as such unfree, or that they are less free than the rich,
whereas libertarians have tended to claim that the poor in a
capitalist society are no less free than the rich. Egalitarians
typically (though not always) assume a broader notion than
libertarians of what counts as a constraint on freedom. Although this
view does not necessarily imply what Berlin would call a positive
notion of freedom, egalitarians often call their own definition a
positive one, in order to convey the sense that freedom requires not
merely the absence of certain social relations of prevention but the
presence of abilities, or what Amartya Sen has influentially called
‘capabilities’ (Sen 1985, 1988, 1992). (Important
exceptions to this egalitarian tendency to broaden the relevant set of
constraints include Waldron (1993) and Cohen (2011), who demonstrate,
for the sake of argument, that relative poverty is in fact empirically
inseparable from, and indeed proportional to, the imposition of
physical barriers by other agents, and Steiner (1994), who grounds a
left-libertarian theory of justice in the idea of an equal
distribution of social freedom.)

We have seen that advocates of a negative conception of freedom tend
to count only obstacles that are external to the agent. Notice,
however, that the term ‘external’ is ambiguous in this
context, for it might be taken to refer either to the location of the
causal source of an obstacle or to the location of the obstacle
itself. Obstacles that count as ‘internal’ in terms of
their own location include psychological phenomena such as ignorance,
irrational desires, illusions and phobias. Such constraints can be
caused in various ways: for example, they might have a genetic origin,
or they might be brought about intentionally by others, as in the case
of brainwashing or manipulation. In the first case we have an internal
constraint brought about by natural causes; in the second, an internal
constraint intentionally imposed by another human agent.

More generally, we can now see that there are in fact two different
dimensions along which one's notion of a constraint might be broader
or narrower. A first dimension is that of the source of a
constraint — in other words, what it is that brings about a
constraint on freedom. We have seen, for example, that some theorists
include as constraints on freedom only obstacles brought about by
human action, whereas others also include obstacles with a natural
origin. A second dimension is that of the type of constraint
involved, where constraint-types include the types of internal
constraint just mentioned, but also various types of constraint
located outside the agent, such as physical barriers that render an
action impossible, obstacles that render the performance of an action
more or less difficult, and costs attached to the performance of a
(more or less difficult) action. The two dimensions of type and source
are logically independent of one another. Given this independence, it
is theoretically possible to combine a narrow view of what counts as a
source of a constraint with a broad view of what types of obstacle
count as unfreedom-generating constraints, or vice versa. As
a result, it is not clear that theorists who are normally placed in
the ‘negative’ camp need deny the existence of internal
constraints on freedom (see Kramer 2003; Garnett 2007).

To illustrate the independence of the two dimensions of type and
source, consider the case of the unorthodox libertarian Hillel Steiner
(1974–5, 1994). On the one hand, Steiner has a much
broader view than Hayek of the possible sources of
constraints on freedom: he does not limit the set of such sources to
intentional human actions, but extends it to cover all kinds of human
cause, whether or not any humans intend such causes and whether or not
they can be held morally accountable for them, believing that any
restriction of such non-natural sources can only be an arbitrary
stipulation, usually arising from some more or less conscious
ideological bias. On the other hand, Steiner has an even
narrower view than Hayek about what type of obstacle
counts as a constraint on freedom: for Steiner, an agent only counts
as unfree to do something if it is physically impossible for
her to do that thing. Any extension of the constraint variable to
include other types of obstacle, such as the costs anticipated in
coercive threats, would, in his view, necessarily involve a reference
to the agent's desires, and we have seen (in sec. 2) that for those
liberals in the negative camp there is no necessary relation between
an agent's freedom and her desires. Consider the coercive threat
‘Your money or your life!’. This does not make it
impossible for you to refuse to hand over your money, only much less
desirable for you to do so. If you decide not to hand over the money,
you will suffer the cost of being killed. That will count as
a restriction of your freedom, because it will render physically
impossible a great number of actions on your part. But it is not the
issuing of the threat that creates this unfreedom, and you are not
unfree until the sanction (described in the threat) is carried out.
For this reason, Steiner excludes threats — and with them all
other kinds of imposed costs — from the set of obstacles that
count as freedom-restricting. This conception of freedom derives from
Hobbes (Leviathan, chs. 14 and 21), and its defenders often
call it the ‘pure’ negative conception (M. Taylor 1982;
Steiner 1994; Carter and Kramer 2008) to distinguish it from those
‘impure’ negative conceptions that make at least minimal
references to the agent's beliefs, desires or values.

Steiner's account of the relation between freedom and coercive threats
might be thought to have counterintuitive implications, even from the
liberal point of view. Many laws that are normally thought to restrict
negative freedom do not physically prevent people from doing what is
prohibited, but deter them from doing so by threatening punishment.
Are we to say, then, that these laws do not restrict the negative
freedom of those who obey them? A solution to this problem may consist
in saying that although a law against doing some action, x,
does not remove the freedom to do x, it nevertheless renders
physically impossible certain combinations of actions that
include doing x and doing what would be precluded by the
punishment. There is a restriction of the person's overall
negative freedom — i.e. a reduction in the overall number of
act-combinations available to her — even though she does not
lose the freedom to do any specific thing taken in isolation (Carter
1999).
6. The Concept of Overall Freedom

The concept of overall freedom appears to play an important role both
in everyday discourse and in contemporary political philosophy. It is
only recently, however, that philosophers have stopped concentrating
exclusively on the meaning of a particular freedom — the freedom
to do or become this or that particular thing — and have started
asking whether we can also make sense of descriptive claims to the
effect that one person or society is freer than another or of liberal
normative claims to the effect that freedom should be maximized or
that people should enjoy equal freedom or that they each have a right
to a certain minimum level of freedom. The literal meaningfulness of
such claims depends on the possibility of gauging degrees of overall
freedom, sometimes comparatively, sometimes absolutely.

Theorists disagree, however, about the importance of the notion of
overall freedom. For some libertarian and liberal egalitarian
theorists, freedom is valuable as such. This suggests that more
freedom is better than less (at least ceteris paribus), and
that freedom is one of those goods that a liberal society ought to
distribute in a certain way among individuals. For other liberal
theorists, like Ronald Dworkin (1977, 2011) and the later Rawls
(1991), freedom is not valuable as such, and all claims about maximal
or equal freedom ought to be interpreted not as literal references to
a quantitative good called ‘liberty’ but as elliptical
references to the adequacy of lists of certain particular liberties,
or types of liberties, selected on the basis of values other than
liberty itself. Generally speaking, only the first group of theorists
finds the notion of overall freedom interesting.

The theoretical problems involved in measuring overall freedom include
that of how an agent's available actions are to be individuated,
counted and weighted, and that of comparing and weighting different
types (but not necessarily different sources) of constraints on
freedom (such as physical prevention, punishability, threats and
manipulation). How are we to make sense of the claim that the number
of options available to a person has increased? Should all options
count for the same in terms of degrees of freedom, or should they be
weighted according to their importance in terms of other values? In
the latter, does the notion of overall freedom really add anything of
substance to the idea that people should be granted those specific
freedoms that are valuable? Should the degree of variety among options
also count? And how are we to compare the unfreedom created by the
physical impossibility of an action with, say, the unfreedom created
by the difficulty or costliness or punishability of an action? It is
only by comparing these different kinds of actions and constraints
that we shall be in a position to compare individuals' overall degrees
of freedom. These problems have been addressed, with differing degrees
of optimism, not only by political philosophers (Steiner 1983; Carter
1999; Kramer 2003; Garnett 2016) but also, and increasingly, by social
choice theorists interested in finding a freedom-based alternative to
the standard utilitarian or ‘welfarist’ framework that has
tended to dominate their discipline (e.g. Pattanaik and Xu 1991, 1998;
Hees 2000; Sen 2002; Sugden 1998, 2003, 2006; Bavetta 2004; Bavetta
and Navarra 2012, 2014).

MacCallum's framework is particularly well suited to the clarification
of such issues. For this reason, theorists working on the measurement
of freedom tend not to refer a great deal to the distinction between
positive and negative freedom. This said, most of them are concerned
with freedom understood as the availability of options. And the notion
of freedom as the availability of options is unequivocally negative in
Berlin's sense at least where two conditions are met: first, the
source of unfreedom-creating constraints is limited to the actions of
other agents, so that natural or self-inflicted obstacles are not seen
as decreasing an agent's freedom; second, the actions one is free or
unfree to perform are weighted in some value-neutral way, so that one
is not seen as freer simply because the options available to one are
more valuable or conducive to one's self-realization. Of the
above-mentioned authors, only Steiner embraces both conditions
explicitly. Sen rejects both of them, despite not endorsing anything
like positive freedom in Berlin's sense.
7. Is the Distinction Still Useful?

We began with a simple distinction between two concepts of liberty,
and have progressed from this to the recognition that liberty might be
defined in any number of ways, depending on how one interprets the
three variables of agent, constraints, and purposes. Despite the
utility of MacCallum's triadic formula and its strong influence on
analytic philosophers, however, Berlin's distinction remains an
important point of reference for discussions about the meaning and
value of political and social freedom. Are these continued references
to positive and negative freedom philosophically well-founded?

It might be claimed that MacCallum's framework is less than wholly
inclusive of the various possible conceptions of freedom. In
particular, it might be said, the concept of self-mastery or
self-direction implies a presence of control that is not captured by
MacCallum's explication of freedom as a triadic relation. MacCallum's
triadic relation indicates mere possibilities. If one thinks
of freedom as involving self-direction, on the other hand, one has in
mind an exercise-concept of freedom as opposed to an
opportunity-concept (this distinction comes from C. Taylor 1979). If
interpreted as an exercise concept, freedom consists not merely in the
possibility of doing certain things (i.e. in the lack of
constraints on doing them), but in actually doing certain
things in certain ways — for example, in realizing one's true
self or in acting on the basis of rational and well-informed
decisions. The idea of freedom as the absence of constraints on the
realization of given ends might be criticised as failing to capture
this exercise concept of freedom, for the latter concept makes no
reference to the absence of constraints.

However, this defence of the positive-negative distinction as
coinciding with the distinction between exercise- and
opportunity-concepts of freedom has been challenged by Eric Nelson
(2005). As Nelson points out, most of the theorists that are
traditionally located in the positive camp, such as Green or
Bosanquet, do not distinguish between freedom as the absence of
constraints and freedom as the doing or becoming of certain things.
For these theorists, freedom is the absence of any kind of constraint
whatsoever on the realization of one's true self (they adopt a
maximally extensive conception of constraints on freedom), and the
absence of all factors that could prevent the action
x is, quite simply, equivalent to the realization of
x. In other words, if there really is nothing
stopping me from doing x — if I possess all the means
to do x, and I have a desire to do x, and no desire,
irrational or otherwise, not to do x — then I do
x. An equivalent way to characterize the difference between
such positive theorists and the so-called negative theorists of
freedom lies in the degree of specificity with which they describe
x. For those who adopt a narrow conception of constraints,
x is described with a low degree of specificity (x
could be exemplified by the realization of any of a large array of
options); for those who adopt a broad conception of constraints,
x is described with a high degree of specificity (x
can only be exemplified by the realization of a specific option, or of
one of a small group of options).

What perhaps remains of the distinction is a rough categorization of
the various interpretations of freedom that serves to indicate their
degree of fit with the classical liberal tradition. There is indeed a
certain family resemblance between the conceptions that are normally
seen as falling on one or the other side of Berlin's divide, and one
of the decisive factors in determining this family resemblance is the
theorist's degree of concern with the notion of the self. Those on the
‘positive’ side see questions about the nature and sources
of a person's beliefs, desires and values as relevant in determining
that person's freedom, whereas those on the ‘negative’
side, being more faithful to the classical liberal tradition, tend to
consider the raising of such questions as in some way indicating a
propensity to violate the agent's dignity or integrity (Carter 2011a).
One side takes a positive interest in the agent's beliefs, desires and
values, while the other recommends that we avoid doing so.