We discuss presupposition, the phenomenon whereby speakers mark 
linguistically the information that is presupposed or taken for 
granted, rather than being part of the main propositional content of 
a speech act. Expressions and constructions carrying presuppositions 
are called “presupposition triggers”, forming a large 
class including definites and factive verbs. The article first 
introduces the range of triggers, the basic properties of 
presuppositions such as projection and cancellability, and the 
diagnostic tests used to identify them. The reader is then introduced
to major models of presupposition from the last 50 years, separated 
into three classes: Frege-Strawson derived semantic models, pragmatic
models such as that offered by Stalnaker, and dynamic models. Finally
we discuss some of the main current issues in presupposition theory. 
These involve accommodation, which occurs when a hearer's knowledge 
state is adjusted to meet the speaker's presuppositions; 
presupposition failure, which occurs when a presupposition is (known 
to be) false; the interaction between presuppositions and attitudes; 
and the triggering problem, i.e., the problem of explaining why 
presuppositions occur in the first place.
 
1. Introduction


Speakers take a lot for granted. That is, they presuppose 
information. As we wrote this, we presupposed that readers would 
understand English. But we also presupposed, as we wrote the last 
sentence, repeated in 
 (1),
 that there was a time when we wrote it, for otherwise the fronted 
phrase “as we wrote this” would not have identified a 
time interval.

(1)As we wrote this, we presupposed that readers would
understand English.



We also presupposed that the sentence was jointly authored, for 
otherwise “we” would not have referred. And we 
presupposed that readers would be able to identify the reference of 
“this”, i.e., the article itself. And we presupposed that
there would be at least two readers, for otherwise the bare plural 
“readers” would have been inappropriate. And so on and 
on. 


Here note a first distinction: the presupposition that an 
interlocutor would understand English corresponds to an assumption we
made in using English words, but it has nothing to do with the 
meanings of any of those words. On the other hand, the existence of a
time when we wrote the article is a requirement associated with our 
use of a specific word, “as”. It is a requirement built 
into the meaning of the temporal preposition “as” that in
a phrase “as X”, the “X” 
has to hold at some time. We say that “as” is a 
presupposition trigger. Similarly, “this” is a 
presupposition trigger requiring something to refer to, the bare 
plural is a presupposition trigger requiring existence of multiple 
individuals, and “would” is a presupposition trigger 
requiring a salient future or hypothetical circumstance.


We can say that the presupposition that the interlocutor speaks 
English, like the presupposition that the interlocutor is interested 
in what the speaker (or writer) has to say, is a conversational 
presupposition or, following Stalnaker (1972; 1974), speaker
presupposition or pragmatic presupposition. The 
presuppositions associated with specific triggers are said to be 
conventional or semantic. In fact, this 
terminological distinction is of theoretical import: as we will see 
later, some theorists regard it as an open question whether there are
any purely conventional presuppositions. A halfway house, suggested 
for example by Karttunen (1973) and Soames (1982), is to define a 
notion of utterance presupposition, thus involving both a 
specific form that is uttered, and a speaker who utters it.


It is important to note that to call presuppositional expressions 
“conventional” or “semantic” is not 
necessarily to imply that the presuppositions they trigger don't 
depend on the context in any way. For example, although 
“this” may be viewed as a conventional presupposition 
trigger, its interpretation very much depends on the context, 
obviously.


What makes presuppositions special? That is, to the extent that 
presuppositions are just a part of the conventional meaning of some 
expressions, what makes them sufficiently distinctive that they merit
their own entries in handbooks and encyclopedias, as well as many 
hundreds of other articles and book chapters elsewhere? First, 
presuppositions are ubiquitous. And second, there are various 
respects in which the behavior of presuppositions differs sharply 
from other aspects of meaning.


As regards the ubiquity of presuppositions, at least the following 
lexical classes and constructions are widely agreed to be 
presupposition triggers:

factives (Kiparsky and Kiparsky, 1970)
  
  Berlusconi knows that he is signing the end of Berlusconism. 
  
  →
  Berlusconi is signing the end of Berlusconism.
aspectual verbs (“stop, continue”) (Simons, 2001; Abusch, 2002; Lorenz, 1992) 
  
  China has stopped stockpiling metals. 
  
  →
  China used to stockpile metals.
temporal clauses headed by “before”, “after”, “since”, etc. (Beaver and Condoravdi, 2003; Heinämäki, 1974) 
  
  The dude released this video before he went on a killing spree. 
  
  →
  The dude went on a killing spree.
manner adverbs (Abbott, 2000) 
  
  Jamie ducked quickly behind the wall.
  →
  Jamie ducked behind the wall.
sortally restricted predicates of various categories (e.g., “bachelor”) (Thomason, 1972) 
  
  Julius is  bachelor.
  → 
  Julius is an adult male.
cleft sentences  (Delin, 1995; Prince, 1986) 
  
  It was Jesus who set me free. 
  
  →
  Somebody set me free.
quantifiers (Roberts, 1995; Gawron, 1995; Abusch and Rooth, 2000; Cooper, 1983) 
  
  I have written to every headmaster in Rochdale. 
  
  →
  There are headmasters in Rochdale.
definite descriptions (strawson:ref, etc.) 
  
  The Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago stood up and wagged his finger. 

→
Trinidad and Tobago have a (unique) prime minister.
names (van der Sandt, 1992) 
  
  The author is Julius Seidensticker. 
  
  → 
  Julius Seidensticker exists.
intonation (e.g., focus, contrast) (Jackendoff, 1972; Geurts and van der Sandt, 2004; Roberts, 1998) 
  
  HE set me free.[1]

  →
  Somebody set me free.




And this is only a small sample of the words and syntactic 
constructions that have been classified as presupposition triggers, 
so even if in some cases there may be doubts about this diagnosis, it
can hardly be doubted that presupposition triggers abound in everyday
language. In the following sections we will discuss the behaviors 
which mark out presuppositions from ordinary entailments, and then 
introduce some of the theories that have been developed to account 
for those behaviors.
2. Projection


The hallmark of presuppositions, as well as the most thoroughly 
studied presuppositional phenomenon, is projection 
(Langendoen and Savin, 1971). Consider 
 (2).
 This has all the presuppositions in 
 (3).
 These presuppositions all follow from utterances of the base sentence
in 
 (2),
 as do the regular entailments in 
 (4):
 someone who sincerely uttered 
 (2)
 would certainly be expected to accept the truth of 
 (3)
 and 
 (4),
 as well:

(2)It's the knave that stole the tarts.


(3a)There  is a (salient and identifiable) knave.
(3b)There were (salient and identifiable) tarts.
(3c)Somebody stole the
 tarts.


(4a)The knave did something
illegal.
(4b)The knave took possession of the tarts.



Now consider the sentences in 
 (5):
 

(5a)
 It isn't the knave that stole the tarts. (negation) 

(5b)If it's the knave that stole the tarts, he will be punished. 
(antecedent of a conditional)
(5c)Is it the knave that stole the tarts?
(question)
(5d)Maybe/It is possible that it's the knave that stole
the tarts. (possibility modal)
(5e)Presumably/probably it's the knave that stole
the tarts. (evidential modal, probability adverb)
(5f)The king thinks it's the knave that stole the
tarts. (belief operator)



In all these examples, sentence 
 (2)
 is embedded under various operators. What is notable is that whereas 
the statements in 
 (4)
 do not follow from any of these embeddings (and would not be expected
to follow according to classical logics), the presuppositions do 
follow. We say that the presuppositions are projected. 
Certainly, the inference is more robust in some cases than in others:
while it is hard to imagine sincerely uttering 
 (5a)
 without believing some tarts to be salient, it is easier to imagine a
circumstance in which 
 (5f)
 could be uttered when in fact the tarts were not stolen, but hidden. 
But in the absence of special factors, to which we will turn shortly,
someone who sincerely uttered any of the sentences in 
 (5)
 might be expected to believe all of the presuppositions in 
 (3a)–(3b).


Projection from embeddings, especially negation, is standardly used 
as a diagnostic for presupposition (hence the term “negation 
test”). It makes sense to try several such embeddings when 
testing for presupposition, because it is not always clear how to 
apply a given embedding diagnostic. Thus, for example, we might be 
specifically interested in the presuppositions of the cleft 
construction in 
 (2),
 but doubt whether the sentence in 
 (5a)
 really involves the cleft being within the semantic scope of the 
negation. However, the other embeddings in 
 (5)
 confirm that the it-cleft construction is a presupposition trigger. 
Similarly, although it is widely agreed that the additive particle 
“too” is a presupposition-inducing expression, the 
negation test is awkward to apply in this case:

(6a)
Fred kissed BETTY, too.
(6b)
Fred didn't kiss BETTY, too.



If we embed 
 (6a),
 e.g., under a modal or in the antecedent of a conditional, it turns 
out that this sentence presupposes that someone other than Betty was 
kissed by Fred. However, as 
 (6b)
 shows, the negation test is awkward in this case, because it is not 
immediately clear whether the negation outscopes the additive or 
vice versa. Such examples illustrate how important it is to 
consider several types of embedding when testing for presupposition.
3. Cancellability


What makes the “projection problem” problematic? If some 
part of the meaning of an expression α was never affected by 
the linguistic context in which α was embedded, that would be 
philosophically interesting, and would demand a theoretical 
explanation, but it would at least be trivial to completely describe 
the data: all presuppositional inferences would survive any 
embedding, end of story. But that isn't what happens. Presuppositions
typically project, but often do not, and most of the empirical and 
theoretical work on presupposition since the 1970s has been taken up with 
the task of describing and explaining when presuppositions project, 
and when they don't.


When a presupposition does not project, it is sometimes said to be 
“canceled”. The classic cases of cancellation occur when 
the presupposition is directly denied, as in the following variants 
of some of the sentences in 
 (5):
 

(7a)
In this court, it isn't the knave that steals the tarts: the king 
employs no knaves precisely because he suspects they are responsible 
for large-scale tart-loss across his kingdom.
(7b)If it's the
knave that stole the tarts, then I'm a Dutchman: there is no knave 
here. 
(7c)Is it the knave that stole the tarts? Certainly 
not: there is no knave here. 
(7d)The king thinks it's the 
knave that stole the tarts, but he's obviously gone mad, since there 
is no knave here.



Presuppositional inferences are typically subject to cancellation by 
direct denial only when the presupposition trigger is embedded under 
some other operator. When the presupposition is not embedded, such 
cancelation (by the same speaker) is usually infelicitous, just as 
is cancelation of entailed content which is not embedded. Thus the 
denial of a presupposition in 
 (8)
 and the denial of an ordinary entailment in 
 (9)
 both lead to pragmatically infelicitous utterances (marked by a 
“#”).

(8)#It's the knave that stole
 the tarts, but there is no knave.


(9)
#It's the knave that stole the tarts, but he didn't do anything 
 illegal.



The fact that presuppositions associated with unembedded triggers are
not cancelable is one of the features that distinguishes most 
presuppositions from Gricean conversational implicatures (Grice, 
1989). For example, an utterance of 
 (10a)
 might ordinarily lead to the so-called scalar implicature in 
 (10b).
 But while this implicature is cancelable, as in 
 (10c),
 the presupposition that there is a knave, once again, is not 
cancelable, as shown by the oddity of 
 (10d).
 

(10a)
The knave stole most of the tarts.
(10b)The knave did not 
steal all of the tarts. 
(10c)The knave stole most of the 
tarts—in fact, he stole them all.
(10d)#The knave stole
most of the tarts, but there was no knave.



We can summarize the typical behavior of entailments, 
presuppositions, and conversational implicatures as follows:



Entailments
Presuppositions
Implicatures


Project from embeddings
no
yes
no


Cancelable when embedded
—
yes
—


Cancelable when unembedded
no
no
yes




Because presuppositions are typically only cancelable when embedded, 
Gazdar (1979a, 1979b) argued that presuppositions are usually 
entailed when the trigger is not embedded. 


The literature is choc-a-bloc with examples of presuppositional 
inferences apparently disappearing. Whether such examples are 
appropriately described as involving cancellation is partly 
a theoretical decision, and, as we will see, many scholars avoid 
using the term “cancellation” for some or all such cases.
One reason for this is that the term “cancellation” 
appears to suggest that an inference has been made, and then removed.
But in many cases there are theoretical reasons not to regard this as
an apt characterization, and we will now consider one class of such 
cases.
4. Theories of presupposition
4.1 The Frege-Strawson tradition


Strawson (1950) famously argued against Russell's (1905) theory of 
definite descriptions by proposing that when a definite description 
fails to refer, the result can be a sentence which lacks a truth 
value. Thus presuppositions are understood as definedness conditions,
necessary requirements for an expression to have a meaning. 
Strawson's intuition, which can be traced back to Frege (1892), leads
to the following 
 definition:[2]



Definition 1 (Strawsonian presupposition)
.
  One sentence presupposes another iff whenever the first is true
or false, the second is true. 



Another definition that is often used is this:


Definition 2 (Presupposition via negation)  One 
sentence presupposes another iff whenever the first sentence is true,
the second is true, and whenever the negation of the first sentence 
is true, the second sentence is 
 true.[3]




These two definitions are equivalent if negation maps true onto 
false, false onto true, and is undefined when its argument is 
undefined. However, the second definition is notable in the context 
of the above discussion of projection, because it seems to directly 
encode the projection properties of at least one operator, negation. 
Specifically, it says that presuppositions are inferences that 
survive embedding under 
 negation.[4]



It is clear that if the above assumptions about presupposition are 
made, then the presuppositions of a sentence will be the same as the 
presuppositions of the negation of the sentence. But what about 
projection from embeddings other than negation? A very simple account
of projection is based on the cumulative hypothesis, first 
discussed by Morgan (1969) and Langendoen and Savin (1971). This is 
the idea that presuppositions always project from embedding, as if 
there were no effects like cancellation. A trivalent semantics that 
yields this behavior is obtained by using the Weak Kleene 
connectives (Kleene, 1952). Assume (for all the partial/multivalued 
semantics given in this article) that for classically valued 
arguments, the connectives behave classically. Then Weak Kleene 
connectives (also known as the Bochvar Internal connectives) are 
defined as follows:
Definition 3 (Weak Kleene)  If any
argument of a sentence with a Weak Kleene connective lacks a classical truth value,
then the sentence as a whole lacks a truth value.


Weak Kleene fails as a theory of presupposition because it entails 
that presuppositions project uniformly, whereas in fact they do not. 
Another system of Kleene's, the Strong Kleene connectives, does not 
have this property:
Definition 4 (Strong Kleene)  If the
classically-valued arguments of a sentence with a Strong Kleene connective would
suffice to determine a truth value in standard logic, then the
sentence as a whole has that value; otherwise it doesn't have a
classical value.


For example, in classical logic a conjunction is bound to be false if
one of its conjuncts is false, and therefore the same holds for 
Strong Kleene “and”. Similarly, since in classical logic 
a disjunction must be true if one of its disjuncts is true, the same 
holds for Strong Kleene “or”. We obtain the following 
truth tables for the main binary connectives:



        Conjunction
	

φ ∧ ψ
t
f
✭


t
t
f
✭


f
f
f
f


✭
✭
f
✭




	Disjunction
	

φ ∨ ψ
t
f
✭


t
t
t
t


f
t
f
✭


✭
t
✭
✭




	Implication
	

φ → ψ
t
f
✭


t
t
f
✭


f
t
t
t


✭
t
✭
✭







Now consider the following example:

(11)If there is a knave, then the
 knave stole the tarts.



Let's ignore all presuppositions triggers in 
 (11)
 save “the knave”, and show that Strong Kleene predicts 
that the sentence as a whole does not presuppose that there is a 
knave. Using Definition 
 1,
 it suffices to find at least one model where 
 (11)
 has a classical truth value, but in which there is no knave. This is easy: in 
such a model, the antecedent is false, and inspection of the above 
Strong Kleene table shows that when the antecedent of a conditional 
is false, the conditional is true, as would be the case classically. 
In fact, Strong Kleene predicts no presupposition for 
 (11). 
This is in contradistinction to Weak Kleene, which would fail to 
give 
 (11)
 a classical value in knave-less models, and hence predict that 
 (11)
 presupposes the existence of a knave.


There are other cases where Strong Kleene does predict a 
presupposition, and the presupposition predicted is not what we might
have expected. Thus Strong Kleene gives 
 (12a)
 a classical truth value in all models where there is a knave, and in 
all models where there was trouble. So while we might have expected 
the presupposition in 
 (12b),
 Strong Kleene predicts the presupposition in 
 (12c).[5] We will return to this
issue shortly.

(12a)If
 the knave stole the tarts, then there was trouble. 
(12b)There is a knave.
(12c)If there was no trouble, then there is a 
knave.



Much of the discussion of partial and multivalent approaches to 
presupposition over the last three decades has centered on the 
treatment of negation. Specifically, the issue has been the treatment
of cancellation examples like 
 (13).
 

(13)The tarts were not stolen by
 the knave: there is no knave.



A standard approach is to propose that negation is ambiguous between 
a presupposition-preserving negation and a presupposition-denying 
negation; see e.g., the discussion by Horn (1985, 1989). The 
presupposition-preserving negation (aka choice negation) we 
have already seen, and it is found in both the Weak and Strong Kleene
systems. The presupposition-denying (or exclusion) negation 
is typically taken to map true to false and false to true, as usual, 
but also to map an argument lacking a classical value to true. Thus 
if 
 (13)
 is interpreted in a model where there is no knave, but 
“not” is understood as a presupposition-denying negation,
then “the tarts were stolen by the knave” would lack a 
classical value, but “The tarts were not stolen by the 
knave”, and 
 (13)
 as a whole, would be true.


Note that in this analysis the presupposition triggered by the 
“the knave” is not literally cancelled; rather, the 
negation is interpreted in such a way that the sentence as a whole 
doesn't inherit this presupposition. However, the idea that negation 
is ambiguous between a presupposition-preserving and a 
presupposition-denying sense is controversial, e.g. because thus far
no language has been found in which presupposition-affirming and 
presupposition-denying negations are realized by different lexical 
 items.[6]

4.2 Pragmatic presupposition


Probably the most significant philosophical counterpoint to the 
Frege-Strawson approach to presupposition, other than the original 
non-presuppositional work of Russell, is due to Stalnaker (1972, 
1973, 1974), and later clarified in Stalnaker 
 (1998).[7]
 Stalnaker suggests that a pragmatic notion of presupposition is 
needed, so that the proper object of philosophical study is not what 
words or sentences presuppose, but what people presuppose when they 
are speaking. A pragmatic presupposition associated with a sentence 
is a condition that a speaker would normally expect to hold in the 
common ground between discourse participants when that sentence is 
 uttered.[8]



One consequence of Stalnaker's view is that, contra semantic
accounts of presupposition, presupposition failure need not produce a
semantic catastrophe. There are, however, two weaker types of failure
that can occur: (i) a speaker uttering some sentence 
S can fail to assume that some proposition P is in 
the common ground, even though most utterances of S would be
accompanied by the presupposition that P; and (ii) 
a speaker can presuppose something that is not in the common ground. 
The former idea was used by Stalnaker to account for some tricky 
examples of Karttunen (1971b), involving a subclass of factive verbs 
that Karttunen referred to as “semifactives”. The 
naturally occurring examples in 
 (14a)
 and 
 (14b),
 which involve the (semi-)factive verb “know”, illustrate 
the point. The first sentence of 
 (14a)
 involves a first person, present tense use of “know”, and
there is clearly no presupposition that Mullah Omar is alive. On the 
other hand, 
 (14b)
 involves a past tense, third person use of “know”, and in
this case it does seem to be presupposed (at least in the fictional 
context of the story) that Luke was alive.

(14a)I don't know that Mullah Omar
is alive. I don't know if he's dead either. (General Dan McNeill,
Reuters, 19 May 2008)
(14b)Vader didn't know that Luke was alive, so he had no
intentions of converting Luke to the Sith. (Web example)



Examples like 
 (14)
 led Karttunen to propose that “know” only triggers a 
presupposition in some person and tense forms; whence the term 
“semifactive”. But, as Karttunen himself realized, such a
stipulation is unmotivated. What Stalnaker noticed was that in the 
context of his pragmatic account of presupposition, these examples 
are not problematic. In the pragmatic account, the verb 
“know” need not presuppose that its complement is true. 
When an addressee hears the first sentence of 
 (14a),
 he will realize that if it were in the common ground that Mullah Omar
was alive, then the speaker would know this, and so the speaker's 
claim would be false. Therefore the hearer can reason that the 
speaker is not presupposing the complement of “know” to 
be true. On the other hand, when a hearer is confronted by 
 (14b),
 it is consistent to assume that Luke was alive. Since speakers using 
“know” typically presuppose the truth of the complement, 
we can assume that this is the case here.


Stalnaker's work was part of an avalanche of pragmatic attacks on the
semantic conception of presupposition. However, unlike Stalnaker's, 
many of these proposals had no distinctive role for a notion of 
presupposition. Working in the immediate aftermath of Grice's 1967 
William James 
 lectures,[9]
 many theorists attempted to reduce presupposition to various 
combinations of entailment and implicature. Thus Atlas (1976; 1977; 
1979), Atlas and Levinson (1981), Kempson (1975), Wilson (1975), and 
Böer and Lycan (1976) all present detailed (and partly 
independent) arguments that presuppositions should be understood as 
something akin to conversational implicatures. Generally speaking, 
the approach is to justify presuppositional inferences using the 
maxims of relevance and quantity. Thus, for example, Atlas (1976) 
suggests that an embedding of a definite under a negation will tend 
to produce a meaning that is ruled out as insufficiently strong to 
satisfy the maxim of quantity, unless it is strengthened by treating 
the definite as if it had wide scope and could act referentially. 
Contemporary descendants of this pragmatic tradition include Abbott 
(2000; 2006; 2008), Simons (2001; 2003; 2004; 2006; 2007), and 
Schlenker (2007; 2008). Both Abbott and Simons are at pains to 
distinguish between different presupposition triggers, rather than 
lumping them all together. Thus Simons, for example, makes a case for
deriving presuppositional inferences associated with factives and 
aspectual adverbs using a combination of Stalnakerian and Gricean 
reasoning, but does not argue for making the same reduction in the 
case of typically anaphoric triggers like the additive 
“too”. Schlenker does not make such fine-grained 
distinctions between presupposition triggers. Instead, he 
concentrates on deriving projection properties pragmatically, using 
both standard maxims and at least one rule specific to 
 presuppositions.[10]



There is a contrast among pragmatic approaches to presupposition. 
Those discussed in the preceding paragraph attempt to derive 
presuppositional inferences from general conversational principles, 
thus explaining both the source of presuppositions, and the 
phenomenon of projection. But Stalnaker made no attempt whatsoever to
explain where presuppositions came from, beyond indicating that they 
are inferential tendencies that might or might not be associated with
semantic presuppositions. This emphasis on the projection of 
presuppositions rather than their source, which holds also of the 
contemporaneous work by Karttunen (1974; 1973), to which we shall 
turn shortly, lived on in much of the work influenced by these 
theories. It is particularly obvious in what we can collectively term
cancellation-based theories of presupposition, led by Gazdar
(1979a; 1979b), and including Soames (1979; 1982), Mercer (1987; 
1992), Gunji (1981), Marcu (1994), Horton (1987), Horton and Hirst 
(1988), Bridge (1991), and, of particular note, van der Sandt (1982; 
1988).


Cancellation accounts can be traced back in spirit to Stalnaker's
account of semifactives, discussed above, in which presuppositions are
defeated by competing conversational inferences: the general idea is 
simply to make presuppositions into defaults, and wipe them out 
whenever they would cause pragmatic embarrassment. Gazdar's account 
provided a remarkably straightforward formalization of this account, 
as well as extending to many other projection phenomena, based on a 
general principle he characterizes as “All the news that 
fits”. In Gazdar's model, the strategy for a hearer is first to
identify sets of entailments, conversational implicatures, and 
presuppositions, and then to try adding them to the speaker's set of 
commitments.
Definition  5 (Gazdar: cancellation) 
Implicatures and entailments defeat
presuppositions, so a hearer adds to his or her commitments only those
presuppositions that are compatible with both implicatures and
entailments. All remaining presuppositions are
cancelled.


Consider 
 (15a),
 and assume there are no relevant pre-existing commitments:

(15a)If the
 king is angry, then the knave stole the tarts.
(15b)If there is a knave, then the
 knave stole the tarts.



According to Gazdar, (15a)
 entails is that if there is an angry king then there is a knave and 
he stole some set of tarts. (This much all theories agree on; some 
theories may predict stronger entailments.) The set of implicatures 
would include the clausal implicature that the speaker doesn't know whether a
king is angry, and doesn't know whether a knave stole tarts. The 
presuppositions (or “potential presuppositions”, as 
Gazdar calls them at this stage) might be that there is a unique 
king, a unique knave, and a unique set of tarts. The hearer proceeds 
by adding the entailments to (his representation of) the speaker's 
commitment set, then adding whatever implicatures fit in, and then 
adding the presuppositions that fit after that. In this case, all the
entailments, implicatures, and presuppositions are consistent, and 
all can be added without any being cancelled.


But now consider 
 (15b),
 repeated from 
 (11).
 Here there is an implicature that the speaker doesn't know whether 
there is a knave. The hearer accepts this and other implicatures, and
then considers the presuppositions that there is a knave and that 
there are some tarts. The presupposition that there are tarts is 
unproblematic, and is added, but the hearer cannot consistently add 
the presupposition that there is a knave. So this presupposition 
 is canceled, and  (15b)
 does not presuppose that there is a knave. Hence, according to Gazdar,
presuppositions are sometimes blocked by conversational implicatures.


Within the space of cancellation-based accounts of presupposition, it
is hard to beat Gazdar's for its conceptual and technical simplicity,
and its empirical coverage. Some conceptual questions remain, 
however, such as why it should be that presuppositions are 
the last things to be added in the process of updating commitments. 
Van der Sandt's (1982, 1988) reformulation of the cancellation model 
gives us an alternative way to think about this, for in this model 
presuppositions are considered in terms of whether they could have 
come first.
Definition  6 (Van der Sandt: cancellation) 
Project only those presuppositions that could be conjoined to the beginning of
the sentence while leaving the utterance consistent with (neo-Gricean)
conversational principles.[11]



The intuitive idea underlying van der Sandt's proposal is that 
presuppositions are given information, and in this sense 
“precede” their carrier sentences, if not de 
facto then at least de jure. In the case of 
 (15),
 fronting the presupposition that there are some tarts yields the 
sentences in 
 (16).
 

(16a)
There are some tarts and if the king is angry then the knave stole
the tarts.
(16b)There are some tarts and if there is a knave, then
the knave stole the tarts.



These do not clash with any Gricean principles, so the 
presuppositions are predicted to project. Similarly, adding the 
presupposition that there is a knave to 
 (15a),
 as in 
 (17a),
 produces no clash, so 
 (15a)
 presupposes that there is a knave. But adding the presupposition that
there is a knave to 
 (15b),
 as in 
 (17b),
 does result in a clash: since 
 (17b)
 is truth-conditionally equivalent to the simple conjunction 
“there is a knave and the knave stole the tarts”, it is 
redundant. On van der Sandt's analysis, if fronting a presupposition 
would produce a redundant result, then that presupposition cannot 
project. So 
 (15b)
 is correctly predicted not to presuppose that there is a knave.

(17a)
There is a knave and if the king is angry then the knave stole the
tarts.
(17b)There is a knave and if there is a knave, then the
knave stole the tarts.



It should be noted, however, that even if 
 (17b)
 is redundant, it is arguably a felicitous discourse, and therefore 
some subtlety is needed in applying van der Sandt's cancellation 
principle in the simplified form above. The issue is not simply 
whether a discourse is felicitous, but whether there is any clash 
with the maxims. And this will of course depend on how exactly the 
maxims are formulated. But for the purposes of understanding the 
intention of van der Sandt's analysis, we can take it that though an 
utterance of 
 (17b)
 could be felicitous, it would be a case of flouting (in 
Grice's sense), a case where a maxim is disobeyed in order to 
preserve some greater conversational goal.
4.3 Local contexts and the dynamic turn


For the last fifty years, the philosophical literature on 
presupposition has been primarily focused on definite descriptions. 
But by the early 1970s, more linguistically oriented work had 
expanded the empirical domain of presupposition theory from definite 
descriptions to other trigger types, including factives (Kiparsky and
Kiparsky, 1970), implicatives (Karttunen, 1971a), focus particles 
(Horn, 1969), verbs of judging (Fillmore, 1971) and sortal 
constraints (Thomason, 1972). Stalnaker's discussion of Karttunen's 
semifactives provides an early example of how this linguistic 
expansion of the empirical domain has impacted on philosophical work.
Also by the early 1970s, linguists had expanded the empirical domain 
in another direction. The philosophical literature was largely 
oriented towards unembedded presupposition triggers and triggers 
under negation, but as we have already mentioned, Morgan (1969) and 
Langendoen and Savin (1971) generalized the issue by considering 
arbitrary embeddings. However, it was not until Karttunen (1973) that
the full complexity of the projection problem became apparent. By 
methodically considering projection behavior construction by 
construction, Karttunen showed that there was more variation in 
projection behavior than had been previously described, making it 
quite clear that none of the extant Frege-Strawson derived systems 
could hope to cover every case.
4.3.1 Karttunen: first intimations of satisfaction


Karttunen (1973) presented a taxonomy of embedding constructions that
divided them into three classes: plugs, holes and 
filters. Plugs comprise a class of predicates and operators 
which Karttunen claimed block the projection of presuppositions, 
while holes are a class of predicates and operators which allow 
presuppositions to project freely. So, since “told that” 
is a plug, according to 
 Karttunen,[12] (18) is predicted not to presuppose that there is a
King of France. On the other hand, since “perhaps” is a 
hole, 
 (19)
 is predicted to presuppose that there is a King of France.

(18)Mary told Jim that the King of
 France was bald.


(19)Perhaps the King of France is
 bald.



Karttunen's filters include the binary logical connectives “if 
then”, “and”, and “or”. The intuition 
behind the filter metaphor is that these constructions allow only 
some presuppositions to project, and we have already seen examples of
this phenomenon. Thus example 
 (11)
 showed that sometimes a presupposition in the consequent of a 
conditional does not project: here the presupposition that there was 
a knave is, to use Karttunen's metaphor, filtered out. But the same 
example includes an occurrence of the definite “the 
tarts” in the consequent, and the presupposition that there are
(or at least were) some tarts projects from the conditional. 
Karttunen concluded that the consequent of a conditional acts as a 
hole to some presuppositions, but filters out all those 
presuppositions which are entailed by the antecedent, or, more 
generally, by a combination of the antecedent and contextually 
supplied background information.


Karttunen's key example showing the role of context bears repetition:

(20)
Either Geraldine is not a mormon or she has given up wearing her
holy underwear.



The second half of 
 (20)
 contains (at least) two presupposition triggers: the definite 
description “her holy underwear” and the aspectual verb 
“give up”, which trigger the presuppositions that 
Geraldine used to have and wear holy underwear, respectively. 
Karttunen's filtering condition for disjunctions removes from the 
right disjunct any presuppositions that are entailed by a combination
of the context and the negation of the left disjunct. Now consider a 
context supporting the proposition that all mormons have holy 
underwear which they wear regularly. It follows from this proposition
and the negation of the left disjunct, i.e., the proposition that 
Geraldine is a mormon, that Geraldine has holy underwear and has worn
it regularly. But these are exactly the presuppositions triggered in 
the right disjunct, so they are filtered out. It follows that 
 (20)
 has no presuppositions.


Karttunen's (1973) account is of interest not only for its triptych 
of plugs, holes and filters, but also because it sets the background 
for a crucial shift of perspective in Karttunen (1974), and thence to
the dynamic approaches to presupposition that have been dominant in 
recent years. What remained completely unclear in the 1973 paper was 
why certain presuppositions should be filtered out if they were 
entailed by other material. Karttunen (1974) suggests an alternative 
conception based on the idea of local contexts of 
evaluation. The idea is that the parts of a sentence are not 
necessarily evaluated with respect to the same context as that in 
which the sentence as a whole is evaluated: a local context 
may contain more information than the global context. For 
example, when evaluating a conjunction, the second conjunct is 
evaluated in a local context which contains not only the information 
in the global context, but also whatever information was given by the
first conjunct. Karttunen (1974) defined local contexts of evaluation
for a range of constructions, and suggested the following 
requirement: presuppositions always need to be entailed (or 
“satisfied”, as he puts it) in the local context in which
the trigger is evaluated. Given this requirement, the overall 
presuppositions of a sentence will just be whatever propositions must
be in a context of an utterance in order to guarantee that the 
presuppositions associated with presupposition triggers are satisfied
in their local contexts of interpretation.


Karttunen spelled out how local satisfaction should be calculated 
separately for each connective and operator he considered. However, 
recent developments in Schlenker (2008) provide a general way of 
calculating what the local context should be. In the following 
reformulation of Karttunen's model we incorporate Schlenker's 
insights along the lines proposed by Beaver (2008).


Let us say that some clause in a complex sentence is 
redundant relative to some context of utterance if you can 
replace that clause by a tautology without affecting the amount of 
factual information conveyed by the sentence in that context. For 
example, in 
 (21),
 the first conjunct is redundant in any context of utterance. Here, 
the same factual information would be conveyed by “Mary is Mary
and Mary owns a sheep”, where the first conjunct is replaced by
the tautology “Mary is Mary”.

(21)
Mary owns an animal and Mary owns a 
 sheep.



Now let us say that a clause is left-redundant if it is 
possible to tell by looking at the material in the sentence to the 
left of the clause that the clause is redundant. So “Mary owns 
an animal” is not left-redundant in 
 (21)
 (except if the context of utterance already entails that Mary owns an
animal), because there is no material before that clause, implying 
that it is impossible to tell by looking at material to the left of 
the clause that the clause is redundant. On the other hand, 
“Mary owns an animal” is left-redundant in 
 (22)
 and also in 
 (23):
 

(22)Mary owns a sheep and
 Mary owns an animal.


(23)
If Mary owns a sheep then Mary owns an 
 animal.



Now we can put this to use to define the crucial notion in 
Karttunen's (1974) account.

Definition 7 (Karttunen/Schlenker: Presupposition via 

satisfaction)

A presupposition P is satisfied at point X
in S iff P would be left-redundant if added at
point X.  A sentence presupposes whatever propositions must
hold in global contexts of utterance such that each locally triggered
presupposition is satisfied where its trigger
occurs.


As an example, let us consider the presuppositions predicted for 
 (20),
 repeated below:

(20)
Either Geraldine is not a mormon or she has given up wearing her
holy underwear.



Note first that for all sentences of the form “A or 
B”, the negation of A is satisfied within the
right disjunct. So “Geraldine is a mormon” is satisfied 
in the right disjunct of 
 (20).
 And more generally, anything entailed by a combination of 
propositions in the context and the negation of the left disjunct 
will be satisfied in the right disjunct. Now, let us consider the 
clause “she has given up wearing her holy underwear”: we 
take this to trigger the presupposition that Geraldine has had holy 
underwear that she wore. This presupposition will be satisfied 
provided the global context of utterance, combined with the negation 
of the left disjunct, entails that she has had holy underwear that 
she wore. And classically this will be the case if and only if the 
context supports the conditional “if Geraldine is a mormon, 
then she has had holy underwear that she wore.” Hence, this 
conditional is the presupposition Karttunen (1974) predicts for 
 (20).
 


One notable property of the Karttunen (1974) treatment of examples 
like 
 (20),
 a property not found in his 1973 model, is that the presupposition 
predicted is conditionalized. That is, 
 (20)
 is not predicted to presuppose that Geraldine has had holy underwear 
that she wore, but that if she is a mormon then she has had such 
underwear. We already encountered such conditionalized 
presuppositions in our discussion of Strong Kleene; in fact, Strong 
Kleene predicts exactly the same conditionalized presupposition in 
this case. Karttunen's 1974 model also predicts conditionalized 
presuppositions when the presupposition trigger is in the right 
conjunct of a conjunction, or in the consequent of a 
 conditional.[13]
 Thus in 
 (15a),
 the presuppositions predicted are that there is a king (since 
presuppositions triggered in the antecedent are not conditionalized),
and that if the king is angry, then there is a knave. In 
 (15b),
 the conditional presupposition (that if there is a knave, then there 
is a knave) is trivial, so in effect there is no net 
 presupposition.[14]


(15a)
If the king is angry then the knave stole the tarts.
(15b)
If there is a knave, then the knave stole the tarts. 



Although Karttunen's (1974) model seems quite distinct from any of 
its predecessors, we have already noted that it shares at least some 
predictions with Strong Kleene. An observation made by Peters (1979) 
showed that the 1974 model is surprisingly closely related to the 
semantic accounts of presupposition discussed above. In particular, 
Peters showed that Karttunen's way of calculating presuppositions for
the truth conditional connectives is equivalent to what would be 
obtained within a three-valued logic, but with special non-symmetric 
connectives. Here is a general way of defining the Peters 
Connectives, inspired both by Schlenker (2009; 2008) and George 
(2008):
Definition  8 (Middle Kleene/Peters connectives) 
Go from left to right
through the sentence. For each argument X that takes a non-classical
value, check whether on the basis of material on its left, assigning
an arbitrary classical value to X could conceivably have an effect on
the overall value. If so, the sentence as a whole lacks a classical
truth value. If not, just assign X an arbitrary value, and carry
on. If this procedure allows all non-classical values to be filled in
classically, then the sentence can be assigned a classical
value.


For example, this procedure makes a conjunction classical if both its
arguments are classical, false if the left conjunct is false, and 
undefined otherwise. Thus undefinedness of the left conjunct forces 
undefinedness of the entire conjunction, whereas undefinedness of the
right conjunct only sometimes yields undefinedness of the entire 
conjunct, as seen in the following comparison of truth tables in 
various systems. The net effect is that presuppositions of the left 
conjunct project in the Middle Kleene system, just as in the Weak 
Kleene system, but presuppositions of the right conjunct are 
conditionalized, just as in the Strong Kleene system. The net effect 
is behavior that precisely mirrors that of the Karttunen (1974) 
model.


Definition 9 (Trivalent truth tables for conjunction)




      Weak Kleene
      

φ ∧ ψ
t
f
✭


t
t
f
✭


f
f
f
✭


✭
✭
✭
✭




      Middle Kleene/Peters
      

φ ∧ ψ
t
f
✭


t
t
f
✭


f
f
f
f


✭
✭
✭
✭




      Strong Kleene
      

φ ∧ ψ
t
f
✭


t
t
f
✭


f
f
f
f


✭
✭
f
✭







The equivalence between Peters' connectives and Karttunen's model 
paved the way for a more complete reformulation of the Karttunen 
model in Karttunen and Peters (1977; 1979), where certain types of 
presupposition (which Karttunen and Peters regard as conventional 
implicatures rather than presuppositions) are treated in a 
compositional grammar fragment. This fragment uses two dimensions of 
meaning, one for presupposition and one for assertion, and is 
effectively an implementation of the Peters connectives in a 
four-valued logic; see Krahmer (1994); Krahmer (1998), Beaver (2001),
and Beaver and Krahmer (2001) for discussion, and the latter for a 
fragment that mirrors that of Karttunen and Peters, but allows for  
richer interactions between presuppositions and 
 quantifiers.[15]

4.3.2 Satisfaction theories


Although Karttunen's (1974) model turned out to be equivalent to a 
system which, from a purely technical point of view, is in the 
Frege-Strawson tradition, Karttunen (1974) was one of the seminal 
papers of the dynamic zeitgeist that swept through semantics and 
pragmatics in the last decades of the twentieth century. Also 
relevant here are Hamblin (1970), Stalnaker (1972); Stalnaker (1974) 
and Lewis (1979), all of whom advanced dynamic models of pragmatics 
in which the (joint) commitments of speakers and hearers evolve as 
new assertions are made and their content becomes part of the 
linguistic context available for future utterances. It is against 
this background that Heim (1982; 1983) offered the first 
dynamic semantic account of presupposition. Heim's model utilizes 
Stalnaker's notion of a context as a set of all possible worlds 
compatible with what has been established at that point in a 
conversation, but involves a crucial twist adapted from Karttunen. In
Stalnaker's model, a single global context is updated each 
time new information is asserted, but in Heim's model the context is 
updated locally in the process of computing the meanings of 
subparts of a complex 
 expression.[16]
 We can define a simplified version of Heim's system as follows:
Definition  10 (Dynamic Semantics)
 
Assuming that the context set C is a set of possible worlds
and S and S′ are sentences:


C + S = the subset of worlds in C
  that are compatible with S, but this is defined
  iff S's presuppositions (if any) are true in all worlds
  in C.
C + ¬S = C − (C + S)
C + S ∧ S′
    = (C + S) + S′
C + S ○ S′, where ○
is some truth functional operator, is given by the simplest classical
definition of ○ in terms of ¬ and ∧ that preserves the
order of the two sub-clauses.
S is satisfied in a context C
  iff C + S = C (i.e., updating C
  with S has no effect).
S presupposes S′
    iff S′
    is satisfied in all contexts where update with S is defined. 




Clause (iv) entails that update with a conditional is 
defined via the equivalence A → B ≡ 
¬ (A ∧ ¬ B) (provided that the subordinate clause precedes the main clause). To see how this will work,
let's consider the following example:

(24)
If the king is angry, then the knave stole the tarts. 
 (=(15a))


(25a)
It's not the case that [the king is angry and the knave didn't steal 
the tarts].
(25b)
The king is angry and the knave didn't steal 
the tarts.
(25c)The king is angry.
(25d)The knave  
didn't steal the tarts.
(25e)The knave stole the tarts.



In order to update a context with 
 (24),
 we must do the equivalent of updating with 
 (25a).
 Now clause (ii) says that to update a context with 
 (25a),
 we must first try updating with 
 (25b),
 and subtract the result from the original context (so as to leave 
behind whichever worlds are not compatible with 
 (25a)).
 But 
 (25b)
 is a conjunction, so we must first update with the left conjunct 
 (25c),
 and then with the right 
 (25d).
 Updating with 
 (25c)
 is only defined if the presupposition that there is a king is 
satisfied in all worlds in the context set. We immediately see that 
 (24)
and (25a),
 (25b), and
 (25c)
 all have this requirement, i.e., they presuppose that there is a 
king. Provided this presupposition is satisfied, updating with 
 (25c)
 produces a subset of worlds where the king is angry. We use this 
reduced context set for update with 
 (25d).
 But update with 
 (25d)
 again uses the negation clause (ii) of the above definition.
So we started off with a set of worlds where there is a king, we 
reduced it to a set of worlds where the king is angry, and now we 
must update that context with 
 (25e).
 But this update will only be defined if there is a knave. So it turns
out that update of a context with 
 (24)
 is only defined for contexts where (a) there is a king, and (b) where
all the worlds where the king is angry are worlds where there is a 
knave. Following the definitions through, it turns out that, once 
again, the original sentence carries both a non-conditionalized 
presupposition, that there is a king, and the conditionalized 
presupposition that if the king is angry, then there is a knave.


The satisfaction based model has seen considerable further 
development—see e.g., Beaver (1992; 2001), Chierchia 
(1995), Heim (1992), Zeevat (1992), and, for a rather different 
formalization of a dynamic semantic approach, van Eijck (1993; 1994; 1995).[17]



The most important feature of the satisfaction model not covered in 
the description above is accommodation. For Heim (1982), 
following Lewis (1979), this is a process whereby contexts are 
adjusted so as to make update possible when presuppositions are not 
satisfied. In terms of her treatment of accommodation, Heim's major 
innovation over Lewis was to allow this process to take place not 
only in the global context of utterance, but also on local contexts 
found midway through an update. However, Heim (1982) was not explicit
about exactly how accommodation should work and what should be 
accommodated.


Beaver's model of accommodation, first published in Beaver (1992), 
was the first to make explicit how accommodation might operate in the
satisfaction framework, and on this model accommodation is a type of 
filtering operation. Beaver suggests that due to uncertainty about 
what the speaker takes the common ground to be, the hearer has to 
entertain multiple alternative context sets, with some ranking of 
which is the most plausible. All these alternative contexts are 
updated simultaneously. Accommodation is then what happens when the 
update is not defined on what was previously considered to be the 
most plausible context, in which case the hearer drops that context 
from contention. What remains is a new set of contexts in which the 
most plausible one is a context that has been successfully updated. 
For example, a hearer who was not certain about whether the speaker 
took there to be a king would represent contexts where there was a 
king, and contexts where there was not. Regardless of which the 
hearer took initially to be more plausible, updating with 
 (24)
 would then cause contexts in which there was no king to be thrown 
out, leaving only contexts in which there was a king.


Though we will not go into detail here, we should note that Beaver's 
proposal is one of several attempts to deal with the conditionalized 
presuppositions that arise in satisfaction accounts and other 
theories (such as Strong and Middle Kleene). See the discussion in 
Beaver (2001), the earlier solution to the problem of conditionalized
presuppositions offered by Karttunen and Peters (1979), the 
criticisms by Geurts (1996); Geurts (1999a), and recent discussion of
van Rooij (2007), Singh (2007) and Rothschild (2008).
4.3.3 Presupposition and anaphora


While a number of authors have noted that presuppositions behave in 
some respects like anaphors (e.g., Kripke 2009 and Soames 1989), it 
was van der van der Sandt (1989; 1992) who brought 
out the connection the most forcefully. He noted that for every case 
where a pronoun is interpreted anaphorically, but is not 
interpretable as a bound variable, a similar configuration is 
possible with 
 presuppositions.[18]
 Thus in each of the following quadruples, the (a) and (b) cases 
exemplify a phenomenon, while the (c) and (d) cases show that a 
slight divergence from the original configurations (ie. those in (a) 
and (b)), produces infelicity. But also, the (a) and (c) examples 
include an anaphoric pronoun (“it”), and the (b) and (d) 
examples include the factive verb “knows”, triggering a 
presupposition that its propositional complement is true (i.e., that 
Fred left). So anaphora is felicitous in configurations in which 
presuppositions are felicitous, and anaphora is infelicitous in 
configurations in which presuppositions are infelicitous. It seems 
reasonable to conclude that connections between anaphoric pronouns 
and their antecedents on the one hand, and presupposition triggers 
and their antecedents on the other, are sensitive to very similar 
configurational requirements.

Inter-sentential (discourse) anaphora 
(26a)
There was a storm. It was fierce.
(26b)
Fred left. Mary knows that Fred left.
(26c)#It was fierce. There was a storm.
(26d)#Mary knows that Fred left. Fred left.


Donkey anaphora 
(27a)If a farmer owns a donkey then he beats it.
(27b)If Fred left then Mary knows that Fred 
left.
(27c)#If a farmer doesn't own a donkey, then he beats 
it.
(27d)#If Fred didn't leave left then Mary knows that Fred
left.


Modal subordination 
(28a)A wolf might come to the 
door. It would eat you.
(28b)Fred might have left. Mary would
know that Fred has left.
(28c)#A wolf might come to the door.
It's brown.
(28d)#Fred might have left. Mary knows that Fred 
has left.


Bathroom anaphora 
(29a)Either there's no bathroom in
this house, or else it's in a funny place.
(29b)Either Fred 
didn't leave, or else Mary knows that he left.
(29c)#Either 
there is a bathroom, or else it's in a funny place.
(29d)Either Fred left, or else Mary knows that he left.



In order to account for these parallels, van der Sandt proposed a 
unified treatment of presupposition and anaphora, extending Discourse
Representation Theory so as to deal with both phenomena (see the SEP entry on DRT for an introduction). Presupposed information is 
information that is presented as given, and in van der Sandt's theory
this means that presuppositions want to have discourse referents to 
bind to. However, whereas anaphoric pronouns are rarely interpretable
in the absence of a suitable antecedent, the same does not hold for 
all presupposition-inducing expressions. For instance, a speaker may 
felicitously assert that he met “Fred's sister” even if 
he knows full well that his audience wasn't aware that Fred has a 
sister. In such cases, presuppositions 
are generally accommodated, which is to say that the hearer accepts 
the information as given, and revises his representation of the 
context accordingly. Accommodation, thus understood, is a form of 
exploitation in Grice's sense: the purpose of presuppositional 
expressions is to signal that this or that information is given, and 
if some information is new but not particularly interesting or 
controversial (like the fact that somebody has a sister) the speaker 
may choose to “get it out of the way” by presuppositional
means.


Van der Sandt's theory incorporates the notion of accommodation as 
follows. Presuppositions, according van der Sandt, introduce 
information that prefers to be linked to discourse referents that are
already available in the hearer's representation of the discourse, 
and in this respect they are like pronouns. Van der Sandt in fact 
uses the term binding to refer to configurations in which 
presuppositions have antecedents in the DRS, thus generalizing the 
standard notion of a bound pronoun to cases involving 
multiple discourse referents. However, if a suitable discourse 
antecedent is not available, a new one will be accommodated, and the 
presupposition is linked to that. Generally speaking, accommodation 
is not an option in the interpretation of pronouns, and one reason 
that has been suggested for this is that a pronoun's descriptive 
content is relatively poor (see Section 
 5.1
 for discussion). Being told that “she” is wonderful is 
not particularly helpful if it isn't clear who the pronoun is meant 
to refer to. By contrast, if the speaker refers to “Pedro's 
sister” there is more to go on, and accommodation becomes 
feasible. Hence, van der Sandt hypothesizes that pronouns are a 
special class of presuppositional expressions: while all 
presupposition triggers prefer to be linked to antecedents, pronouns 
almost always must be linked to antecedents, because they are 
descriptively attenuated, and therefore cannot be construed by way of 
accommodation (see below for further discussion of the last point).


To get a better idea how this is supposed to work, let us consider an
example with several presupposition triggers:

(30)If Fred is gay, then his son is gay, 
 too.



This sentence contains the definite NP “his son”, which 
in its turn contains the pronoun “his”, and the focus 
particle “too”. Assuming the pronoun's antecedent is 
“Fred”, the definite NP triggers the presupposition that 
Fred has a son, while the focus particle triggers the presupposition 
that someone other than Fred's son is gay. Note that in this example 
the presupposition triggered by the definite NP is 
“inherited” by the sentence as a whole, while the one 
triggered by “too” is not: normally speaking, an 
utterance of 
 (30)
 would license the inference that (according to the speaker) Fred has 
a son, but not that someone else besides Fred's son is gay.


Van der Sandt's theory accounts for these observations as follows. We
suppose that the grammar assigns 
 (30)
 the intermediate semantic representation in 
 (31)
 [a]. Here [ u1,…, 
um: 
φ1,…,φn] is a simple 
Discourse Representation Structure in linear form, with 
u1,…, um a 
list of discourse markers, and 
φ1,…,φn a list of 
conditions on those markers; connectives like ⇒ are used to 
build up complex conditions. We assume for convenience that most 
interpretative problems have been cleared out of the way already, and
that the only thing that remains to be done is resolve the 
presuppositions triggered by “his”, “his son”
and “too”, which are flagged by 
 Beaver's (1992) trigger symbol, ∂.

(31a)[x: Fred(x), [: gay(x)] ⇒ [: 
∂[z: ∂[y:], z is y's 
son], gay(z), ∂[u: u ≠ z,
gay(u)]]]


…binding y to x…


(31b)[x: Fred(x), [: gay(x)] ⇒ [: 
∂[z: z is x's son], gay(z), 
∂[u: u ≠ z, gay(u)]]]


…accommodating x…


(31c)[x, z: Fred(x), z is 
x's son, [: gay(x)] ⇒ [: gay(z), 
∂[u: u ≠ z, gay(u)]]]


…binding u to x…


(31d)
[x, z: Fred(x), z is 
x's son, [: gay(x)] ⇒ [: gay(z), 
x ≠ z]]


(31a)
 is the initial semantic representation associated with 
 (30),
 in which three presuppositions remain to be resolved. The first of 
these, triggered by the pronoun “his”, is bound to the 
discourse referent representing Fred, which results in 
 (31b).
 The second presupposition, that Fred has a son, cannot be bound, and 
therefore must be interpreted by way of accommodation. Van der 
Sandt's theory, like Heim's (Heim, 1983), stipulates that 
accommodation at the global level, as shown in 
 (31c),
 is preferred to accommodation at other sites, as will be discussed in
section 
 5.1,
 below. Finally, the presupposition triggered by the focus particle 
can be bound in the antecedent of the conditional; after 
simplification, this results in 
 (31d),
 which represents the most natural way of interpreting 
 (30).
 
5. Current issues in presupposition theory
5.1 Accommodation


Accommodation was first discussed by Karttunen (1974) and Stalnaker 
(1974), though only named as such by Lewis (1979). Karttunen 
introduces the concept as follows:
Ordinary conversation does not always proceed
in the ideal orderly fashion described earlier. People do make leaps
and shortcuts by using sentences whose presuppositions are not
satisfied in the conversational context. This is the rule rather than
the exception […] I think we can maintain that a sentence is
always taken to be an increment to a context that satisfies its
presuppositions. If the current conversational context does not
suffice, the listener is entitled and expected to extend it as
required. (Karttunen 1974: 191)


If this looks reasonably straightforward, the reader should be warned
that accommodation is among the more contentious topics in 
presupposition theory.


To begin with, there are various notions of accommodation, some of 
which are stricter than others. To explain, consider the following 
example by Heim (1982):

(32)
John read a book about Schubert and wrote to the author.



In order to determine the intended meaning of “the 
author”, the hearer has to infer (i) that there is an 
author and (ii) that the said author wrote the book read by 
John. Whereas on a broad understanding of accommodation, all of this 
is accommodated, on a strict construal only (i) is, and 
(ii) is a bridging inference. This is not just a matter of 
terminology. If we choose to be strict, we can argue that there is 
something like an “accommodation module”, which as such 
has nothing to do with world knowledge; whereas if the notion is 
construed more broadly, accommodation is of a piece with bridging. To
facilitate the following discussion, we will adopt a strict notion of
accommodation, and take the naive view that what is accommodated is 
the presupposition as triggered by, e.g., a definite NP or factive 
verb.


With these preliminaries out of the way, we turn to the first major 
question: Where are presuppositions accommodated? Though it 
may seem odd at first, this question is inescapable if we assume, as 
is standard in dynamic semantics, that an expression may occur in 
several contexts at the same time (cf. Section 4.3.2).
 To illustrate, consider the following:

(33a)(c0)
 Maybe (c1) Betty is trying to give up drinking.
(33b)(c0) Maybe (c1) 
Wilma thinks that (c2) her husband is having an 
affair.



Here c0 refers to the global context in which a 
given sentence is uttered, and c1and 
c2 are auxiliary, or local, contexts. In 
 (33a),
 the modal “maybe” creates an auxiliary context of 
possible states of affairs in which Betty is trying to give up 
drinking; the same, mutatis mutandis, for 
 (33b).
 Now, the presupposition triggered in 
 (33a),
 that Betty used to drink, can be accommodated globally, 
i.e., in c0, or locally, in 
c1. In the former case, the utterance is 
construed as meaning that Betty used to drink and may be trying to 
kick the habit; in the latter, it conveys that, possibly, Betty used 
to drink and is trying to give up drinking. Likewise, in 
 (33b),
 the presupposition that Wilma is married may be accommodated 
globally, or locally in the most deeply embedded context. But here 
there is a third option, as well: if the presupposition is 
accommodated in c1, the sentence is read as 
“Maybe Wilma is married and she thinks that her husband is 
having an affair”, and we speak of intermediate 
accommodation.


It is widely agreed that the following empirical generalization, made
explicit by Heim (1983), is correct:

PGA:  Global accommodation is preferred to
non-global accommodation.



In the examples in 
 (33b)
 the PGA (preference for global accommodation) clearly holds: 
non-global interpretations may be possible, but they require special 
contexts. One such context may be that the presupposition contains a 
variable which is bound by a quantifier:

(34)Most Germans wash their cars on 
 Saturday.



In 
 (34),
 with the possessive presupposition trigger “their cars”, 
there is a global context (outside of the scope of 
“most”), a local context corresponding to the scope of 
the quantifier (occupied by the VP “wash their cars on 
Saturday”), and also an intermediate context in the restrictor 
of the quantifier (occupied by “Germans”). The most 
natural interpretation of this sentence surely is that most Germans 
who own a car wash it on Saturday. So in this case intermediate 
accommodation seems to be the preferred option, and this might be 
explained, following van der Sandt (1992), by supposing that the 
possessive pronoun contains a variable bound by the quantifier.


There are other cases where intermediate accommodation is virtually 
impossible:

(35)(c0) If (c1) Fred is 
coming to the reception, (c2) he may 
(c3) bring his wife.



It is quite unlikely that this may be construed, with intermediate 
accommodation in c1, which is the antecedent of 
the conditional, as “If Fred is married and is coming to the 
reception, he may bring his wife.” More generally, we don't 
know of any clear-cut cases (i.e., cases in which accommodation is 
not forced by independent contextual factors) in which a 
presupposition triggered in the consequent of a conditional is 
accommodated in the antecedent.


The picture is rather confusing. While in some cases, e.g., 
 (33b)
 or 
 (34),
 intermediate accommodation seems possible and sometimes even 
preferred, in other cases it doesn't seem possible at all. And things
get even more confused than this. Thus far, we have taken our 
examples at face value, but some authors have argued that we 
shouldn't because, as a matter of fact, intermediate accommodation 
doesn't exist. For instance, according to Beaver (2001), the 
presupposition in 
 (34)
 is taken as evidence that the topic of conversation is car-owning 
Germans, and it is this topic that restricts the domain of the 
quantifier, making intermediate accommodation redundant. See also von
Fintel (1995) and Geurts and van der Sandt (1999) for discussion.


Returning to the uncontested PGA, let us ask how it can be explained.
Oddly enough, although virtually all theories of presupposition 
projection accept that the PGA holds, there haven't been that many 
attempts at explanation. One candidate is what Beaver (2001) calls 
the “Atlas Principle”, after Atlas (1976):


AP: One accommodation alternative is preferred to 
another if the former yields a stronger meaning than the latter 
(i.e., if the first meaning unilaterally entails the second). 



Advocates of the Atlas Principle include, besides its eponym, Yeom 
(1998), Zeevat (1999), and Blutner (2000). One thing to note about 
the Atlas Principle is that it does not necessarily vindicate the PGA
across the board: while the predictions made by the Atlas Principle 
will tend to comply with the PGA, they don't have to. However, it is 
surprisingly difficult to say where exactly the Atlas Principle 
deviates from the PGA, because this depends on various extraneous 
factors; see Geurts (2000) for discussion.


A major worry about the Atlas Principle is that it is ad hoc. Despite
its soothing resemblance to Grice's second Quantity Maxim, it is 
questionable whether hearers generally prefer stronger 
interpretations to weaker ones. This suggests that the Atlas 
Principle may not be justified as an instance of a more general 
constraint, and is therefore stipulative. The sad and somewhat 
embarrassing truth seems to be that, thus far, we don't really know 
why the PGA should hold.


One last issue we would like to mention is that accommodation isn't 
always equally easy (or hard). For example:

(36a)
Fred is looking for the person.
(36b)Wilma is pregnant, too.



In 
 (36a)
 the presupposition triggered by “the person” clearly 
requires a salient discourse referent to hook on to; the sentence 
would be infelicitous when uttered out of the blue. The same goes for
the presupposition triggered by “too” in 
 (36b),
 viz. that some salient person different from Wilma is pregnant. This 
sentence would be very peculiar when uttered out of the blue, or in 
any context where no salient person was under discussion who could be
pregnant. Put otherwise: unlike the presuppositions we have seen thus
far, it is very hard to deal with the presuppositions of “the 
person” or “too” by accommodation 
 alone.[19]
 Why should this be so?


As discussed in Section 4.3.3, van der Sandt (1992) proposes that
presuppositions whose descriptive content is relatively poor are hard
to accommodate. This generalization is borne out by pronouns, names,
and semantically attenuate definite NPs like “the
person”. However, it is not very clear what “relatively
poor” means. Definite NPs like “the water molecule”
or “the lonely carpenter” don't strike us as particularly
poor, but may be hard to interpret by way of accommodation. Similarly,
the presuppositions associated with “too” may be quite
rich, and nevertheless they are generally hard to accommodate. Geurts
and van der Sandt (2004) propose to account for the latter by adopting
Heim's (1992) idea that the presupposition triggered by
“too” contains a pronominal element, which blocks
accommodation, but this proposal has been criticised by Beaver and
Zeevat (2007). Be this as it may, it seems clear that van der Sandt's
generalization cannot be read as biconditional: even if poor
presuppositions are difficult to accommodate, the reverse doesn't
always hold.


Another problem with van der Sandt's generalization is that it is not
clear how it can be justified. Even if it somehow makes sense 
that lack of descriptive content should make accommodation hard, we 
would like to know more precisely why this should be so. A possible 
answer to this question may be found in the work on definites by 
Hawkins (1978), Clark and Marshall (1981), Heim (1982), and others. 
As Heim observes, “accommodation in response to definites is 
not normally a matter of adding just the minimal amount of 
information that would restore felicity.” (Heim 1982, p. 372)
It seems plausible that this holds for accommodation generally, and 
it arguably follows from the nature of accommodation. If a 
presupposition is to be interpreted by way of accommodation, new 
information is presented as if it were given, and it has 
often been observed that this will only work if the information is 
not contentious or otherwise remarkable. That is to say, it should 
always be possible to integrate the new information into the
common ground: it has to be linked to what is already given. This 
will be hard with semantically attenuate NPs like “the 
thing” or pronouns like “he”, but also with richer 
definites whose content cannot readily be linked to anything in the 
common ground. Nevertheless, it will generally be easy with richer 
presuppositions, not because they have more content, but 
simply because they are more likely to contain anchors into the 
common ground.
5.2 Presupposition failure


What happens when a presupposition is false? The textbook story goes 
as follows. According to Frege (1892), if an expression A 
suffers from presupposition failure, then any sentence containing 
A will lack a truth value; Russell (1905) famously denied 
this, holding that such a sentence will always be true or false; and 
then Strawson (1950) reaffirmed Frege's position, more or less. What 
is less well known is that in subsequent work, Strawson partly 
recanted his initial view and came to doubt that presupposition 
failure invariably entails lack of truth value.


Taking a closer look at how speakers actually assess a sentence, 
Strawson's (1964) paper argues that presupposition failure may but 
need not cause a sentence to be infelicitous. Two of his examples are
the following:

(37a)
Jones spent the morning at the local swimming pool.
(37b)
The exhibition was visited yesterday by the king of 
 France.



If there is no swimming pool locally, it is “natural 
enough”, according to Strawson, to say that 
 (37a)
 is false, and since the king of France doesn't exist, the same 
applies to 
 (37b).
 And if these sentences are false, their negations must be true. So, 
if these subtle judgments are accepted, these are cases in which 
presupposition failure does not prevent us from saying that a 
sentence is true or false. But Strawson hasn't changed his mind about
Russell's example:
Confronted with the classical example, “The king of
France is bald”, we may well feel it natural to say, straight
off, that the question whether the statement is true or false doesn't
arise because there is no king of France. (Strawson 1964:
90)


Strawson goes on to observe, however, that speakers who subscribe to 
this judgment may want to reconsider their verdict if the context is 
set up the right way. For instance, if Russell's sentence is used to 
answer the question, “What examples, if any, are there of 
famous contemporary figures who are bald?”, we may be more 
inclined to say that the answer is simply false.


Strawson's explanation for these facts is given in terms of 
topicality. The most likely purpose of a sentence like 
 (37a)
 is to describe what Jones has been doing in the morning, rather than,
say, who the local swimming pool was visited by. That is, in the 
absence of further information about the context in which this 
sentence is uttered, its topic will be Jones's exploits. Similarly, a
sentence like 
 (37b)
 will normally be used to convey information about the exhibition. If 
so, although the sentence purports to refer to the king of France, it
is not about him; the king of France is not the topic of discourse, 
nor part of the topic. Strawson's suggestion is that this circumstance 
influences the way presupposition failure is dealt with. On this view, presupposition failure results in infelicity 
only if it affects the topic of a sentence; otherwise the sentence 
will be judged true or false, as appropriate.


One of the appealing features of this analysis is that it takes into 
account the context-dependence of speakers' intuitions. As Strawson 
notes, Russell's sentence 
 (38)
 will by default be construed as being about the king of France, 
whence a strong tendency to judge the sentence infelicitous.

(38)
The king of France is bald.



If, however, the discourse is about royal baldness in general, for 
instance, the grammatical subject of 
 (38)
 is used to say something about that topic, and Strawson's account 
predicts that the sentence is more likely to be judged false, which 
seems correct. Another observation that neatly falls into place is 
that word order may have an effect on speakers' intuitions about 
presupposition failure. As Strawson observes, if we compare 
 (37b)
 with 
 (39),
 where the defective description is in subject position, we would be 
“a shade more squeamish” to say that the sentence is 
simply false (p. 91). This is precisely what one should expect if 
speakers' intuitions were topic-dependent.

(39)
The king of France visited the exhibition 
 yesterday.



Assuming that Strawson's observations are correct, should we say (a) 
that non-topical definites are non-presuppositional, or (b) that they
do have presuppositions, whose failure happens not to affect 
speakers' truth-value judgments? Some authors argue for the former 
(e.g., Reinhart 1982, Horn 1989); this is Strawson's view, as well. 
Von Fintel (2004) argues for the latter: topical or non-topical, 
“the king of France” always triggers the presupposition 
that there is a king of France; it's just our truth-value judgments 
that fluctuate.


Von Fintel's position is in line with what in theories of projection 
has been a working hypothesis for many years. According to these 
theories, presuppositions are never really cancelled: if a 
presupposition seems to disappear, it is because it projects to a 
non-global context. It bears emphasising that this view is not 
irrevocably linked to these theories. It's just that there is no need
to assume that there are part-time presupposition triggers (in a 
sense we expand upon in section 
 5.4
 below), because non-global projection can be relied upon to explain 
why presuppositions sometimes seem to disappear. However, this 
working hypothesis may have to be reassessed if we want to account 
for Strawson's observations, which might be taken to show that 
presuppositions are cancellable not only in complex sentences but in 
simple sentences, as well.


So far we've only talked about definite descriptions. Some other 
triggers show similar variability, but not all of them do. On the one
hand, the domain presuppositions associated with strong quantifiers 
like “all” and “most” behave very much like 
definite presuppositons (de Jong and Verkuyl 1985, Lappin and 
Reinhart 1988, Geurts 2007). For example, when uttered out of the 
blue, 
 (40)
 will sound odd, but when proffered in response to Strawson's 
question, “What examples, if any, are there of famous 
contemporary figures who are bald?”, it seems more likely to be
judged false:

(40)All South-American monarchs are 
 bald.



On the other hand, consider the following:

(41a)
#BENEDICT XVI is the incumbent pope, too.
(41b)
#Carnap managed to be born on May 18, 1891.



Given that there is only one incumbent pope and that it can't have 
taken Carnap any effort to be born on May 18, 1891, both 
 (41a)
 and 
 (41b)
 suffer from presupposition failure. But if someone who knew that 
there was only one incumbent pope uttered 
 (41a),
 it would not seem entirely natural to say that they had lied. One 
might even say that these sentences are true, and this 
intuition does not seem to be topic dependent. The reason for this 
may be that the presuppositions in question are incidental 
to the primary content of these sentences.
5.3 Presuppositions and attitudes


For nearly four decades, the Holy Grail of presupposition research 
has been to explain the behavior of presuppositional expressions 
occurring in embedded positions. Given that the theoretically most 
challenging mode of embedding is within the scope of an attitude 
verb, one might expect that the interaction between presuppositions 
and attitude verbs should have received a lot of attention. But it 
hasn't. And it can't be because this topic doesn't pose any 
problems—on the contrary.


Already the data are problematic. If we embed a presupposition 
trigger under, e.g., “believe”, we observe two types of 
inference. This is seen in the following examples, where 
“→” indicates that there is an inference, but of 
unspecified type:

(42)
Barney believes that his sister is drunk.
 → Barney has a sister. 
 → Barney believes he has a sister.
(43)
Wilma believes that Barney knows that his sister is 
drunk. 
 → Barney's sister is drunk. 
 → Wilma believes that Barney's sister is drunk.



Both inferences are fairly robust, and both seem to exhibit 
projection behavior, as we illustrate here by applying various 
embedding tests to 
 (42):
 

(44a)
Barney doesn't believe that his sister is drunk.
(44b)Perhaps
Barney believes that his sister is drunk.


(45a)
If Barney has a sister, then he believes that his sister is drunk.
(45b)
If Barney believes that he has a sister, then he also 
believes that his sister is drunk.



It is natural to infer from both sentences in 
 (44)
 that Barney has a sister and that he believes that he has a sister, 
and these inferences can be blocked in sentences such as those in 
 (45)
 , where “his sister” occurs in the consequent of 
conditional whose antecedent makes one or the other inference 
explicit. It may seem odd at first that 
 (45a)
 should block the inference that Barney believes that he has a sister,
while 
 (45b)
 blocks the inference that Barney has a sister. Note however that, 
generally speaking, Barney has a sister iff he believes that
he has a sister. We'll return to this theme below.


Interestingly, literally the same pattern of observations holds for 
other attitude verbs, like “want” for example:

(46)
 Barney wants to phone his sister.
 → Barney has a sister. 
 → Barney believes he has a sister.



The puzzling thing is that 
 (46)
 does not license the inference that Barney wants to have a 
sister, but rather that he believes that he has one.


So, in many cases at least, a presupposition φ triggered within 
the scope of “x
VA…”, where 
VA is an attitude verb, gives rise to 
two inferences with a candidature for presuppositional status: (a) 
that φ and (b) that x believes φ. Hence, we have 
three possible ways of proceeding, all of which have been defended in
the literature:

Both inferences are presuppositions
  (Zeevat 1992, at least for certain
  triggers).  
Only φ is a presupposition (Gazdar 1979a; van der
  Sandt 1988; Geurts
  1998).  
Only “x believes that φ” is a
    presupposition (Karttunen
    1974; Heim 1992).  



The first strategy seems to require a stipulation that certain 
presuppositions have to be accommodated twice, once inside a belief 
context, and once outside, and such a strategy is difficult to 
motivate. On the other hand, for (ii) and (iii), 
there is the obvious problem that if we adopt either one of them, we 
only account for half of the observed inferences. How to explain the 
other half? Three possible answers to this question have been 
discussed in the literature, mainly by Heim (1992):

De re construal (Heim 1992) What
at first looks like a presupposition projecting to the global context
may in fact be due to a de re construal of the presupposition
trigger. This solution has several serious drawbacks. In particular,
it hard to see how this proposal can give us both inferences at the
same time, rather than one (de re) or the other
(presupposition). For this and other reasons
(see Geurts 1998), we will not consider it
any further.
Exportation (Karttunen
1974, Heim 1992, Kay
1992) If Barney believes that he has a sister, then it may
plausibly be inferred that he has a sister. Therefore, if it is
presupposed that Barney believes that he has a sister, then it may
plausibly be inferred that he has a sister.
Importation (Heim
1992, Geurts 1998) If Barney has a
sister, then it may plausibly be inferred that he believes that he has
a sister. Therefore, if it is presupposed that Barney has a sister,
then it may plausibly be inferred that he believes that he has a
sister.



If our presupposition theory predicts that the inferences projected 
from “x VA” are of 
the form “x believes that φ”, then we can 
appeal to exportation to explain why φ is inferable, as well. 
Vice versa, a theory which predicts that φ is presupposed can use
importation for deriving “x believes that 
φ”. So we have two options:


 
x believes that φ
φ


Option A
importation
presupposition


Option B
presupposition
exportation




Which is it going to be? That's a hard question, which raises various
issues, only some of which we can mention here. First, it should be 
noted that, whereas for theories of the satisfaction family it is 
hard to avoid making the prediction that
presuppositions projected from attitude contexts are of the form 
“x believes that φ”, DRT-style theories are 
more flexible, and can predict either this or that the presupposition
is simply φ. In other words, satisfaction theories are more 
constrained (which is good), but therefore practically forced to 
resort to Option B.


One of the issues that need to be addressed is that of the true 
nature of importation and exportation inferences. It seems reasonable
to assume that, generally speaking, people's beliefs are consistent 
with the facts, and that we tend to assume by default that this is 
the case. But even if this much is true, it is most unlikely that, by
default, people will infer φ from “x believes 
φ” (for arbitrary x and φ), or vice versa. 
Whatever importation and exportation are, they aren't general 
heuristics; rather, these inferences are almost certainly dependent 
on the context to some degree.


Bearing this in mind, we proceed to illustrate the kind of issues 
that arise when A-type and B-type theories are pitted against each 
other. Let's consider the following example from Heim (1992), 
focusing our attention on the reading of 
 (47a)
 which implies 
 (47b)
 as well as 
 (47c)
 (which is also the most natural one, in our view):

(47a)
John believes that it has stopped raining.
(47b)It was raining.
(47c)John believes it was raining.



According to an A-type theory, 
 (47a)
 presupposes 
 (47b),
 from which 
 (47c)
 is inferred by means of importation. How plausible is this inference?
Note, first, that this inference may not be needed, for it may be 
argued that 
 (47c)
 is entailed by 
 (47a)
 , in which case there is no issue about importation to begin with. On
the other hand, it may be that, once 
 (47b)
 has projected out, 
 (47a)
 is left to mean something like:

(48)
There was a raining event e and John believes that 
e has 
 stopped.



Now the question becomes: given that 
 (47b)
 is presupposed and 
 (48)
 is true, how likely is it that 
 (47c)
 is true, as well? Quite likely, in our view. Granted, it is possible 
to imagine a scenario in which something that was in fact rain is 
believed by John to have stopped, even if he doesn't believe that it 
was rain. But surely this would be a pretty unusual state of affairs.
Hence, the A-type approach seems quite plausible in this case.


Things are somewhat different for B-type theories. Here the question 
to ask is: Given that 
 (47c)
 is presupposed and that 
 (47a)
 is true, how likely is it that 
 (47b)
 is true, as well? Possibly, it could be argued that, since it is 
presupposed that John believes that it was raining, it would
be surprising if it wasn't raining. One problem with this proposal is that 
it is not in general the case that presupposing someone's belief in some proposition
leads to the inference that the proposition is true. For example,
 (49), in which a belief statement
is embedded under a factive verb, seems to presuppose that John thinks
it is raining, and not that it is raining. So, at least in this case,
the A-type importation account seems to be on stronger ground.

(49)
Mary knows that John thinks it is raining.

5.4 Part-time triggers


As we mentioned in 
 §5.2
 theories of presupposition projection tend to adopt the working 
hypothesis that presuppositions are associated with expression types:
if an expression α triggers a presupposition φ, then φ 
will always be triggered by α. This is just a matter of 
economy: since a projection theory already provides a mechanism for 
explaining how presuppositions, once triggered, can seem to 
disappear, there is no need for supposing that there are part-time 
presupposition triggers. Indeed, it would be a bit of a nuisance if 
it turned out that that some expressions or constructions trigger 
their presuppositions on a part-time basis, because then we would 
have two ways of explaining why a given presupposition fails to 
appear: either it has projected to an embedded context or it wasn't 
triggered in the first place.


Are there compelling reasons for believing that there are part-time 
triggers? Not as far as we know. There are suggestive facts, though. 
The following example by Fauconnier (1985) is one. A and 
B are sitting in a bar observing a stranger who doesn't seem
to be too happy:

(50)
A: I wonder why that guy is looking so glum.
B: Maybe his girlfriend jilted him.



The most natural interpretation of B's answer, in this 
context, is that it is possible that the stranger has a girlfriend 
who has jilted him; this construal will require local accommodation 
of the girlfriend if we assume that “his girlfriend” 
always triggers the presupposition that the pronoun's referent has a 
 girlfriend.[20]
 The problem, according to some authors, is that if this is local 
accommodation, then it's too easy. Accommodation, according 
to these authors, is supposed to be hard, and therefore they prefer 
to assume that, in cases like 
 (50),
 no presupposition is triggered to begin with. But why should 
accommodation be hard? The reason that is usually given is that 
accommodation is dispreferred, but that is not entirely convincing. Inferior 
coffee is dispreferred, too, yet it is easier to obtain than decent 
coffee. Examples like 
 (50)
 may be suggestive, but they don't prove much.


There must be better ways of arguing that part-time triggers exist. 
For instance, if we could explain why this or that 
expression triggers such and such a presupposition, one of the 
corollaries might be that the expression in question is a part-time 
trigger. To see how such an argument might go, consider the 
presuppositions associated with aspectual verbs like 
“start” or “stop”:

(51a)
Jill has started smoking pot.  → Jill didn't use to 
smoke pot. 
(51b)
Jill has stopped smoking pot.  → 
Jill used to smoke pot.



Aspectual verbs describe a transition from one state to another, and 
it is always the first state that is presupposed, as the standard 
projection tests will confirm. This is unlikely to be an accident, 
and the explanation might be sought in the fact that interlocutors 
are more interested in where the story is going than where it came 
from, and therefore tend to take the past as given. If a transition 
is described, the past state is in a sense demoted because 
we are more interested in the present and the future. The idea would 
be, of course, that demoted information is presupposed. This is 
admittedly vague, but if it is on the right track, then it is 
plausible to assume that it may depend on the context what parts of 
semantic content are demoted, which would imply that it may depend on
the context whether or not a given presupposition is triggered. 
Examples like the following could then be explained along the same 
lines:

(52)
If anyone stops smoking before July 1, they are eligible for a 
payment from the Tobacco Indemnity Fund. (Example adapted from Abusch 2002.)



On a classical account, the aspectual verb triggers the 
presupposition that x used to smoke, which has to be 
accommodated locally, presumably because x is bound by 
“anyone”, as suggested by van der Sandt (1992). But it is
also conceivable that there was no presupposition to begin with.
6. Concluding remarks


We have presented an overview of the major strands of work on 
presupposition. But we have not considered the question of whether 
presupposition triggers form a natural class in the first place: 
maybe all presupposition triggers are not alike. Like the topics 
discussed in the last section, this is a possibility that has only 
just begun to be explored in detail, with several authors proposing 
to dichotomize presupposition triggers in some way or other (e.g., 
Zeevat 1992, Geurts 1999b, Abusch 2002).


Our own suspicion, if we may end on an opinionated note, is that 
these first attempts to separate presupposition types from each other
may turn out to be too cautious. There are several philosophically 
and linguistically interesting dimensions along which the set of 
presupposition triggers can be partitioned, such as referentiality, 
anaphoricity, ease of accommodation, ease of cancellation, and 
maintenance of truth under presupposition failure. So perhaps what 
will eventually emerge is not a straightforward dichotomy, but a more
complex taxonomy of different types of trigger. And at that point, 
perhaps we may re-ask the question of whether the things that the 
different so-called “presupposition triggers” are 
triggering are in fact presuppositions, in any of the theoretical 
senses of the term “presupposition” that we have 
considered in this article.