Properties (also called ‘attributes,’
‘qualities,’ ‘features,’
‘characteristics,’ ‘types’) are those entities
that can be predicated of things or, in other words, attributed to
them. Moreover, properties are entities that things are said to bear,
possess or exemplify. For example, if we say that that thing over
there is an apple and is red, we are presumably attributing the
properties red and apple to it, and, if the
attribution is veridical, the thing in question exemplifies this
property. Thus, properties can be characterized both as
predicables and as exemplifiables. Relations, e.g.,
loving and between, can also be viewed as
predicables and exemplifiables. More generally they can be treated in
many respects on a par with properties and indeed they may even be
viewed as kinds of properties. Accordingly, this entry will also
discuss them to some extent, although they are treated in more detail
in another entry:
 relations.
 

Questions about the nature and existence of properties are nearly as
old as philosophy itself. Interest in properties has ebbed and flowed
over the centuries, but it has undergone a resurgence since at least
the second half of the last century and keeps flourishing. The recent
collections by Galluzzo & Loux (2015) and Marmodoro & Yates
(forthcoming) well testify this trend. This entry will focus primarily
on what has been done in this field in the last few decades (taking up
where Loux’s (1972) earlier review of the literature leaves
off).

Philosophers who argue that properties exist almost always do so
because they think properties are needed to solve certain
philosophical problems, and their views about the nature of
properties are strongly influenced by the problems they think
properties are needed to solve. So a good deal of discussion here will
be devoted to the tasks properties have been introduced to perform and
the ways in which these tasks influence accounts of the nature of
properties.

In §1 we introduce some distinctions and terminology that will be
useful in subsequent discussion. In §2 we deal with the central
topic of what it is for properties to be exemplified. §3 contains
a discussion of traditional attempts to use properties to explain
phenomena in metaphysics, epistemology, and philosophy of language.
§4 focuses on the three areas where contemporary philosophers
have offered the most detailed accounts based on properties:
philosophy of mathematics, the semantics of natural languages, and
topics in a more nebulous area that might be called naturalistic
ontology. We then turn to issues about the nature of properties,
including their existence conditions (§5), their identity
conditions (§6), and the various sorts of properties there might
be (§7). §8 provides an introductory, informal discussion of
formal theories of properties.
 
1. Distinctions and Terminology
1.1 Properties: Basic Ideas

Not all philosophers acknowledge properties in their ontological
inventory and even those who agree that properties exist often
disagree about which properties there are. This means that it
is difficult to find wholly uncontroversial examples of properties.
For example, someone might claim that apple is a natural kind
and that natural kinds are not properties (Summerford 2003).

Once properties are accepted, however, one would typically say that
they characterize objects or, conversely, that objects
instantiate or exemplify them (as we shall see in
more detail in §2). To illustrate, if apple is
recognized as a property, it is a property that characterizes all
apples.

A fundamental question about properties—second only in
importance to the question whether there are any—is whether they
are universals or particulars. To say that properties are universals
is to say that the selfsame property can be instantiated by
numerically distinct things, at least in typical cases. (Exceptions
are unexemplifiable properties, e.g., round and square, and
properties that can only be exemplified by a single thing, e.g.,
identical to Socrates.) On this view it is possible for two
different apples to exemplify exactly the same color, a single
universal.

It appears then that a universal property can be in two completely
different places (i.e., in two different instances) at the same time,
but ordinary things can never be separated from themselves in this
way. There are scattered individuals (like the former British Empire),
but they have different spatial parts in different places. Properties,
by contrast, do not seem to have spatial parts; indeed, they are
sometimes said to be wholly present in each of their instances. But
how could a single thing be wholly present in widely separated
locations? (Plato, Philebus, 15b-c and Parmenides,
13b.)

There are two typical lines of reply here (both of which commit us to
fairly definite views about the nature of properties). One response is
that properties are not located in their instances (or anywhere else),
so they are never located in two places at once. The other response is
that this objection wrongly judges properties by standards that are
only appropriate for individuals. Properties are a very different sort
of entity, and they can exist in more than one place at the
same time without needing spatial parts to do so (see Johansson 2013
for a recent discussion of this issue, with special emphasis on the
special problems posed by relations.)

Despite these replies, this conundrum has worried some philosophers so
much that they have opted for an alternative view, according to which
properties are just as much individuals or particulars as concrete
things such as apples and desks. No matter how similar the colors of
two apples, their colors are numerically distinct properties, the
redness of the first apple and the redness of the second. Such
individualized properties are variously known as ‘perfect
particulars,’ ‘abstract particulars,’ ‘quality
instances,’ ‘moments,’ ‘modes,’and
‘tropes.’
 Tropes
 have various attractions and liabilities, but since they are the
topic of another entry, here we will construe properties as universals
and limit ourselves to a few clarificatory remarks on tropes in
§1.1.2. We thus presuppose a fundamental distinction between
universals and particulars. This is typically accepted by supporters
of universals, but is not uncontroversial (MacBride 2005).
1.1.1 Predication vs. exemplification

We have talked above in a way that might give the impression that
predication is an activity that we perform, e.g., when we say
or think that a certain apple is red. Although some philosophers might
think of it in this way, predication is typically viewed as a special
link that connects a property to a thing in a way that gives rise to a
proposition, understood as a complex featuring the property and the
thing as constituents with different roles: the latter occurs as
logical subject or argument, as is often said, and
the former as attributed to such an argument. A proposition is also
typically viewed as a mind-independent entity that exists whether we
think of it or not and that may be true or false (Carmichael 2010
argues from this conception of propositions to the existence of
universals.) If a proposition is true (the predication is veridical),
the argument instantiates (exemplifies) the property
and is called an instance of that property. For example, if
there is a red apple, the proposition in which the apple occurs as
logical subject and the property red as attributed to it is
veridical; the apple thus exemplifies this property and is an instance
of it. It is often assumed nowadays that, when an object exemplifies a
property, there is a further, complex, entity, a state of
affairs or fact (Armstrong 1997), having the property
(or perhaps some counterpart of it in the natural world; see §5.4)
and the object as constituents (not all agree however with this
compositional conception; see, e.g.. Bynoe 2011 for a dissenting
voice). States of affairs are typically taken to fulfill the
theoretical roles of truthmakers (the entities that make true
propositions true) and causal relata (the entities connected by causal
relations). Not all philosophers, however, distinguish between
propositions and states of affairs; Russell (1903) acknowledges only
propositions and, for a recent example, so does Gaskin (2008).

Properties are also often characterized as exemplifiables.
But this terminology must be handled with care, because of the
controversial issue of the existence of properties that cannot be
instantiated, e.g., round and square. Other matters of
controversy are whether properties can exist at all without being
exemplified and whether some properties can be exemplified by other
properties (in the way, perhaps, that redness exemplifies the
property of being a color). There is almost universal
consensus, however, on the idea that only properties can be predicated
and exemplified. For example, ordinary objects like apples and chairs
cannot be predicated of, and are not exemplified by, anything.

It is typically assumed that there is just one kind of predication and
we will stick to this view here. It should be noted, however, that
according to some philosophers who have revived Meinong’s
account of
 nonexistent objects,
 there are two modes of predication, sometimes characterized as
‘external’ and ‘internal’ (Castañeda
1972; Rapaport 1978; Zalta 1983). Zalta (1983) traces back the
distinction to Mally and uses ‘exemplification’ to
characterize the former and ‘encoding’ to characterize the
latter. Roughly, the idea is that a Meinongian object such as the
winged horse is, in Zalta’s terminology, an
abstract object that encodes the properties
winged and horse, but does not exemplify them; such
properties can only be exemplified by concrete objects such as birds
and horses in the spatiotemporal realm. These concrete objects do not
encode properties at all, they can only exemplify them. In contrast,
abstract objects can exemplify some properties, e.g.,
abstract or thought by someone. Other Meinongians
have kept predication univocal and have rather invoked a distinction
between two kinds of properties: ‘nuclear,’ such as
red and round and ‘extra-nuclear’ such
as existent and thought by someone (Parsons
1980).
1.1.2 Universals vs. Tropes

According to some philosophers, universals and tropes may coexist in
one ontological framework (see, e.g., Lowe 2006 for a well-known
general system of this kind, and Orilia 2006a, for a proposal based on
empirical data from quantum mechanics). However, nowadays they are
typically seen as alternatives, with the typical supporter of
universals (‘universalist’) trying to do without tropes
and the typical supporter of tropes (‘tropist’) trying to
dispense with universals (see, e.g., Armstrong 1997 and Maurin 2002;
Benovsky 2014 is a recent attempt to show that deciding between these
two frameworks may be a hard and perhaps insurmountable matter). In
order to better clarify how differently they see matters, we may take
advantage of the notion of state of affairs that we have just
introduced. Both parties may agree, say, that there are two red
apples, a and b. They will immediately disagree,
however, for the universalist will add (a) that there are two distinct
states of affairs, that a is red and that b is red,
(b) that the former has a and the universal red as
constituents, and (c) that the latter also has the universal
red as constituent (and differs from the former only by
having b rather than a as additional constituent).
The tropist will rejoinder that there are no such states of affairs
and universals and rather urge that there are entities such as the
redness of a and the redness of b, i.e., two
distinct tropes. Tropes are understood as simple entities,
but the little exchange that we have just imagined suggests that they
are meant to play a theoretical role analogous to the one that the
universalist would invoke for complex entities, i.e., states of
affairs. Hence, tropists typically claim that tropes can be causal
relata (Williams 1953) and truthmakers (Mulligan, Simons and Smith
1984). 

That tropes, in spite of their simplicity, can play the role of states
of affairs, depends on the fact that universals combine two
theoretical roles, only one of which is fulfilled by tropes. On the
one hand, universals are characterizers, inasmuch as they
characterize concrete objects. On the other hand, they are also
unifiers, to the extent that different concrete objects may
be characterized by the very same universal, which is thus somehow
shared by all of them; when this is the case, there is, according to
the universalist, an objective similarity among the different objects
(see §3.1). In contrast, tropes are only characterizers, for they
cannot be shared by distinct concrete objects. Given its dependency on
one specific object, say, the apple a, a trope can do the
work of a state of affairs with a as constituent. But for
tropes to play this role, the tropist will have to pay a price and
introduce additional theoretical machinery to account for objective
similarities among concrete objects. To this end, she will typically
resort to the idea that there are objective resemblances among tropes,
which can then be grouped together in resemblance classes. These
resemblance classes play the role of unifiers for the tropist. Hence,
from the tropist’s point of view ‘property’ is
ambiguous, since it may stand for the characterizers (tropes) or for
the unifiers (resemblance classes) (in the terminology of §6.4 of
the entry on
 mental causation).
 Similarly, ‘exemplification’ and related words may be
regarded as ambiguous insofar as they can be used either to indicate
that an object exemplifies a certain trope or to indicate that the
object relates to a certain resemblance class by virtue of
exemplifying a trope in that class.

The disagreement between the universalist and the tropist is operative
at a very basic ontological level. One may wonder however whether
divergencies at this foundational layer have some impact on more
specific philosophical issues and indeed it has been claimed that this
is the case in philosophy of mind, in particular as regards mental
causation and the tenability of reductive physicalism (Robb 1997;
§6.4 of the entry on
 mental causation;
 Gozzano & Orilia 2008).
1.1.3 Properties and Relations

Properties are usually distinguished from relations. For example, a
specific shade of red or a rest mass of 3 kilograms is a property,
while being smaller than or between are typically
regarded as relations. Relations are usually taken to have a
‘degree’ (‘adicity’, ‘arity’),
which depends on the number of objects that they can relate, or, to
put it otherwise (somewhat metaphorically), on the number of
‘places’ they come with. They are thus called
‘dyadic’ (‘two-place’), ‘triadic’
(‘three-place’), and so forth, depending on their degree.
For example, being smaller than and between are
usually viewed as dyadic (of degree 2) and triadic (of degree 3),
respectively. In line with this classification, properties can be
called ‘monadic’ (of degree 1). (See Van Inwagen 2015 for
a recent example of this way of seeing matters). This terminology is
also applied to predicates. For example, the predicates
‘red’ and ‘smaller than’ are monadic and
dyadic, respectively.

Relations can also be considered predicable and exemplifiable
entities, although, at least in typical cases, they are attributed
simultaneously not to single objects, but to a plurality of objects.
These objects can be said to jointly instantiate the relation
in question, if the attribution is veridical (in which case, one may
add, the objects, i.e., the relata, and the relation are
constituents of a state of affairs). Thus, except where otherwise
noted or where the context indicates otherwise, we will use
‘property’ as a generic term to cover both monadic
(one-place, nonrelational) properties and (polyadic, multi-place)
relations (i.e., properties of degree higher than one). It should be
noted, however, that relations can hardly be said to jointly
instantiate certain objects simpliciter; it seems necessary
to also specify how the instantiation occurs. This comes to the fore
in particular with non-symmetric relations such as loving.
For example, if John loves Mary, then loving is jointly
instantiated by John and Mary in a certain way, whereas if it is Mary
who loves John, then loving is instantiated by John and Mary
in another way. Thus, one often hears that relations are exemplified
by their relata in a certain order, or even that relations are
exemplified by ordered sets of items. How this relational
order should be understood is a complex issue, which has been
discussed more and more in recent years; see §7.4.
1.1.4 Properties vs. Sets

Properties are often compared to sets and sometimes even assimilated
to them. Just as properties can have instances, sets can have members,
and it is typically assumed that, given a property, there is a
corresponding set, called the extension of the property,
having as members exactly those things that exemplify the property.
But it is important to note a fundamental difference between the two.
Sets have clear-cut identity conditions: they are identical when they
have exactly the same members. In contrast, the identity conditions of
properties are a matter of dispute. Everyone who believes there are
properties at all, however, agrees that numerically distinct
properties can have exactly the same instances without being
identical. Even if it turns out that exactly the same things exemplify
a given shade of green and circularity, these two properties are still
distinct. For these reasons sets are called extensional and
properties are often said to be intensional entities.
Precisely because of their intensional nature properties were
dismissed by Quine (1956) as ‘creatures of darkness’ and
just a few decades ago many philosophers concurred with him. But
philosophers now widely invoke properties without guilt or shame.
1.1.5 Realism, Nominalism, and Conceptualism

The deepest question about properties is whether there are any.
Textbooks feature a triumvirate of answers: realism,
nominalism, and conceptualism. There are many
species of each view, but the rough distinctions come to this.
Realists hold that there are universal properties, understood as
mind-independent entities. Nominalists deny this (though some hold
that there are tropes). And conceptualists urge that words (like
‘honesty’) which might seem to refer to properties really
refer to concepts, understood as mind-dependent entities. Nominalism
and conceptualism often come together and often are assimilated to the
extent that they both involve a non-realist stance about universals
(and some would say even an idealist rejection of a mind-independent
world; Hochberg 2013). Such a stance is typically coupled with an
attempt to reduce universals to other entities such as sets or classes
of their instances or, as Lewis (1986) has proposed, to sets of all
their possible instances. The former option suffers from notorious
problems (Armstrong 1978). The latter can hardly be disentangled from
Lewis’s realism about possible worlds; it is thus unpalatable to
most philosophers and affected by its own technical problems (Egan
2004).

A few contemporary philosophers have defended conceptualism (cf.
Cocchiarella 1986, ch. 3; 2007), and recent empirical work on
 concepts
 bears on it, but it is not a common view nowadays. Nominalism has
many supporters, but the pros and cons of its various forms are
treated extensively in other entries (e.g.,
 nominalism in metaphysics
 and
 tropes).
 We will then focus on realism here (but see §5.1.4).

It is important to note that the realist house is a divided one; in
broad outline it is useful to distinguish between those of a Platonist
orientation and those whose views trace back to Aristotle. The former
view universals as transcendent, ante rem in traditional
terminology, capable of existing uninstantiated (see §5.2), but
somehow related by instantiation to the objects that happen to
exemplify them. In contrast, the latter takes universals to be in
rebus, rooted in the spatio-temporal world and thus incapable of
uninstantiated existence (see §5.1.4) and intimately related, some
say as constituents, to the objects that exemplify them (for
a recent take on this old dispute see the essays by Loux, Van Inwagen,
Lowe and Galluzzo in Galluzzo & Loux 2015).
1.2 Talking about Properties

Philosophers do not have a settled idiom for talking about properties.
Often they make do with a simple distinction between singular terms
and predicates. Singular terms are words and phrases that can occupy
subject positions in sentences and that purport to denote or
refer to a single thing. Examples include proper names like
‘Bill Clinton’ and ‘Chicago,’ definite
descriptions like ‘the first female Supreme Court Justice’
and indexicals or demonstratives like ‘I’ or
‘that.’ Predicates, by contrast, can be true of things and
are usually taken to express, or (as some friends of
properties may say) denote, a property. Expressions such as ‘is
a philosopher,’ ‘is wise,’ ‘walks,’
‘loves’ and the like are typically considered predicates.
When we represent a sentence like ‘Quine is a philosopher’
in a standard formal language as ‘P(q),’
we absorb the entire expression ‘is a philosopher’ into
the predicate ‘P.’ There is dispute over whether
‘is a philosopher’ as a whole expresses a property or it
is rather ‘philosopher’ by itself that does. Frege viewed
the meanings of predicates as ‘unsaturated,’ as somehow
endowed with ‘holes’ that have to be filled by meanings of
singular terms to generate thoughts. Philosophers who are influenced
by Frege in this respect tend to prefer the former option. Others are
more inclined to prefer the latter and regard the copula
‘is’ as the expression of an exemplification link
(Strawson 1959; Bergmann 1960). For these philosophers it might be
more appropriate to consider ‘philosopher’ and
‘wise’ as predicates. It will be convenient for us to use
‘predicate’ for expressions of both kinds and view all of
them as ways of expressing properties.

Predicates can be nominalized by means of appropriate
suffixes such as ‘-ity’ or ‘-ness,’ or via
gerundive or infinitive phrases. Nominalization generates singular
terms that at least prima facie denote properties. For example,
‘triangular’ and ‘is triangular’ can be turned
into ‘triangularity’ and ‘being triangular’;
‘drunk’ and ‘is drunk’ into
‘drunkness,’ ‘being drunk’ or ‘to be
drunk’; ‘gives’ and ‘gives a kiss to
Mary’ into ‘giving’ and ‘to give a kiss to
Mary’ (some think that ‘being F’ and
‘F-ness’ stand for different kinds of property
(Levinson 1991), but we will not pursue this line here). It seems also
possible to have definite descriptions and perhaps even indexicals
that refer to properties. If Mary happens to prefer wisdom to any
other property ‘Mary’s favorite property’ seemingly
refers to wisdom. Moreover, though more controversially, if someone
points to a red object while saying: ‘that shade of red is a
beautiful color,’ then the demonstrative ‘that shade of
red’ denotes a property (Heal 1997).

Frege (1892) and Russell (1903) had different opinions regarding the
ontological import of nominalization. According to the former,
nominalized predicates stand for a ‘correlate’ of the
unsaturated entity that the predicate stands for (in Frege’s
terminology they are a ‘concept correlate’ and a
‘concept,’ respectively). According to the latter, who
speaks of ‘inextricable difficulties’ in Frege’s
view (Russell 1903, §49), they stand for exactly the same entity.
Mutatis mutandis, they had the same difference of opinion regarding
singular terms such as ‘Mary’s favorite property.’
There is some prima facie grammatical evidence in favor of
Frege’s view: it is perfectly grammatical to say ‘Monica
is honest’ or ‘Honesty is a virtue,’ but your old
English teacher will cringe if you say ‘Honest is a
virtue’ or ‘Monica is honesty.’ But it is not clear
that ontological conclusions can be drawn from grammar here or that
other compelling reasons can be found (see Parsons 1986 for a good
discussion); moreover, it would be desirable to avoid multiplying
entities and semantic relations beyond necessity (distinguishing
properties and their correlates on the one hand and denoting and
expressing on the other hand). And so here we will be fairly cavalier
about property terms, using terms such as ‘honesty’ and
‘honest’ indifferently to refer to (express) the same
property. It should be noted, however, that some philosophers still
support Frege’s view or at least take it very seriously (see
Cocchiarella 1986 and Landini 2008).
2. Exemplification

We saw right at the outset that objects exemplify properties. More
generally, we may say, items of all sorts, including properties
themselves, exemplify properties, or, in different terminology, they
instantiate, bear, have or possess properties. To reverse order, we
can also say that properties characterize, or inhere in, the items
that exemplify them. There is then a very general phenomenon of
exemplification to investigate, which has been labeled in various
ways, as the variety of terms of art just displayed testifies. All
such terms, including ‘exemplification’ itself, have often
been given special technical senses in the rich array of different
explorations of this territory since Ancient and Medieval times up to
the present age (see, e.g., Lowe 2006, 77), explorations that can
hardly be disentangled from the task of providing a general
ontological picture with its own categorial distinctions. In line with
what most philosophers do nowadays, we choose
‘exemplification,’ or, equivalently,
‘instantiation’ (and their cognates), to discuss this
phenomenon in general and to approach some different accounts that
have been given of it in recent times. It should be borne in mind that
this sweeping use of these terms is to be kept distinct from the more
specialized uses of them that will surface below (and to some extent
have already surfaced above) in describing specific approaches by
different philosophers with their own terminologies.

Some philosophers deem it important to distinguish different kinds of
exemplification, typically in relation to the categorial distinctions
that they put forward in their ontology, whereas others are content
with just one exemplification, applying indifferently to different
categories of entities. The latter option may be considered the
default one and a typical recent case of a philosopher who goes with
it is Armstrong (1997). He distinguishes three basic categories,
particulars, properties or relations, and states of affairs, and takes
exemplification as cutting across them: properties and relations are
exemplified not only by particulars, but by properties or relations
and states of affairs as well. For instance, we may have two states of
affairs exemplifying the relation of causation or laws of nature
consisting of two properties exemplifying a necessitation
relation.

The above-considered Meinongians may perhaps be attributed different
kinds of exemplification corresponding to the different sorts of
predication that they admit (see, e.g., Monhagan’s (2011)
discussion of Zalta’s theory). A more typical example of the
multifarious alternative is however provided by Lowe (2006), who
distinguishes ‘instantiation,’
‘characterization’ and ‘exemplification’ in
his account of four fundamental categories: objects, and three
different sorts of properties, namely kinds (substantial universals),
attributes and modes (tropes) (‘property’ is being used
here as elsewhere in this entry in a most generic sense, possibly not
in line with Lowe’s more restricted usage of it): (i) kinds and
attributes are instantiated by objects and modes, respectively, (ii)
kinds and objects are characterized by attributes and modes,
respectively; (iii) attributes are exemplified by objects, whether
dispositionally or occurrently. Exemplification is dispositional to
the extent that the exemplifying objects instantiate kinds
characterized by the attributes in question, while it is occurrent
when the exemplifying objects are characterized by modes that
instantiate the attributes in question. Thus, for example, Fido is a
dog insofar as it instantiates the kind dog, D,
which in turn is characterized by the attribute of barking,
B. Hence, when Fido is barking, it exemplifies B
occurrently by virtue of being characterized by a barking mode,
b, that instantiates B; and, when it is silent, it
exemplifies B dispositionally, since D, which Fido
instantiates, is characterized by B. (see Gorman 2014 for a
critical discussion of this sort of view).
2.1 Is Exemplification Analyzable?

It might be thought that once a bundle theory of objects is endorsed,
one automatically has an analysis of exemplification in terms of
‘compresence,’ the relation that ties properties together
in such a way that they come to constitute a particular object
(Russell 1948, Pt. IV, ch. 8): a particular’s exemplifying a
property amounts to the property’s being compresent with other
properties, those that constitute the particular in question (recently
there have been on offer mereological interpretations of this; see
Paul 2002 and Shiver 2014). Nevertheless, to the extent that the
relation of compresence is itself taken to be jointly exemplified by
the properties that constitute a given bundle, as it should seemingly
be, there is no real analysis here.

There have been attempts to analyze instantiation even without
(explicitly) endorsing a bundle theory. According to Cowling (2014),
for instance, one can put forward, for at least some properties, an
account in terms of occupying a location. A more well-known assay is
provided by Baxter (2001, 2013), who relies on the notion of
aspect and on the relativization of numerical identity to
counts, as we shall now see. In his view, both particulars
and properties have aspects, which can be similar to distinct
aspects of other particulars or properties. For example, ‘Hume
insofar as he is human’ denotes an aspect had by Hume, and it is
similar to the aspect denoted by ‘Rousseau insofar as he is
human,’ had by Rousseau. Further, ‘humanity insofar as it
is had by Hume,’ denotes an aspect had by humanity, and it is
similar to the other aspect had by humanity that is denoted by
‘humanity insofar as it is had by Rousseau.’ Both
particulars and universals have different aspects. For example, Hume
has also an aspect denoted by ‘Hume insofar as he is
even-tempered,’ which differs from his other above-considered
aspect, since, say, the former accounts for his being a rational
mammal, whereas the latter accounts for his gentle manners. Yet, both
aspects are numerically identical to the extent that the same
particular has them. Similarly, different aspects of the same property
are numerically identical. Thus, Leibniz’s law (telling us that
what is true of x is also true of y, if x
and y are numerically identical), while retained for
properties and particulars, fails for aspects. The numerical identity
of aspects is relative to standards for counting, counts,
which allow us to group items together. Two counts are specifically
relevant for instantiation: the particular count, which
allows us to group particulars together; and the universal
count, which allows us to group universals together. There
can then be a cross-count identity, which holds between an
aspect in a collection generated by a certain count, and an aspect in
a collection generated by another count. For example, humanity insofar
as it is had by Hume, to be found in the collection generated by the
universal count, is cross-count identical to Hume insofar as he is
human, to be found in the collection generated by the universal count.
When there is a cross-count identity of this sort, the universal and
the particular in question are taken to be partially
identical. Instantiation then amounts to the partial identity of
a universal and a particular. Thus, for example, Hume and humanity are
partially identical and accordingly Hume instantiates humanity (he is
human). As one can see, the theoretical and ontological costs of this
analysis are very high and one may well have the feeling, as Baxter
himself worries (2001, 449), that instantiation has been traded off
for something definitely more obscure, such as aspects and an
idiosyncratic view of identity. It can also be suspected that
particulars’ and properties’ having aspects is
presupposed in this analysis and that this having is a
relation rather close to exemplification itself.

Baxter’s analysis has inspired a related approach by Armstrong
(2004), who, however, has tried to do without aspects. At first glance
it seems as if Armstrong analyzes exemplification, for he takes the
exemplification of a property (a universal) by a particular to be a
partial identity of the property and the particular; as he puts it
(2004, 47),‘[i]t is not a mere mereological overlap, as when two
streets intersect, but it is a partial identity.’ However, when
we see more closely what this partial identity amounts to, the
suspicion arises that it presupposes exemplification. For Armstrong
appears to identify a particular via the properties that it
instantiates and similarly a property via the particulars
that instantiate it. So that we may take a particular,
x, to be something like a bundle of properties qua
instantiated by x, say Fx +
Gx + Hx + … +
Px + Qx + …; and a
property, P, as something like a bundle of particulars qua
instantiating P, say Pa +
Pb + … + Px +
Py + … By putting things in this way, we
can then say that a particular is partially identical to a property
when the bundle which the particular is has an element in common with
the bundle that the property is. To illustrate, the x and the
P of our example are partially identical because they have
the element Px in common. Now, the elements of
these bundles are neither properties tout court nor particulars tout
court, which led us to talk of properties qua instantiated and
particulars qua instantiating. But this of course presupposes
instantiation. Alternatively (going very much beyond what Armstrong
explicitly say), we can perhaps take these elements to be
particularized properties, abstract particulars or tropes, which
perfectly resemble each other when the bundle that they constitute is
a property (a resemblance class playing the role of a universal); and
which are compresent, when the bundle that they constitute is a
concrete particular (say, an ordinary object). In any case, there is
the unwelcome consequence that the world becomes dramatically less
contingent than we would have thought at first sight, for neither a
concrete particular nor a property-universal can exist without it
being the case that the former has the properties it happens to have,
and that the latter is instantiated by the same particulars that
actually instantiate it; we get, as Mumford puts it (2007, 185),
‘a major new kind of necessity in the world.’

Despite these proposals, it seems safe to say that most philosophers,
whether tacitly or overtly, take exemplification to be a primitive and
unanalyzable phenomenon. The difficulties encountered by approaches
such as those we have just considered (but see also, e.g., Forrest
2013) can perhaps be taken to confirm that there is some wisdom behind
the majority view.
2.2 Two Crucial Problems: Bradley’s Regress and Self-exemplification

One important motivation, possibly the main one, behind attempts at
analysis such as the ones above is the worry to avoid the so-called
Bradley’s regress regarding exemplification (Baxter 2001, 449;
Munford, 2007, 185). One construal of the regress that has passed into
the literature goes like this (although it is not clear to what extent
Bradley himself had this version in mind; for references to analogous
regresses prior to Bradley’s, see Gaskin 2008, ch. 5, §70).
Suppose that the individual a has the property F.
For a to instantiate F it must be linked to
F by a (dyadic) relation of instantiation,
I1. But this requires a further (triadic) relation
of instantiation, I2, that connects
I1, F and a, and so on without
end. At each stage a further connecting relation is required, and thus
it seems that nothing ever gets connected to anything else.
This regress has traditionally been regarded as vicious (see, e.g.,
Bergmann 1960), although philosophers such as Russell (1903, §55)
and Armstrong (1997, 18–19) have argued that it is not. In doing
so, however, they seem to take for granted the fact that a
has the property F (pretty much as in the brute fact
approach; see below) and go on to see a’s and
F’s instantiating I1 as a further
fact that is merely entailed by the former, which in turn entails
a’s, F’s and
I1’s instantiating I2,
and so on. This way of looking at the matter tends to be regarded as a
standard response to the regress. But those who see the regress as
vicious assume that the various exemplification relations are
introduced in an effort to explain the very existence of the fact that
a has the property F. Hence, from their explanatory
perspective, taking the fact in question as an unquestioned ground for
a chain of entailments is beside the point (cf. Loux 2006, 31–36;
Vallicella 2002). It should be noted, however, that this perspective
suggests a distinction between an ‘internalist’ and an
‘externalist’ version of the regress (in the terminology
of Orilia 2006a). In the former, at each stage we postulate a new
constituent of the fact, or state of affairs, s, that exists
insofar as a has the property F, and there is
viciousness because s can never be appropriately
characterized. In the latter, at each stage we postulate a new,
distinct, state of affairs, whose existence is required by the
existence of the state of affairs of the previous stage. This amounts
to admitting infinite explanatory and metaphysical dependence chains,
but, according to Orilia (2006, §7), since no decisive arguments
against such chains exist, the externalist regress should not be
viewed as vicious. An extensive defense of a similar approach can be
found in Gaskin 2008. See Maurin 2015 for a sustained criticism.

A typical line for those convinced that the regress is vicious has
consisted in proposing that instantiation is not a relation, at least
not a normal one. Some philosophers hold that it is a sui
generis linkage that hooks things up without intermediaries.
Strawson (1959), following W. E. Johnson, calls it a
non-relational tie and Bergmann (1960) calls it a
nexus. Broad likened instantiation to metaphysical glue,
noting that when we glue two sheets of paper together we don’t
need additional glue, or mortar, or some other adhesive to bind the
glue to the paper (Broad 1933, 85). Glue just sticks. And
instantiation just relates. It is metaphysically self-adhesive. An
alternative line has been to claim that there is no such thing as
instantiation at all and that talk of it is just a misleading figure
of speech. At this point it is natural to resort to metaphors like
Frege’s claim that properties have gaps that can be filled by
objects or the early Wittgenstein’s suggestion (if we read him
as a realist about properties) that objects and properties can be
hooked together like links in a chain. Although most realists about
properties nowadays still tend to adopt one or another of these
strategies, Vallicella (2002) has offered a penetrating criticism of
them. His basic point is that, if a has property F,
we need an ontological explanation of why F and a
happen to be connected in such a way that a has F as
one of its properties (unless F is a property that a
has necessarily). But none of these strategies can provide this
explanation. For example, the appeal to gaps is pointless: F
has a gap whether or not it is filled by a (for example, it
could be filled in by another object), and thus the gap cannot explain
the fact that a has F as one of its properties.

Before proposing the above-discussed account of exemplification as
partial identity, Armstrong (1997, 118) has claimed that
Bradley’s regress can be avoided by taking a state of affairs,
say x’s being P, as capable by itself of
holding together its constituents, i.e. the object x and the
property P. Thus, there is no need to invoke a relation of
exemplification linking x and P in order to explain
how x and P succeed in giving rise to a unitary
item, namely the state of affairs in question. There seems to be a
circularity here for it appears that we want to explain how an object
and a property come to be united in a state of affairs by appealing to
the result of this unification, namely the state of affairs itself.
But perhaps this view can be interpreted as simply the idea that
states of affairs should be taken for granted in a primitivist fashion
without seeking an explanation of their unity by appealing to
exemplification or otherwise; this brute fact approach, as we
may call it, seems to be Van Inwagen’s standpoint (1993,
37).

Lowe (2006) has tried to tackle Bradley’s regress within his
multifarious approach to exemplification. In his view,
characterization, instantiation and exemplification, qua
‘formal,’ are to be sharply distinguished from
garden-variety relations such giving or loving,
which guarantees that characterization, instantiation and
exemplification do not give rise to Bradley’s regress (Lowe
2006, 30, 80, 90). In explaining this, Lowe vacillates between taking
them to be internal and declaring them non-existent, (Lowe 2006, 111,
167). Perhaps, they are considered non-existent precisely because
internal, but separating internality from non-existence may be a
better choice, since after all formal relations are in Lowe’s
ontological inventory. Moreover, it is really their internality,
rather than lack of existence, that is appealed to in the attempt to
avoid Bradley’s regress, as shall now illustrate by turning back
to the above Fido example. What a mode instantiates and what it
characterizes belongs to its essence. In other words, a mode cannot
exist without instantiating the attribute it instantiates and
characterizing the object it characterizes. Hence, mode b, by
simply existing, instantiates attribute B and characterizes
Fido. Moreover, since exemplification (the occurrent one, in this
case) results from “composing” characterization and
instantiation, b’s existence also guarantees that Fido
exemplifies B. According to Lowe, we thus have a bunch of
truths, that b characterizes Fido, that b
instantiates B, and that Fido exemplifies B (i.e.,
is barking), all of which are made true by b. Hence, there is
no need to postulate as truthmakers states of affairs with
constituents, Fido and b, related by characterization, or
b and B, related by characterization, or Fido and
B, related by exemplification. This, in Lowe’s opinion,
eschews Bradley’s regress, since this arises precisely because
we appeal to states of affairs with constituents in need of a glue
that contingently keep them together. Nevertheless, there is no loss
of contingency in Lowe’s world picture, for an object need not
be characterized by the modes that happen to characterize it. Thus,
for example, mode b might have failed to exist and there
could have been a Fido silence mode in its stead, in which case the
proposition that Fido is barking would have been false and the
proposition that Fido is silent would have been true. One may wonder
however what makes it the case that a certain mode is a mode of just a
certain object and not of another one, say another barking dog. Even
granting that is essential for b to be a mode of Fido, rather
than of another dog, it remains true that it is of Fido,
rather than of the other dog, and since b might have failed
to exist, one may still think that this being of is also a
contingent glue. The suspicion then is that the problem of accounting
for the relation between a mode and an object has been traded for the
Armstrongian one of what makes it the case that a property-universal
P and an object x make up the state of affairs
x’s being P. But the former problem, one may
urge, is no less thorny than the latter (for a take on Bradley’s
regress analogous to Lowe’s and worries along the lines of those
voiced here, see Simons 2011 and MacBride 2011, respectively).

As it should be clear from this far from exhaustive survey,
Bradley’s regress deeply worries ontologists and the attempts to
tame it keep flowing (see, e.g., Peacock 2012, for an approach
resorting to Russell’s notion of a relating relation, as opposed
to a relation that is not doing its relating work; Tegtmeier 2013, for
a view according to which a fact itself grounds its unity; Schneider
2013 for an appeal to ‘unrepeatable nexuses’ in the
context of an Aristotelian framework in the spirit of the one defended
in Lowe 2006).

We have dealt primarily, more or less explicitly, with the
exemplification of properties by items other than properties, e.g.,
ordinary objects. But presumably properties may also exemplify
properties. For example, if properties are abstract objects, as is
usually thought, then seemingly every property exemplifies
abstractness. But then we should also grant that there is
self-exemplification, i.e., a property exemplifying itself. For
example, abstractness is itself abstract and thus exemplifies itself.
Self-exemplification however has raised severe perplexities since the
early days of Plato.

In various passages throughout his dialogues Plato appears to hold
that all properties exemplify themselves, when he claims that
Forms (which are often taken to be his version of properties)
participate in themselves. This claim serves as a premise in what is
known as his third man argument which, he seems to think, may
show that the very notion of a Form is incoherent
(Parmenides, 132ff). But it is not clear why we should hold
that all properties exemplify themselves (Armstrong 1978, 71). For
instance, why should we think that honesty itself is honest?

A more serious worry related to self-exemplification is
Russell’s famous paradox. If every predicative expression
corresponds to a property, then the expressions ‘is a property
that does not instantiate itself’ should do so. This raises the
question: does this property instantiate itself? Suppose that it
does. Then it is a property that does not instantiate itself;
so if it does instantiate itself, it doesn’t instantiate itself.
Now suppose that it does not instantiate itself. Then it is
one of those properties that do not instantiate themselves; so it does
instantiate itself. Such a property, which instantiates itself if and
only if it does not instantiate itself, appears to defy the laws of
logic, at least classical logic. This puzzle and related conundrums
still occupy logicians and no consensus on how to eschew them is in
sight; see on this §§7.2 and 8.
3. Traditional Explanations

Properties are typically introduced to help explain or
account for phenomena of philosophical interest, especially
in doing ontology. The existence of properties, we are told, would
explain qualitative recurrence or help account for our ability to
agree about the instances of general terms like ‘red.’ In
the terminologies of bygone eras, properties save the phenomena; they
afford a fundamentum in re for things like the applicability
of general terms. Nowadays philosophers make a similar point when they
argue that some phenomenon holds because of or in virtue
of this or that property, that a property is its
foundation or ground, or that a property is the
truthmaker for a sentence about it. These expressions signal
explanations (for a defense of the legitimacy of ontological
explanations, cf. Swoyer 1999; for qualms about an explanatory
recourse to properties, see Quine 1961, 10; Quinton 1973, 295).

In seeking explanations in ontology (as in other disciplines) we must
frequently weigh tradeoffs between various desiderata, e.g., between
simplicity and comprehensiveness, and even between different kinds of
simplicity. But one tradeoff is so pervasive that it deserves a name,
and we will call it the fundamental ontological tradeoff. The
fundamental ontological tradeoff reflects the perennial tension
between explanatory power and epistemic risk, between a rich, lavish
ontology that promises to explain a great deal and a more modest
ontology that promises epistemological security. The more machinery we
postulate, the more we might hope to explain—but the harder it
is to believe in the existence of all the machinery. As we shall see
in the following, the inevitability of this tradeoff keeps playing a
crucial role in current discussions of properties.

Properties keep being invoked to explain a very wide range of
phenomena. Insofar as each of the explanations is plausible, it serves
as part of a cumulative case for the existence of properties.
In the following subsections we shall survey several of the most
common explanations philosophers have asked properties to provide (for
a longer list see Swoyer 1999, §3). In the next section we shall
discuss more novel attempts to appeal to properties in providing
explanations.
3.1 Resemblance and Recurrence

There are objective similarities or groupings in the world. Some
things are alike in certain ways. They have the same color or shape or
size; they are protons or lemons or central processing units. A
puzzle, sometimes called the problem of the one over the
many, asks for an account of this. Possession of a common
property (e.g., a given shade of yellow) or a common constellation of
properties (e.g., those essential to lemons) has often been cited to
explain such resemblance. Similarly, different groups of things, e.g.,
Bill and Hillary, George and Barbara, can be related in similar ways,
and the postulation of a relation (here being married to)
that the members of each group jointly instantiate is often cited to
explain this similarity. Finally, having different properties, e.g.,
different colors, is often said to explain qualitative differences. A
desire to explain qualitative similarity and qualitative difference
has been a traditional motivation for realism with respect to
universals, and it continues to motivate many realists today (e.g.,
Butchvarov 1966; Aaron 1967, ch. 9; Armstrong 1984, 250).
3.2 Recognition of New and Novel Instances

Many organisms easily recognize and classify newly encountered objects
as yellow or round or lemons or rocks, they can recognize that one new
thing is larger than a second, and so on. One may thus think that that
this ability is based partly on the fact that the novel instances have
a property that the organism has encountered before—the old and
new cases share a common property—and that the creature is
somehow attuned to recognize it.
3.3 The Meaning of General Terms

Our ability to use general terms (like ‘yellow,’
‘lemon,’ ‘heavier than,’ and
‘between’) provides a linguistic counterpart to the
epistemological phenomenon of recognition and to the metaphysical
problem of the One over the Many. Most general terms apply to some
things but not to others, and in many cases competent speakers have
little trouble knowing when they apply and when they do not.
Philosophers have often argued that possession of a common property
(like redness), together with certain linguistic conventions,
explains why general terms apply to the things that they do. For
example, Plato noted that ‘we are in the habit of postulating
one unique Form for each plurality of objects to which we apply a
common name’ (Republic, 596A; see also Phaedo,
78e; Timaeus, 52a; Parmenides, 13; and Russell 1912,
93). At least for those who attach metaphysical weight to the
distinction between expressing (predicates) and referring (singular
terms), questions about the meanings (now often known as the
‘semantic values’) of singular terms like
‘honesty’ and ‘hunger’ and ‘being in
love’ may be even more pressing. Since the chief task of
singular terms is to refer to things, the semantic values of
‘honesty,’ ‘hunger’ and the like are
presumably the things they refer to. But what could a word like
‘honesty’ refer to? If there are properties, it could
refer to the property honesty.
4. Recent Explanations

In addition to the traditional ones discussed above, there are other
tasks for which properties have been invoked. For example, the
above-mentioned bundle theory attempts to reduce particulars to
properties. In spite of well-known problems (Van Cleve 1985) this view
keeps having supporters (Casullo 1988; Curtis 2014). Moreover, it has
also been proposed that possible worlds can be reduced to properties
(Forrest 1986) or that fictional characters can be viewed as
properties (Orilia 2012).

Leaving these issues aside, we shall however concentrate on three
areas where properties are often invoked today: philosophy of
mathematics, semantics (the theory of meaning), and naturalistic
ontology. These areas are useful to consider, because if properties
can explain things of interest to philosophers who don’t
specialize in metaphysics, things like mathematical truth or the
nature of natural laws, then properties will seem more interesting.
Unlike the substantial forms derided by early modern philosophers as
dormitive virtues, properties will pay their way by doing interesting
and important work.
4.1 Mathematics

Philosophers of mathematics have focused much of their attention on
number theory (arithmetic). Number theory is just the theory of the
natural numbers, 0, 1, 2, …, and the familiar operations (like
addition and multiplication) on them. Many sentences of arithmetic,
e.g. ‘7 + 5 = 12,’ certainly seem to be true, but such
truths present various philosophical puzzles and philosophers have
tried to explain how they could have the features they seem
to have, in particular that they are objective, necessary and knowable
a priori.

Most attempts to use properties to explain these features are versions
of identificationism, the reductionist strategy that
identifies numbers with things that initially seem to be
different. This approach is familiar from the original versions of
identificationism, where numbers were identified with sets, but it is
straightforward to adapt this earlier work to identify numbers with
properties rather than with sets. For example, the sequence of natural
numbers 0, 1, ... could be identified with a sequence of second-order
properties such as the property of having no instance, the property of
having exactly one instance, etc. (see, e.g., Cocchiarella 1989,
§4).

The most compelling defense of the use of properties in the philosophy
of mathematics urges that, when we step back and consider the big
picture, we see that a rich-enough stock of properties can do all the
work of sets and numbers (or that we can use them to define sets and
numbers) and that properties can do further things that sets
simply cannot. For example, it has been argued that properties can be
used to give accounts of the semantics of English or explain the
nature of natural laws. The appeal of sets, in short, results from a
metaphysical myopia, but, once we adopt a larger view of things, we
find that properties provide the best global, overall explanation.

The identification of numbers with properties has sometimes been
offered in an attempt to resurrect logicism, roughly the thesis,
championed by Frege and Russell, that classical mathematics, or at
least arithmetic, can be reduced to logic (Bealer 1982; Cocchiarella
1986a; Orilia 2000). Logicism of course raises the difficult issue of
what exactly counts as logic and not all identificationists embrace it
(Pollard and Martin 1986). In any case, once numbers are identified
with properties, we can explain various things of philosophical
interest about truths of arithmetic. They can be objectively true,
because they describe an objective realm of mind-independent
properties. Moreover, given that the properties identified with
numbers are ones that exist necessarily, and that they necessarily
stand in their arithmetical relations, the truths of arithmetic will
be necessarily true, as one should expect.

However, taken alone, property-based identificationism does not
explain mathematical knowledge and substantive auxiliary hypotheses
about human cognitive faculties are presumably needed.
Identificationists typically propose to identify numbers with putative
objects that lie outside the spatio-temporal, causal order. As argued
by Benacerraf (1973), however, since we are physical organisms living
in a spatio-temporal world, it is not clear how we can interact
causally (or in any other discernible way) with abstract, causally
inert things so as to have epistemic access to them. A few
philosophers, e.g., Linsky & Zalta (1995), have taken this problem
seriously and proposed solutions that do not involve mysterious
cognitive faculties. Others have even argued that certain universals
can play the role of sense-data and should thus be considered objects
of perception (Forrest 2005). Philosophers remain divided on this
issue, but it is safe to say that if the problem of epistemic access
cannot be overcome, it in turn undermines identificationist attempts
to use properties to explain arithmetic truth. Here we face the
fundamental ontological tradeoff: A richer ontology offers to explain
many things that might otherwise be mysterious. But in the view of
many philosophers, it engenders epistemological mysteries of its
own.

Some recent accounts identify numbers with properties that seem less
other-worldly than those invoked by mainstream identificationists such
as those mentioned above. For example, Bigelow and Pargetter (1990)
argue that rational numbers are higher-order
relations—ratios—among certain kinds of
first-order relations.

The gravest threats to identificationism are posed by what might be
called the Benacerraf problem. As Benacerraf (1965) noted, if
there is one way to identify the natural numbers with sets, there are
countless ways, e.g., Frege’s, Zermelo’s, von
Neumann’s, etc. There is a similar arbitrariness in any
particular identification of numbers with properties (as the fact that
different property theorists identify numbers with different
properties shows; we have seen one proposal above, but another way to
go could be this: define first a successor relation à la
Frege and then identify 1 with the successor of the property of having
no instance, 2 with the successor of 1, and so on (cf. Bealer 1982,
§6)). Authors who defend such accounts are aware of these
difficulties and some have proposed various responses to them, but the
problems are serious and no solutions are generally accepted.

There are also non-identificationist accounts of mathematical truth
that make use of properties, such as that by Linsky and Zalta (1995)
(further developed in Zalta 1999; 2000). It is based on Zalta’s
(1983; 1988) theory of abstract objects, a theory designed to explain
a wide range of phenomena, which is particularly relevant here because
it is developed alongside a rich formal account of properties.
4.2 Semantics and Logical Form

Language and logic have long been an important source of data for
ontologists. Many philosophers have contented themselves with fairly
informal appeals to various features of language to support their
claim that properties exist, but in the last two decades some
philosophers (along with a few linguists and even computer scientists)
have employed properties as parts of detailed accounts of the
semantics of large fragments of natural languages like English or
Choctaw, and some of these accounts contain the most detailed formal
theories of properties ever devised. Some property theorists are
motivated almost exclusively by a desire to give a semantic account of
natural language (e.g., Chierchia and Turner 1988), others hold that
this is but one of several motivations for developing an account of
properties (e.g., Bealer 1982; Zalta 1988) (but it should be noted
that still others, e.g., Jubien 1989; Armstrong 1997; Mellor 1991,
180ff doubt that properties have any serious role to play in semantics
at all).

The basic idea that motivates this work is the following. If we allow
for a rich-enough stock of properties, we can provide a semantic value
for every predicate and abstract singular term of English (or at least
for those that could have a semantic value without leading to paradox)
and thus account for many linguistic phenomena.

We explain the meanings of general terms like ‘honest’ by
claiming that they denote (or express) properties (like
honesty), that a sentence like ‘Tom is honest’
has the logical form of a simple subject-predicate sentence, and that
it is true just in case the individual denoted by ‘Tom’ is
in the extension of the property denoted (or expressed) by the
predicate ‘honest,’ which requires that there be a
property expressed by this predicate (see Hochberg 1968 for a good
discussion of related issues).

We can also argue that abstract singular terms like
‘honesty’ denote the property that the associated
predicate (‘honest’) denotes or expresses, that sentences
like ‘Honesty is a virtue’ have the simple logical form of
a subject-predicate sentence, and that the sentence is true exactly
when the word ‘honesty’ denotes a property that is in the
extension of the property denoted by the verb phrase ‘is a
virtue.’

Once we take these steps, it is also straightforward to explain the
validity of arguments such as ‘Clinton is self-indulgent;
therefore, there is at least one vice that Clinton has’: The
logical form of the premise is that of a simple subject-predicate
sentence and the logical form of the conclusion is that of an
existential quantification with a standard objectual quantifier. If
the first sentence is true, then ‘self-indulgent’
expresses a property, and this property (which can be assumed to have
the property of being a vice) satisfies the open sentence
‘Clinton is X.’ Hence, just as in standard
first-order logic, the existential quantification is true.

What we discussed so far at most requires, one may think, simple
properties without any internal structure. Bu there are some more
complex phenomena that appear to require “compound”
properties and propositions. They include the following:

 Various English constructions are quite naturally interpreted as
complex predicates: ‘Tom is a boring but honest brother of
Sam’ is straightforwardly construed as containing a compound
predicate, ‘is a boring but honest brother of Sam,’ that
is predicated of the noun ‘Tom’ (and that could be
predicated of other nouns too, e.g., ‘Wilbur’). Other
constructions are very naturally interpreted as complex singular terms
(as in ‘Being a boring but honest brother of Sam is no bed of
roses’). Furthermore, these complex expressions are related to
simpler expressions in systematic ways. For example, ‘Tom is a
boring but not dishonest brother of Sam’ should entail
‘Tom is not dishonest.’
 English is full of intensional or intentional idioms like
‘necessarily,’ ‘believes’ and
‘imagines’ that cannot be handled by any extensional
semantics.


In recent years a number of philosophers (e.g., Bealer 1982; 1994;
Cocchiarella 1986; 2007; Zalta 1983; 1988; Chierchia & Turner
1988; Menzel 1993; Orilia 2000) have developed intricate accounts of
properties that deal with these phenomena. They include formal
languages whose semantics provide systematic ways of forming compound
properties (e.g., loving Darla) to serve as semantic values
of complex predicates (‘loves Darla’) or complex singular
terms (‘loving Darla’). Moreover, they appeal to
propositions, which they treat as zero-place properties, to deal with
intensional and intentional idioms. For this to be done properly,
properties must be very finely individuated, probably as finely
individuated as the linguistic expressions that denote or express
them. For example, Tom’s grasp of logic may be so tenuous that
he believes of Ortcutt that he is a spy and an auditor for the IRS but
doubts that he is an auditor for the IRS and a spy. This is sometimes
taken to suggest that being a spy and an auditor for the IRS
is distinct from the (necessarily coextensive) property being an
auditor for the IRS and a spy. To be sure, few people are guilty
of such blatant lapses, but we can certainly make mistakes when
necessarily coextensive properties are described in more complicated
ways (such errors are routine in mathematics and logic).

On the plausible (though not inevitable) assumption that the structure
of many of our thoughts is similar to the structure of the sentences
we use to describe the contents of those thoughts (‘Sam thinks
Tom is boring but not dishonest’), we might also hope to use
properties in an account of mental content that would in many ways
parallel an account of the semantics of the more intensional fragments
of English.

Before the explicit appeal to properties in formal semantics in works
such as those cited above, there has been important work in formal
semantics that treats the semantic values of noun phrases and verb
phrases as intensions. Intensions are functions that assign
sets to predicates at each possible world (or related set-theoretic
devices that encode the same information). On such accounts, for
example, the semantic value of ‘red’ is the function that
maps each possible world to the set of things in that world that are
red. Montague (1974) and linguists and philosophers inspired by his
work have devised systems based on this idea that have great elegance
and power. Nevertheless, finely individuated properties are more
useful in semantics than intensions as used by Montague because
intensions are still too coarse-grained to explain many semantic
phenomena involving intensional idioms. For example, semantic accounts
that employ intensions would most naturally treat ‘circle’
and ‘locus of points equidistant from a point’ as having
the same meaning (since they have the same intension). This makes it
difficult to deal with the so-called paradox of analysis,
which asks us to explain how it could be true, e.g., that ‘Tom
believes something is a circle, but does not believe that it is a
locus of points equidistant from a point’. If
‘circle’ and ‘locus of points equidistant from a
point’ have the same meaning an explanation is hard to find. In
contrast, with finely individuated properties, we get an account based
on the idea that the complex expression ‘locus of points
equidistant from a point’ and the simple one
‘circle’ have different properties as meanings, a compound
one and a simple, or at least simpler, one, in a way that reflects the
different complexity of the two terms in question (cf. Bealer 1982
and, for a variation on this theme, Orilia 1999). It should be noted
here that a prima facie similar problem arises with simple terms such
as ‘gorse’ and ‘furze’: could not Tom believe
that the flower picked by Mary is a gorse without believing that it is
a furze? To deal with such cases an appeal to finely individuated
compound properties won’t help, since presumably
‘gorse’ and ‘furze’ stand for the same simple
property, and accordingly one may want to move from the semantic to
the pragmatic level to account for them (Bealer 1982, §39). 

Creswell (1985) has shown how to attribute within a Montague-style
intensionalist framework two different semantic values to expressions
of different complexity such as ‘circle’ and ‘locus
of points equidistant from a point’, precisely with the intent
of addressing issues concerning beliefs and other propositional
attitudes. But then another problem with intensions is this: it is
unlikely that they can perform tasks in areas outside semantics (like
naturalistic ontology) that properties may be able to do. It is
natural, for example, to suppose that things have the capacities that
they do (e.g., the capacity to exert a force on a distant object)
because of the properties they possess (e.g., gravitational mass). But
it seems most unlikely that huge set-theoretic intensions would be
able to explain things like this.

Some philosophers have construed intensions as providing a
reduction of properties to intensions (properties are nothing
over and above functions from the class of possible worlds to classes
of objects). This view keeps having supporters (see, e.g., Egan 2004).
Given what we noted above, however, it seems much better to view
properties (including relations, and perhaps propositions) as
irreducible entities.

Current property-based semantic theories do not accommodate vagueness.
This is a serious shortcoming, because vague predicates (like
‘bald’) and vague nominalizations (like
‘baldness’) are the rule rather than the exception. Recent
empirical work on concepts reinforces the point that many concepts
(and, with them, predicates) have a graded membership and goes on to
stress the importance of phenomena like typicality. On most current
psychological accounts, concepts involve features and similarity
relations. Since features (e.g., having feathers, having a beak) are
properties, there is no reason why current property theories could not
be emended and extended to make contact with such accounts, and it
seems likely that this will be a fruitful line of inquiry in the
future (see Margolis & Laurence 1999 for a useful selection of
papers on concepts).
4.3 Naturalistic Ontology

In recent years properties have played a central role in philosophical
accounts of scientific realism, measurement, causation, dispositions,
and natural laws. This is a less unified set of concerns than those
encountered in the previous two subsections, but it is still a clearly
recognizable area, and we will call it naturalistic ontology.
Let us see how properties enter the picture in this field.

Even quite modest and selective versions of scientific realism are
most easily developed with the aid of properties. Most importantly,
this is so because claims that appear to quantify over properties are
common in science, as these examples show:

 If one organism is fitter than a conspecific, then there is at
least one property the first organism has that gives it a greater
propensity to reproduce than the second.
 There are many inherited characteristics, but there are no
acquired characteristics that are inherited.
 Properties and relations measured on an interval scale are
invariant under positive linear transformations, but this isn’t
true of all properties and relations measured on ordinal scales.
 In a Newtonian world all fundamental properties are invariant
under Galilean transformations, whereas the fundamental properties in
a special-relativistic world are those that are invariant under
Lorentz transformation.


No one has any idea how to paraphrase most of these claims in a
non-quantificational idiom, and they certainly seem to assert (or
deny) the existence of various sorts of properties; natural
properties, one may say in the terminology of Lewis (1983), who takes
naturalness as coming in degrees, so that we may speak of perfectly
natural properties, perhaps negatively charged, less than
perfectly natural properties such as metallic, and completely
unnatural ones, e.g., Goodman’s notorious grueness (see
Dorr & Hawthorne 2013 for a detailed analysis of what naturalness
amounts to).

Many important properties invoked in science, like being a simple
harmonic oscillator, being a gene, being an edge
detector, or being a belief, are often thought to be
functional properties. To say that something exemplifies a functional
property is, roughly, to say that there are certain
properties that it exemplifies and that together they allow it to play
a certain causal role. For example, DNA molecules have certain
properties that allow them to transmit genetic information in pretty
much the way described by Mendel’s laws. Here again, we have
quantifications over properties that seem unavoidable.

Much explanation in science is causal explanation, and causal
explanations often proceed by citing properties of the things involved
in causal interactions. For example, electrons repel one another in
the way that they do because they have the same charge.

In naturalistic ontology we often hear claims that one sort of thing
is reducible to a second or (more frequently nowadays) that
one sort of thing supervenes on another. Such claims make the
best sense if we take them to involve properties. For example the
claim that the psychological realm supervenes on the physical realm
involves mental and physical properties.

Some philosophers of science, most notably Feyerabend and Kuhn, argue
that theoretical terms such as ‘mass’ draw their meaning
from the theories within which they occur. Hence, they conclude, a
change in theory causes a shift in the meanings of all of its
constituent terms, and so different theories simply talk about
different things, they are ‘incommensurable.’ The common
realist rejoinder is that the reference of terms can remain the same
even when the surrounding theory shifts. But for this response to work
a theoretical term must refer to something, and the most plausible
candidate for this is a property.

Various features of measurement in science are most easily explained
by invoking properties. For example, estimates of the magnitude of
measurement error are typically reported along with measurement
results. Such talk makes little sense unless there is a fact about
what a correct measurement would be. But the very notion of correct
measurement seems to imply that objects exemplify magnitude properties
such as rest mass of 4kg. Moreover, nowadays measurement
units are often specified directly in terms of properties. For
instance, we now specify the meter in terms of something that can in
principle be instantiated anywhere in the world, e.g., as the
length equal to a certain number of wavelengths (in a vacuum) of
a particular color of light emitted by krypton 86 atoms (Mundy 1987;
Swoyer 1987).

Some philosophers have employed properties in reductive accounts of
causation (cf. Tooley 1987; Fales 1990). It would take us too far
afield to explore this work here, but it is worth noting that it is
never a single, undifferentiated amorphous blob of an object (or blob
of an event) that makes things happen. It is an object (or event)
with properties. Furthermore, how it affects things
depends on what these properties are. The liquid in the glass causes
the litmus paper to turn blue because the liquid is an alkaline (and
not because the liquid also happens to be blue). This suggests that at
least some properties are causal powers.

Properties have played a central role in several recent accounts of
natural laws. This is particularly evident in what we will call
N-relation theories, according to which a natural law is a
second-order relation of nomic necessitation (N, for
short) holding among two or more first-order properties. Hence the
logical form of a statement of a simple law is not ‘All
Fs are Gs’; in the case of a law involving two
first-order properties, it is a second-order atomic sentence of the
form ‘N(F,G)’ (see, e.g., Armstrong
1978a; 1983; Dretske 1977; Tooley 1977).

In the more exact sciences the relevant first-order properties (our
Fs and Gs) will typically be determinate magnitudes
like a kinetic energy of 1.6 × 10−2 joule or a
force of 1 newton or an electrical resistance of 12.3 ohms (rather
than mass or force or resistance simpliciter; Knowles 2015 argues
interestingly for the controversial view that these properties are
relations to numbers). Hence the laws specified by an equation are
really infinite families of specific laws. For instance,
Newton’s second law tells us that each specific, determinate
mass m (a scalar, and so a monadic property) and total
impressed force f (a vector, and so a relational property)
stand in the N-relation to the appropriate relation (vector) of
acceleration a (= f/m).

The dominant accounts of laws during much of the last century were
regularity theories, according to which laws are simply
contingent regularities and there is no metaphysical
difference between genuine laws and accidentally true generalizations.
N-relation theories were originally devised to avoid perceived
shortcomings of these earlier accounts, such as their failure to
account for the modal force and the objective character of natural
laws. Many laws seem to necessitate some things and to preclude
others. Pauli’s exclusion principle requires that two
fermions occupy different quantum states and the laws of
thermodynamics show the impossibility of perpetual motion
machines. But, N-relation theorists insist, since regularity theorists
forswear everything modal, they can never account for the modal
aspects of laws. Moreover, according to N-relation theories, laws are
objective because the N-relation relates those properties it does
quite independently of our language and thought (in the case of
properties that don’t specifically involve our language or
thought). By contrast, the epistemic and pragmatic features used by
regularity theorists to demarcate laws from accidental generalizations
are too anthropocentric to account for the objectivity of laws.

N-relation theories are not without difficulties (Van Fraassen 1989).
First, it is not clear how to extend N-relation accounts to deal with
several important kinds of laws, most prominently conservation laws
and symmetry principles. Second, even in the case of laws that can be
coaxed (or crammed) into the N-relation scheme, the account involves a
highly idealized notion whose connection to the things that go by the
name ‘law’ in labs and research centers is rather remote
(attempts to remove this gap typically rely on Cartwright 1983; 1989).
However, if N-relation accounts are on the right track, there is a
reasonably rich realm of properties that is structured by one or more
nomic relations.

The work discussed in this subsection suggests that properties include
determinate physical magnitudes like mass of 3.7 kg and
electrical resistance of 7 ohms. Furthermore, such properties
typically form families of ordered determinates (e.g., the family of
determinate masses) that have a definite algebraic structure (Mundy
1987; Swoyer 1987). It also suggests that a fundamental feature of at
least many properties is that they confer causal capacities on their
instances. Work on naturalistic ontology doesn’t entail detailed
answers to every question about the nature of properties, but it does
suggest answers to some of them.
4.4 Lessons About Properties

The material covered in the three previous subsections offers us some
insights on the nature of properties. One can notice a fundamental way
in which the general conception of properties that emerges
from naturalistic ontology differs from many of the conceptions
discussed in relation to mathematics and semantics. On those earlier
conceptions, in invoking properties there appear to be strong reasons
for viewing them as finely individuated; we saw that even being a
circle and being a locus of points equidistant from a point are
regarded as different properties and of course we may add that for
similar reasons properties like being water and being an aggregate of
molecules of H2O are also regarded as distinct. Moreover,
the broadly a priori character of the investigations on which these
conceptions are based may easily lead to view properties of this sort
as other-worldly necessary beings: abstract entities that exist
outside space and time and accordingly are causally inert. If these is
what they are, presumably they cannot causally interact with us and
thus the task of explaining how we may possibly have knowledge of them
is highly problematic. 

By contrast, in naturalistic ontology we can learn what properties
there are and what they are like through empirical investigation in
which we causally interact with them, and accordingly they are treated
as contingent entities intimately related to the causal,
spatio-temporal order. From this perspective, they can hardly be
viewed as finely individuated like the meanings of the other
conception, for it is possible to discover a posteriori that a
property conceived of in one way (e.g., the property of being water)
is identical with a property conceived in some quite different way
(e.g., the property of being an aggregate of molecules of
H2O). It might be misleading to call such properties
‘concrete’ (the standard antonym of the slippery word
‘abstract’), but it isn’t quite right to call them
‘abstract’ either. Indeed, the stark dichotomy between
abstract and concrete is probably too simple to be useful here. This
conflict between different conceptions of properties is somehow
reflected in the different views about the existence and identity
conditions for properties, which will be discussed in the next two
sections.
5. Existence Conditions

What properties are there? Under what conditions does a property
exist? These questions can hardly be disentangled from the issue of
the identity conditions for properties, to be discussed in the next
section. Before turning to it, it will be useful to look at the array
of views about the existence conditions of properties as a continuum,
with claims that the realm of properties is sparse over on
the right (conservative) end and claims that it is abundant
over on the left (liberal) end. Here we are following Lewis’s
(1986) well-known terminology, which acknowledges a sparse
and an abundant conception of properties. We will focus on
three views in this continuum, the two extreme ones and another that
holds a middle ground. We will then turn to a hybrid view that tries
to combine the two ends of the spectrum by admitting two radically
distinct kinds of property.
5.1 Minimalism

According to minimalist conceptions of properties, the realm of
properties is sparsely populated. This is a comparative claim (it is
more thinly populated than many realists suppose) rather than a claim
about cardinality. Indeed, a minimalist could hold that there is a
large infinite number of properties, say, that there are at least as
many properties as real numbers. This would be a natural view, for
example, for a philosopher who thought that each value of a physical
magnitude is a separate property and that field theories of such
properties as gravitational potentials are correct in their claim that
the field intensity drops off continuously as we move away from the
source of the field.

The best-known contemporary exponent of minimalism is David Armstrong
(e.g., 1978; 1978a; 1984), although he came to make a distinction
between ‘first-class properties’ (universals), identified
from a minimalist perspective, and ‘second-class
properties’ (supervening on universals), which go far beyond
minimalist strictures (1997; see Orilia 2016, for a discussion of
this). Another supporter of minimalism is Swoyer (1996). Specific
reductionist motivations (e.g., a commitment to physicalism) can lead
to minimalism, but here we will focus on more general motivations.
These motivations typically involve some combination of the view that
everything that exists at all exists in space and time (or
space-time), a desire for epistemic security, and a distrust of modal
notions like necessity. Hence, a minimalist is likely to subscribe to
at least most of the following four principles.
5.1.1 The Principle of Instantiation

The principle of instantiation says that there are no
uninstantiated properties. For properties: to be is to be exemplified.
Taken alone, the principle of instantiation doesn’t enforce a
strong version of minimalism, since it might be that a wide array of
properties are exemplified. For example, someone who thinks that
numbers or individual essences or other abstract objects exist would
doubtlessly think that a vast number of properties are exemplified. So
it is useful to distinguish two versions of the principle of
instantiation.

Weak Instantiation: All properties are instantiated;
there are no uninstantiated properties.

Strong Instantiation: All properties are instantiated
by things that exist in space and time (or, if properties can
themselves instantiate properties, each property is part of a
descending chain of instantiations that bottoms out in individuals in
space and time).

Armstrong (1978) holds that properties enjoy a timeless sort of
existence; if a property is ever instantiated, then it
always exists. A more rigorous minimalism holds that
properties are mortal; a property only exists when it is
exemplified. This account has an admirable purity about it, but it is
hard pressed to explain very much; for example, if laws are relations
among properties, then a law would seem to come and go as the
properties involved do.
5.1.2 Properties are Contingent Beings

Philosophers who subscribe to the strong principle of instantiation
are almost certain to hold that properties are contingent
beings. It is a contingent matter just which individuals exist
and what properties they happen to exemplify, so it is a contingent
matter what properties there are.
5.1.3 The Empirical Conception of Properties

A natural consequence of the view that properties are contingent
beings is that questions about which properties exist are empirical.
There are no logical or conceptual or any other a priori
methods to determine which properties exist.
5.1.4 Properties are Coarse-grained

Those who hold that properties are very finely individuated will be
inclined to hold that the realm of properties is fairly bountiful. For
example, if the relation of loving and the converse of its
converse (and the converse of the converse of that, and so on) are
distinct, then properties will be plentiful. Minimalists, by contrast,
are more likely to hold that properties are coarse-grained (see
§6 Identity Conditions): they are identical just in case they
necessarily have the same instances or just in case they bestow the
same causal powers on their instances.

The strong principle of instantiation opens the door to the claim that
properties are literally located in their instances. This is a version
of the medieval doctrine of universalia in rebus, which was
contrasted with the picture of universalia ante rem, the view
that properties are transcendent beings that exist apart from their
instances. With properties firmly rooted here in the spatio-temporal
world, it may seem less mysterious how we could learn about them, talk
about them, and use them to provide illuminating explanations. For it
isn’t some weird, other-worldly entity that explains why this
apple is red; it is something in the apple, some aspect of
it, that accounts for this. It is easier, however, to think of monadic
properties as located in their instances than it is to view relations
in this way (this may be why Aristotle and the moderate realists of
the Middle Ages understood relations in terms of accidents that inhere
in single things (see the entry on
 medieval theories of relations).
 Nevertheless, the general feeling that transcendent properties
couldn’t explain anything about their instances has figured
prominently in many debates over properties.

Minimalists must pay a price for their epistemic security
(there’s no escaping the fundamental ontological tradeoff). They
will have little hope of finding enough properties for a semantic
account of even a modest fragment of any natural language and they
will be hard pressed (though Armstrong 1997 does try) to use
properties to account for phenomena in the philosophy of mathematics.
Minimalists may not be greatly bothered by this, however, for many of
them are primarily concerned with issues in naturalistic ontology.
Moreover, they might perhaps agree that there are concepts, understood
as mind-dependent entities, and let them play the theoretical role
assigned by maximalists to properties in dealing with semantics and
mathematics (e.g., along the lines proposed in Cocchiarella 2007).
5.2 Maximalism

At the other, left, end of the spectrum we find maximalist conceptions
of properties. Borrowing a term from Arthur Lovejoy, maximalists argue
that properties obey a principle of plenitude. Every property
that could possibly exist does exist. For properties: To be
is to be possible (Linsky & Zalta 1995; cf. Jubien 1989). If one
accepts the view that properties are necessary beings, then it is a
simple modal fact that if a property is possible it is necessary and,
hence, actual.

Just as the principle of instantiation alone does not guarantee
minimalism, the principle of plenitude alone does not guarantee
maximalism. One can endorse the former while holding that all sorts of
properties are instantiated, and one can endorse the latter by holding
that very few properties are possible (an actualist who subscribes to
the strong principle of instantiation might hold this). So, to get to
the maximalist end of the spectrum, we need to add the claim that a
vast array of properties is possible. This can be achieved by means of
various formal principles, e.g., a strong comprehension principle (as
in Zalta 1988) or axioms ensuring very finely-individuated properties
(as in Bealer 1982, 65, or Menzel 1986, 38)(see §8).

Maximalist accounts are often propounded by philosophers who want to
explain meaning and mental content, but, since such accounts postulate
so many properties, maximalists have the resources to also offer
accounts of other things (e.g., phenomena in the foundations of
mathematics), and many do. Indeed, the great strength of maximalism is
that its enormously rich ontology offers the resources to explain all
sorts of things.

Epistemology is the Achilles heel of maximalism. At least some
philosophers find it difficult to see how our minds could make
epistemic contact (and how our words could make semantic contact) with
entities lying outside the spatio-temporal, causal order. But
maximalism has its advantages. Those maximalists who are untroubled by
epistemic angst typically remain maximalists. By contrast,
philosophers who begin as minimalists sometimes feel pressure to move
to a richer conception of properties, either to extend their
explanations to cover more phenomena or, sometimes, even just to
adequately explain the things they started out trying to explain
(e.g., Armstrong’s more recent work is somewhat less minimalist
than his earliest work).
5.3 Centrism

There is a large middle ground between extreme minimalism and extreme
maximalism. For example, several philosophers primarily concerned with
physical ontology have urged that a limited number of uninstantiated
properties are needed to account for features of measurement (Mundy
1987), vectors (Bigelow and Pargetter 1990, 77), or natural laws
(Tooley 1987). These approaches can, like minimalism, treat properties
as contingent, fairly coarsely individuated, and too sparse to satisfy
any general comprehension principles (e.g., they may deny that there
are negative or disjunctive properties). One can also arrive at a
centrist position by endorsing a comprehension principle, but adding
that it only guarantees the existence of properties built up from an
sparse initial stock of simple properties (cf. Bealer 1994, 167).
Another option is to hold that all the properties there are are those
that can be possibly exemplified, where the possibility in question is
causal or nomic possibility (Cocchiarella 2007, ch. 12).

Being moderate isn’t always easy, and it can be difficult to
stake out a position in the center that doesn’t appear
arbitrary. Once any uninstantiated properties are admitted,
we are in much the same epistemological boat as the maximalist. No
doubt the minimalist will see this as a reason to reject any
uninstantiated properties, while the maximalist (who believes that
epistemological problems can be overcome) will see it as a reason to
admit as many of them as possible.
5.4 Dualism

The contrast between the different perspectives on properties brought
to light in §4 gives us some reason to think that accounts in
different fields (e.g., semantics and natural ontology) may call for
entities with different identity conditions; for example, semantics
requires very finely individuated properties, whereas naturalist
ontology may need more coarsely individuated ones. If this is so, then
no single kind of entity could do both kinds of jobs. The minimalist
is likely to conclude that it is a mistake to employ properties in
semantics. But less squeamish philosophers may instead conclude that
there are (at least) two different sorts of property-like entities.
This dualist view, as we may call it, is developed most
explicitly in Bealer 1982, where two kinds of properties are admitted:
the type I properties, also called concepts, are the
fine-grained properties that can function as meanings and as
constituents of mental contents; the type II properties, also called
qualities or connections, are the coarse-grained
properties required by naturalistic ontology (it should be noted that
Bealer does not use ‘concept’ to mean the mind-dependent
entities typically postulated by conceptualists; his concepts are
mind-independent universals and he even suggests (p. 186) that simple
concepts can be identified with qualities and connections). Orilia
(1999) has followed Bealer’s dualist approach and adopted the
same terminology. A form of dualism can perhaps also be attributed to
Lewis (1983; 1986, 60) when he distinguishes between the sparse and
the abundant conception of properties.

Dualism might look like a happy hybrid, but it won’t satisfy
everyone: minimalists (and some centrists) will reject the view that
there are any type I or abundant properties. However, the pull toward
some sort of distinction along dualist lines is strong, as testified,
one may think, by Armstrong’s above-mentioned recognition of
second-class properties.
6. Identity Conditions

What are the identity conditions for properties? An answer would give
us necessary and sufficient conditions for the properties x
and y to be one and the same property. In other words, it
would tell us how finely individuated properties are. We find a
spectrum of options on this matter.



Infra-coarse: Properties with the same extension are
the same properties. This claim might perhaps be associated with
Frege, if one identifies his referents of predicates
(‘concepts’) with properties. But all contemporary
property theories reject this view.


Medium coarse: Properties are identical just in case
they necessarily have the same extension (the precise import of this
condition depends on which notion of necessity is at play). This seems
to transpose the identity conditions for sets into an appropriately
intensional key, and this is precisely how identity conditions for
properties work in accounts that treat them as intensions (as
functions from possible worlds to sets of objects therein) (Montague
1974). Bealer also views this as the identity condition for his type
II properties. Although necessary coextension may be the
most-discussed candidate identity condition for properties, many
realists reject it because it doesn’t comport well with the
explanations they want to develop. On the one hand, this proposal is
in tension with the idea that necessarily coextensive properties may
be distinct since they can confer different causal powers on their
instances (Sober 1982 contains a strong argument that this can happen,
though the jury is probably still out on this issue). On the other
hand, in semantics we need properties that are individuated much more
finely than the necessary-coextension condition allows.


Medium Fine: Properties are identical just in case
they confer the same causal or, more generally, the same nomological
powers on their instances. This view has been endorsed by various
philosophers who work primarily in scientific ontology (see
§7.18).


Ultra-fine: Properties are individuated almost as
finely as the linguistic expressions that express them. Thus, for
example, even red and square and square and red are
different properties. This conception is typically developed in the
context of a rich formal theory of properties that allows for complex
properties built up from simpler ones by means of operations such as
negation, conjunction, etc. A natural way to proceed in this approach
is to develop an account of the analysis of a property and to hold
that properties are identical just in case they have the same analysis
(cf. Bealer’s (1982) account of type I properties; Menzel 1993).
This view seems to offer the kind of properties needed in semantics,
once one realizes that properties conceived of as intensions are not
fine-grained enough to account, e.g., for belief sentences. The
ultra-fine-grained properties are then often called
‘hyperintensional.’ Suited as they may be for semantics,
hyperintensional properties however also raise certain difficult
questions. For example, what is the difference between the property
being red and square and the distinct property being
square and red, and what allows us to link the right complex
predicate (say ‘is red and square’) to the right property
(being red and square) rather than to the wrong one
(being square and red)? If properties literally had parts
corresponding to the parts of the linguistic expression, an answer
could be forthcoming, but few philosophers are willing to admit this.
We will return briefly to such matters in §8.


An alternative way to offer identity conditions for properties is
available to those philosophers who admit two modes of predication
(see §1.1). This alternative has been developed by Zalta (1983;
1988). On this account, two properties are identical just in case they
are encoded by the same abstract objects. Thus, properties that
necessarily have the same encoding extensions are
identical, but properties that necessarily have the same
exemplification extensions may be distinct. To see
the difference, note that the property of being a round square and the
property of being a round triangle necessarily have the same
exemplification extension. This approach has the virtue of expressing
the identity conditions for properties in terms of one of their most
fundamental features, namely that they are predicable entities. The
price is that it requires us to hold that there are two modes of
predication and abstract objects. Moreover, since abstract objects are
identified via the properties that they encode, one may suspect that
there is some dangerous circularity in providing identity conditions
for properties in terms of abstract objects (Greimann 2003). An appeal
to Gupta and Belnap’s theory of circular
 definitions
 may be of interest here.
7. Kinds of Properties

Most realists agree that there are various sorts of properties, and in
this section we will review the main kinds of properties they have
proposed. But many realists are also selective; they believe that
some, but not all, of these kinds of properties exist. Indeed,
almost none of the putative kinds of properties discussed
here is accepted by all realists, but to avoid constant qualifications
(like ‘putative kind of property’) we will present each
sort of property as though it were unproblematic.
7.1 First-order vs. Higher-order Properties

The first set of issues we will examine involve the most fundamental
logical or structural features of properties. We will begin with a
picture of a hierarchy of properties arranged according to order (or
level). First-order properties and relations are those that can only
be instantiated by individuals. For example, redness can be
instantiated by apples and cherries and being married to can
be jointly instantiated by Bill and Hillary, but no properties can be
red or married. It is natural to suppose, however, that at least many
first-order properties and relations can themselves have properties
and relations. For example, redness might be thought to
exemplify the property of being a color and being married
to might be thought to exemplify the property of being a
symmetrical relation. Once we think of second-order properties,
it is natural to wonder whether there are third-order properties
(properties of second- or, perhaps in cumulative fashion, of second-
and first-order properties), and so on up through ever-higher
orders. This metaphysical picture finds a formal parallel in
higher-order logics, wherein predicate variables of different orders
can be bound by quantifiers.

Realists differ over which niches in this proposed hierarchy of orders
are occupied. Proponents of the empirical conception of properties
will hold that it is an empirical question whether there are second-
or fourth- or fifty-seventh-order properties. The issue for them is
likely to be whether putative higher-order properties confer any
causal powers over and above those already conferred by lower-order
properties. But it is also possible to have less empirically motivated
views about which parts of the hierarchy are occupied.

Elementarism (Bergmann 1968) is the view that there are
first-order properties but no properties of any higher order. There
are first-order properties like various shades of red, but there is no
higher-order property (like being a color) that such
properties share nor are they related by any higher-order relations
(like being darker than).

Elementarism has sometimes been defended by appealing to something
like Russell’s principle of acquaintance, understood as
the tenet that only things with which we are acquainted should be
thought to exist, together with the claim that we are acquainted with
first-order properties but not with those of any higher orders. To the
extent that first-order properties are able to perform all of the
tasks that properties are called on to do, elementarism could also be
defended on grounds of parsimony. But it is now widely acknowledged,
even by minimalists, that at the very least some higher-order
relations are needed to confer structure on first-order
properties.
7.2 Typed Properties

The discovery of his paradox (and then the awareness of related
puzzles) led Russell to introduce a theory of types which institutes a
total ban on self-exemplification by a strict segregation of
properties into levels that he called ‘types’ (cf. Copi
1971). Actually his account involves a distinction of types and orders
and is thus more complex and restrictive than this. More details can
be found in the entry on
 Russell’s paradox
 (for a detailed reconstruction of how Russell reacted to the paradox,
cf. Landini 1998).
7.3 Untyped Properties

Type theory has never gained unanimous consensus and its many
problematic aspects are well-known (see, e.g., Fitch 1952, Appendix C;
Bealer 1989). Just to mention a few, the type-theoretical hierarchy
imposed on properties appears to be highly artificial and multiplies
properties ad infinitum (e.g., since presumably properties are
abstract, for any property P of type n, there is an
abstractness of type n+1 that P exemplifies).
Moreover, many cases of self-exemplification are innocuous and common
(at least for realists who are not minimalists or conservative
centrists). For example, the property of being a property is itself a
property, so it exemplifies itself. There also seem to be
transcendental relations. A transcendental relation like thinks
about is one that can relate quite different types of things:
Hans can think about Vienna and he can think about
triangularity. But typed theories cannot accommodate
transcendental properties without several epicycles.

Several recent accounts are thus type-free and treat properties as
entities that can exemplify themselves. From this perspective, the
picture of a hierarchy of levels is fundamentally misguided, if it is
interpreted too rigidly; there are simply properties (which can be
exemplified—in many cases by other properties, even by
themselves) and individuals (which cannot be exemplified). One
challenge here is to develop formal accounts that allow as much
self-exemplification as possible without teetering over the brink into
paradox (see §8).
7.4 Relations

What we now usually regard as genuine multi-place relations were not
recognized as such by philosophers for quite a long time, or so it
seems. Apparently, Aristotle and the Scholastics found no place for
genuine irreducible relations in their ontology (see the entry on
 medieval theories of relations)
 and Leibniz is usually viewed as a philosopher who, in line with this
tradition, tries to show effectively how relations can be reduced to
monadic properties (Mugnai 1992). An accurate analysis of
Leibniz’s technical use of expressions such as ‘insofar
as’ (‘quatenus’) and ‘by the same token’
(‘et eo ipso’) in sentences such as ‘Paris loves and
by the same token Helen is beloved’ suggests, however, that he
did acknowledge somehow the existence of irreducibly relational facts
(Orilia 2000a). Be this as it may, it was not before the second half
of the 19th century (with the work of De Morgan, Schroeder, Peirce
and, somewhat later, Russell) that irreducible relations began to be
generally acknowledged. Some philosophers still hold that relations
are reducible to properties in that they supervene on the monadic
properties of their relata in a very strong sense that shows that
relations are not actually real (some trope theorists hold this view;
it is defended at length in Fisk 1972). But no one has been able to
show that all relations do supervene on monadic properties, and there
are strong reasons for thinking that at least some sorts of relations,
e.g., spatio-temporal ones, do not. The view that there are relations
but no monadic properties, or at least that the former have
ontological priority over the latter, has also been considered. It is
defended in different forms by Dipert 1997 and by various authors in
the context of ontic structural realism (see, e.g., French &
Ladyman 2003, Esfeld 2003 and §6 of the entry on
 structural realism).
 This view is far, however, from having gained some consensus
(Ainsworth 2010). In sum, all in all most contemporary realists hold
that there are both genuine monadic properties and genuine relations.
(see, however, Marmodoro & Yates forthcoming, a collection of
papers most of which deal in depth with all these issues).

In standard first-order logic predicates come with a fixed degree and
in line with this relations are usually taken to have a fixed degree
themselves (on abundant conceptions of properties, there are relations
of every finite number of argument places, but on sparse conceptions
it is an empirical question whether there are relations of any
particular degree). In contrast with this, however, many natural
language predicates appear to be multigrade or variably
polyadic; they can be true of various numbers of things. For
example, the predicate ‘robbed a bank together’ is true of
Bonnie and Clyde, Ma Barker and her two boys, Patti Hearst and three
members of the Symbionese Liberation Army, and so on. Multigrade
predicates are very common (e.g., ‘work well together,’
‘conspired to commit murder,’ ‘are lovers’).
Moreover, there is a kind of inference, called ‘argument
deletion,’ that also suggests that many predicates that prima
facie could be assigned a certain fixed degree are in fact multigrade.
For example, ‘John is eating a cake’ suggests that
‘is eating’ is dyadic, but since, by argument deletion, it
entails ‘John is eating,’ one could at least tentatively
conclude that ‘eating’ is also monadic and thus
multigrade. Often one can resist the conclusion that there are
multigrade predicates by resorting to one stratagem or another. For
example, it could be said that ‘John is eating’ is simply
short for ‘John is eating something.’ But it seems hard to
find a systematic and convincing strategy that allows us to maintain
that natural language predicates have a fixed degree. This has
motivated the construction of logical languages that feature
multigrade predicates in order to provide a more appropriate formal
account of natural language (Gandy 1976; Graves 1993; Orilia 2000a;
the latter two show that this can be done by appealing to thematic
roles). Although any leap from language to ontology must be handled
with care, all this suggests that relations, or at least some of them,
are variably polyadic. Turning to naturalistic ontology, some support
for this conclusion comes from the ingenious treatment of measurement
in Mundy (1990), which is based on multigrade relations. In sum, it
seems that a truly flexible account of properties should abandon not
only the restrictive hierarchy of types but also the constraint that
all properties come with a fixed number of argument places.

Relations pose a special problem, that of explaining from a very
general, ontological, point of view the nature of the difference
between states of affairs, such as Abelard loves Eloise and
Eloise loves Abelard, that at least prima facie involve
exactly the same constituents, namely a non-symmetric relation and two
other items (loving, Abelard, and Eloise, in our example).
Such states of affairs are often said to differ in ‘relational
order’ or in the ‘differential application’ of the
non-symmetric relation in question, and the problem then is that of
characterizing what this relational order or differential application
amounts to. Russell (1903, §218) attributed an enormous
importance to this issue and has attacked it repeatedly. In spite of
this, until a few years ago, only a small number of other philosophers
have confronted it systematically (e.g., Bergmann 1992; Hochberg 1987)
and their efforts have been pretty much neglected. However, Fine
(2000) has forcefully brought the issue on the agenda of ontologists
and proposed a novel approach that has received some attention. Fine
identifies a standard and a positionalist view
(analogous to two views defended by Russell at different times (1903;
1984); cf. Orilia 2008). According to the former, relations are
intrinsically endowed with a ‘direction,’ which allows us
to distinguish, e.g., loving and being loved:
Abelard loves Eloise and Eloise loves Abelard
differ, because they involve two relations that differ in direction
(e.g., the former involves loving and the latter being
loved). According to the latter, relations have different
‘positions’ that can somehow host relata: Abelard
loves Eloise and Eloise loves Abelard differ, because
the two positions of the very same loving relation are
differently occupied (by Abelard and Eloise in one case and by Eloise
and Abelard in the other case). Fine goes on to propose and endorse an
alternative, ‘anti-positionalist’ standpoint, according to
which, relations have neither direction nor positions. The literature
on this issue keeps growing and there are now various proposals on the
market, including attempts to rescue positionalism from Fine’s
criticism, and primitivism, according to which differential
application cannot be analyzed (see the entry on
 relations
 for details).
7.5 Propositions

In ancient and medieval times
 propositions
 were not seen as a special kind of property and many contemporary
philosophers who focus on physical ontology or philosophy of
mathematics do not regard propositions as a kind of property (many of
them doubt that there are any such things). But some, especially those
who work on the semantics of natural language, often postulate the
existence of propositions, noting that we can think of them as a
limiting case of a property (see, e.g., Bealer 1982 and Van Inwagen
2015). Consider a two-place property like loves and think of
plugging one of its open places up with Darla to obtain the one-place
property loves Darla. If we can do this, it is sometimes
argued, then we can plug the remaining (last) open place up with Sam
to get the zero-place property, or proposition, that Sam loves
Darla.
7.6 Structured vs. Unstructured Properties

Some philosophers (e.g., Grossman 1983, §§58–61) argue
that all properties are simple. Others argue that there is a
distinction between simple properties and compound
properties, that some compound properties exist, and that they
have a structure that involves or incorporates simpler properties.In
one way of looking at this matter the compound properties result from
simpler ones by means of logical connectives such as negation,
disjunctions and conjunctions (or ontological counterparts thereof).
Logical aspects of this conception are discussed below in the section
on formal theories of properties. But the issue is also ontological
and has to do with whether or not we have reasons for postulating such
complex properties in explanations such as those discussed in
§§3 and 4. A well-known inquiry on this comes from
Armstrong (1978a, 1997), who ends up with a mixed stance: acceptance
of conjunctive properties and rejection of disjunctive and negative
ones. Those who abide by a sparse conception of properties typically
demurs about the former and follow him regarding the latter. The issue
is however extremely controversial and can be taken up from different
perspectives; for example, rather than simply denying that there are
negative properties, one could try and argue that they are less real
than positive ones (Zangwill 2011). Armstrong (1978a, 1997) also
admits structured properties that cannot be straightforwardly
understood in terms of logical connectives. They are instantiated by
an object, when it has appropriately arranged parts that instantiate
simpler properties. For example, that methane is exemplified
by a certain molecule depends on the molecule having parts
instantiating carbon and hydrogen. Lewis (1986a) has
argued that the very idea of a structured property of this kind is
incoherent, but there are rejoinders that propose different ways of
making sense of it (Wetzel 2009; Hawley 2010; Davis 2014).
7.7 Tensed Properties

In the philosophy of time (see the entry on
 time)
 there is a growing interest in presentism, the view according to
which whatevever exists is present. Presentists have the problem of
providing truthmakers for true statements about the past, e.g., that
Caesar crossed the Rubicon. In an effort to tackle these problems many
presentists have appealed to tensed properties or relations (Bigelow
1996; Brogaard 2006), which can be expressed only by making an
essential use of tenses. For example, according to Bigelow, there is
the property being such that Caesar crossed the Rubicon, which
the universe as a whole exemplifies now, despite the fact that neither
Caesar nor the event of his crossing the Rubicon exist.
7.8 Sortal vs. non-sortal Properties

Some properties, typically expressed by count nouns like
‘table’ and ‘cat,’ provide counting
principles, or principles of identity, in the sense that they allow us
to count objects. For example, the properties of being a
table and being a cat are properties of this kind; there
are definite facts of the matter as to how many tables are in the
kitchen and how many cats are on those tables. They have been called
 sortal
universals (by Strawson (1959, Ch. 5, §2) and
particularizing universals (by Armstrong (1978, Ch. 11,
§4), but the ideas involved here have a long history. Strawson
borrows the word ‘sortal’ from Locke, and at least some
sortal properties correspond closely to Aristotle’s secondary
substances. There seem to be also sortal properties of events, e.g.,
intervention and bombing.

Sortal properties are naturally contrasted with
characterizing properties, typically expressed by adjectives
like ‘red’ and ‘triangular.’ Characterizing
properties, like redness and triangularity, do not
divide the world up into a definite number of things. To the extent
that a property like redness allows us to count red things,
it is because we are relying on the umbrella count noun
‘thing’ to help with the count. Sortal properties may also
be contrasted with mass properties, like water,
gold, and furniture. They apply to stuff and thus,
like characterizing properties, do not divide the world up into
definite numbers of things.
7.9 Genus and Species

Although the notions of genus and species play a
relatively small role in contemporary metaphysics, they figured
prominently in Aristotle’s philosophy and in the many centuries
of work inspired by it. When we construe these notions as properties
(rather than as linguistic expressions), a genus is a general property
and a species is a more specific subtype of it. The distinction is
typically thought to be a relative one: being a mammal is a
species relative to the genus being an animal, but it is a
genus relative to the species being a donkey. It has usually
been assumed that in such chains there is a top-most, absolute genus,
and a bottom-most, absolute species.

It was traditionally supposed that a species could be uniquely
specified or defined in terms of a genus and a differentia. For
example, the property being a human is completely determined
by the properties being an animal (genus) and being
rational (differentia). It is difficult, by today’s lights,
to draw a principled distinction between genera and differentiae, but
the idea that species properties are compound, conjunctive properties
remains a natural one. For example, the property of being a
human might be identified with the conjunctive property being
an animal and being rational. But it is now rarely assumed, as it
was for many centuries, that all compound properties are
conjunctive.
7.10 Determinables and Determinates

The concepts of determinables and determinates were
popularized by the Cambridge philosopher W. E. Johnson. Properties
like color and shape are determinables, while more
specific versions of these properties (like redness and
octagonality) are determinates. Similarly, rest mass and rest
mass of 3 kilograms are a determinable and a determinate,
respectively. Like the distinction between genus and species, the
distinction between determinables and determinates is a relative one;
redness is a determinate with respect to color but a determinable with
respect to specific shades of red. But determinates are not definable
in terms of a determinable and a differentia; indeed, they are not
conjunctive properties of any obvious sort. The distinction between
determinables and determinates has played a larger role in recent
metaphysics than the more venerable distinction between genus and
species. See the entry on
 determinates vs. determinables
 for more details.
7.11 Natural Kinds

Though not all view natural kinds as properties, for many philosophers
they are important properties that carve nature at its joints
(Campbell et al. 2011). Paradigms include the property of
being a specific sort of elementary particle (e.g., the property of
being a neutron), chemical elements (e.g., the property of being
gold), and biological species (e.g., the property of being a jackal).
Natural kinds are often contrasted with artificial kinds (e.g., being
a central processing unit). The chief issue here is whether there are
any natural kinds or whether our classifications are primarily a
matter of cultural and linguistic conventions that represent just one
of many ways of classifying things (so that joints are a result of the
way that we happen to carve things up).

In recent years a good deal of work has been done on the ontology of
natural kinds and the semantics of natural kind terms (involving such
issues as whether they are rigid designators), as can be seen from the
entry on
 natural kinds.
7.12 Purely Qualitative Properties

Some properties involve or incorporate particulars. The properties of
being identical with Harry and being in love with
Harry involve Harry. Even those who think that lots of properties
exist necessarily often believe that non-qualitative properties like
these are contingent; they depend upon Harry, and they only exist in
circumstances in which he exists. By contrast, purely qualitative
properties (like being a unit negative charge or being in
love) do not involve individuals in this way. The distinction
between properties that are purely qualitative and those that are not
is usually easy to draw in practice, but a precise characterization of
it is elusive.
7.13 Essential Properties and Internal Relations

Essential properties are contrasted with accidental properties,
properties that things just happen, quite contingently, to have (see
the entry on
 essential vs. accidental properties).
 My car is red, but it could have been blue (had I painted it), so its
color is an accidental property. In contrast, it is sometimes
suggested, natural kinds provide examples of essential properties; for
instance, being human is an essential property of Saul Kripke
(although some acknowledge natural kinds without taking them to be
essential properties). According to some philosophers, there are also
individual essences, essential properties that characterize
individuals univocally (Plantinga 1974). According to tradition, an
essential property of an individual is so defined: it is such that,
necessarily, if that individual exists, then it has the property in
question. Fine (1994) criticizes this conception by noting that, for
example, Socrates cannot exist without the property of being a member
of the singleton of Socrates, and yet this property seems to have
nothing to do with his essence. He then takes the notion of being an
essential property as primitive.

Internal relations are usually understood as the relational analogues
of essential (monadic) properties. For example, if a bears
the relation R to b, then R
internally relates a to b just in case,
necessarily, if they both exist, then a bears this relation
to b. Relations that are not internal, that contingently link
their relata, are external. See the entry on relations for
details.
7.14 Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Properties

Some properties are instantiated by individuals because of the
relations they bear to other things. For example, the property
being married is instantiated by Bill Clinton because he is
married to Hillary Clinton. Such properties are sometimes
called extrinsic or relational properties. Objects
have them because of their relations to other things. By contrast,
intrinsic or non-relational properties are
properties that a thing has quite independently of its relationships
to other things. See the entry on
 intrinsic vs. extrinsic properties
 for details.
7.15 Primary vs. Secondary Properties

The distinction between primary and secondary properties goes back to
the Greek atomists. It lay dormant for centuries, but was revived by
Galileo, Descartes, Boyle, Locke, and others during the seventeenth
century. Locke’s influence is so pervasive that such properties
still often go under the names he gave them, primary and
secondary qualities. The intuitive idea is that primary
properties are objective features of the world; on many accounts they
are also fundamental properties that explain why things have the other
properties that they do. Early lists of kinds of primary properties
included shape, size, and (once Newton’s
influence was absorbed) mass. Today we might add
charge, spin or the four-vectors of special
relativity. By contrast, secondary properties somehow depend on the
mind; standard lists of secondary properties include
 colors,
 tastes, sounds, and smells.
7.16 Supervenient and Emergent Properties

Supervenience
 is sometimes taken to be a relationship between two fragments of
language (e.g., between psychological vocabulary and physical
vocabulary), but it is increasingly viewed as a relationship between
pairs of families of properties. To say that psychological
properties supervene on physical properties, for example, is to say
that, necessarily, everything that has any psychological properties
also has physical properties and any two things that have exactly the
same physical properties will have exactly the same psychological
properties. There are no differences in psychological properties
without some difference in physical properties. Supervenient
properties are sometimes distinguished from
 emergent properties.
7.17 Linguistic Types

It is commonplace to contrast linguistic
 types and tokens.
 For example, the word ‘dog,’ qua abstract
repeatable entity, is a type, but any concrete written or oral
realization of it is a token. Admittedly, it is typical to attribute
properties to a linguistic type, e.g. being short to the word
‘dog’, but not to attribute the type to one of its tokens;
we do not normally say, e.g., that ‘dog’ is possessed by a
concrete ink-made mark that we see on a piece of paper. Hence, some
may resist the idea that linguistic types are properties whose
instances are linguistic tokens. Yet, it is a quite natural view, and
if one follows it, such properties should seemingly be conceived of as
possibly structured, since words and sentences have parts (Wetzel
2009; Davis 2014). 
7.18 Categorical Properties vs. Causal Powers

In naturalistic ontology, one can see two conceptions of properties at
play: properties as powers or dispositions to act or being acted upon,
and properties as categorical or manifest qualities, mere ways in
which objects happen to be. It seems clear that having a property
often amounts to having a certain causal power and in some cases the
only informative things we can say about a property are what
powers (capacities) it confers on its instances. For example, the
things we know about determinate charges have to do with the active
and passive powers they confer on particles that instantiate them,
their effects on the electromagnetic fields surrounding them, and the
like. In the light of examples such as this, some philosophers have
urged that all properties are causal powers (e.g., Achinstein 1974;
Armstrong 1978, ch. 16; Shoemaker 1984, chs. 10 and 11; Hawthorne
2001; Bird 2005, 2007; see Tugby 2013 for an attempt to argue from
this sort of view to a Platonist conception of properties). In such an
extreme view the very distinction between having a power (which might
not be exercised) and manifesting it is lost and thus Martin (1993)
and Armstrong (2005), while maintaining that all properties bestow
causal powers, thereby having a ‘dispositional side,’
acknowledge that they also have a ‘qualitative side.’
Martin (1997) and Heil (2003) have proposed to understand the relation
between these two sides as identity, but Armstrong demurs (2005, 315)
and prefers an account in terms of his own N-relation theory of
natural laws. Supporters of the idea that properties and powers must
go hand in hand keep flourishing: Yates (2013) relies on Kit
Fine’s (1994) essentialism to explain how bestowing powers is
essential to properties and Ingthorsson (2013) assays how properties
can be both qualitative and dispositional.

Some philosophers, however, insist that there must be categorical
properties irreducible to powers (Ellis 2001, 2010; Molnar 2003). Bird
(2005) has disparagingly called such categorical properties
‘quiddities,’ and argued that they would be unknowable and
indistiguishable from one another, but Ellis (2010) has responded that
properties that we would intuitively regard as categorical, such as
‘shape, size, orientation, speed, handedness, direction, angular
separation,’ can be recognized via ‘common patterns of
spatio-temporal relations’ and thus after all ‘there is nothing
wrong with quiddities.’
8. Formal Theories of Properties

Formal property theories are formal systems that aim at formulating
‘general noncontingent laws that deal with properties’
(Bealer & Mönnich 1989, 133). They thus allow for terms
corresponding to properties, in particular variables that are meant to
range over properties and that can be quantified over. This can be
achieved in two ways. Either (option 1; Cocchiarella 1986) the terms
standing for properties are predicates or (option 2; cf. Bealer 1982)
such terms are subject terms that can be linked to other subject terms
by a special predicate that is meant to express a predication relation
(let us use ‘pred’) pretty much as in standard set theory
a special predicate, ‘∈’, is used to express the
membership relation. To illustrate, given the former option, an
assertion such as ‘there is a property that both John and Mary
have’ can be rendered as
‘∃P(P(j) &
P(m))’. Given the second option, it can be
rendered as ‘∃x(pred(x,j) &
pred(x,m))’. (The two options can somehow be
combined as in Menzel 1986; see Menzel 1993 for further
discussion).

Whatever option one follows, in spelling out such theories one
typically postulates a rich realm of properties. Traditionally, this
is done by a so-called comprehension principle which, intuitively,
asserts that, for any well-formed formula (‘wff’)
A, with n free variables, x1,
…, xn, there is a corresponding
n-adic property. Following option 1, it goes as follows:

(CP)
∃Rn∀x1…∀xn(Rn(x1,…,xn)↔A).

Alternatively, one can use a variable-binding operator, λ,
that, given an open wff, generates a term (called a ‘lambda
abstract’) that is meant to stand for a property. This way to
proceed is more flexible and is followed in the most recent versions
of property theory. We will thus stick to it in the following. To
illustrate, we can apply ‘λ’ to the open formula,
‘R(x) & S(x)’ to
form the one-place complex predicate
‘[λx(R(x) &
S(x))]’; if ‘R’ denotes
being red and ‘S’ denotes being
square, then this complex predicate denotes the compound,
conjunctive property being red and square. Similarly, we can
apply the operator to the open formula
‘∃y(L(x,y))’ to
form the one-place predicate
‘[λx∃y(L(x,y))]’;
if ‘L’ stands for loves, this complex
predicate denotes the compound property loving someone
(whereas
‘[λy∃x(L(x,y))]’
would denote being loved by someone). To ensure that lambda
abstracts designate the intended property, one should assume a
‘principle of lambda conversion.’ Given option 1, it can
be stated thus:

(λ-conv)
[λx1…xnA](t1,
…, tn) ↔
A(x1/t1, …,
xn/tn).

A(x1/t1, …,
xn/tn) is
the wff resulting from simultaneously replacing each
xi in A with
ti (for 1 ≤ i ≤
n), provided ti is free for
xi in A.) For example, given
this principle, [λx(R(x) &
S(x))](j) is the case if and only if
R(j) & S(j) is also the case,
as it should be.

Standard second-order logic allows for predicate variables bound by
quantifiers. Hence, to the extent that these variables are taken to
range over properties, this system could be seen as a formal theory of
properties. Its expressive power is however limited, since it does not
allow for subject terms that stand for properties. Thus, for example,
one cannot even say of a property F that F =
F. This is a serious limitation if one want a formal tool for
a realm of properties whose laws one is trying to explore. Standard
higher order logics beyond the second order obviate this limitation by
allowing for predicates in subject position, provided that the
predicates that are predicated of them belong to a higher type. This
presupposes a grammar in which predicates are assigned types of
increasing levels, which can be taken to mean that the properties
themselves, for which the predicates stand for, are arranged in a
hierarchy of types. Thus, such logics appropriate one version or
another of the type theory concocted by Russell to tame his own
paradox and related conundrums. If a predicate can be predicated of
another predicate only if the former is of a type higher than the
latter, then self-predication is banished and Russell’s paradox
cannot even be formulated. Following this line, we can construct a
type-theoretical formal property theory. The simple theory of types,
as presented, e.g., in Copi 1971, can be seen as a prototypical
version of such a property theory (if we neglect the principle of
extensionality assumed by Copi). A type-theoretical approach is also
followed in the property theory embedded in Zalta’s (1983)
theory of abstract objects.

However, for reasons sketched in §7.3, type theory is hardly
satisfactory. Accordingly, many type-free versions of property theory
have been developed over the years. Of course, without
type-theoretical constraints, given (λ-conv) and classical
logic (CL), paradoxes such as Russell’s immediately follow (to
see this, consider this instance of (λ-conv):
[λx ~x(x)]([λx
~x(x)]) ↔ ~[λx
~x(x)]([λx
~x(x)])). In formal systems where abstract singular
terms or predicates may (but need not) denote properties (cf. Swoyer
1998), formal counterparts of (complex) predicates like ‘being a
property that does not exemplify itself’ (formally,
‘[λx ~x(x)]’) could
exist in the object language without denoting properties; from this
perspective, Russell’s paradox would merely show that such
predicates do not stand for properties. But we would like to have
general criteria to decide when a predicate stands for a property and
when it does not. Moreover, one may wonder what gives these predicates
any significance at all if they do not stand for properties. There are
then motivations for building type-free property theories in which all
predicates stand for properties. We can distinguish two main strands
of them: those that weaken CL and those that circumscribe
(λ-conv) (some of the proposals to be mentioned below are
formulated in relation to set theory, but can be easily translated
into proposals for property theory).

An early example of the former approach was offered in a 1937 paper by
the Russian logician D. A. Bochvar (Bochvar 1981), where the principle
of excluded middle is sacrificed as a consequence of the adoption of
what is now known as Kleene’s weak three-valued scheme. An
interesting recent attempt based on giving up excluded middle is Field
2004. A rather radical alternative proposal is to embrace a
paraconsistent logic and give up the principle of non-contradiction
(Priest 2006). A different way of giving up classical logic is
followed by Fitch, Prawitz and Tennant, who in practice give up the
transitivity of logical consequence (see Rogerson 2007, for a recent
analysis of these attempts). The problem with all these approaches is
whether their underlying logic is strong enough for all the intended
applications of property theory, in particular to natural language
semantics and the foundations of mathematics.

As for the second strand (based on circumcribing (λ-conv)), it
has been proposed to read the axioms of a standard set theory such as
ZFC, minus extensionality, as if they were about properties rather
than sets (Schock 1969; Bealer 1982; Jubien 1989). The problem with
this is that these axioms, understood as talking about sets, can be
motivated by the iterative conception of sets, but they seem rather ad
hoc when understood as talking about properties (Cocchiarella 1985).
An alternative can be found in Cocchiarella 1986, where
(λ-conv) is circumscribed by adapting to properties the notion
of stratification used by Quine for sets. This approach is however
subject to a version of Russell’s paradox derivable from
contingent but intuitively possible facts (Orilia 1996) and to a
paradox of hyperintensionality (Bozon 2004) (see Landini 2009 and
Cocchiarella 2009 for a discussion of both). Orilia 2000 has proposed
another strategy for circumscribing (λ-conv), based on applying
to exemplification Gupta’s and Belnap’s theory of circular
 definitions.

Independently of the paradoxes (Bealer & Mönnich 1989, 198
ff.), there is the issue of providing identity conditions for
properties, specifying when it is the case that two properties are
identical. If one thinks of properties as meanings of natural language
predicates and tries to account for intensional contexts, one will be
inclined to assume rather fine-grained identity conditions, possibly
even allowing that [λx(R(x) &
S(x))] and
[λx(S(x) &
R(x))] are distinct. Presumably it will be at least
maintained that two notational variants such as
‘[λx(R(x) &
S(x))]’ and
‘[λy(R(y) &
S(y))]’ stand for the same property. On the
other hand, if one thinks of properties as causally operative entities
in the physical world, one will want to provide rather coarse-grained
identity conditions. For instance, one might at least require that
[λx A] and [λx B]
are the same property if it is contingent that it is physically
necessary that ∀x(A ↔ B)
(although one will have to digest the idea that the identity
[λx A] = [λx B] is
only contingently true, if it is physically necessary that
∀x(A ↔ B)). Bealer 1982 tries
to combine the two approaches (see also Bealer & Mönnich
1989).

Formal systems of property theory are often provided with an algebraic
semantics that associates primitive predicative terms of the language
with ‘basic’ properties and the lambda abstracts with
complex properties obtained from the basic ones by means of operations
that generate new properties from given ones (Bealer 1973, 1982;
McMichael & Zalta 1981; Leeds 1978; Menzel 1986; Swoyer 1998;
Zalta 1983). Thus, for example, one assumes that there is an
operation, &, that maps each pair of properties,
P and Q, to the conjunctive property
P & Q. If ‘P’ and ‘Q’
stand for P and Q, respectively,
then ‘[λx(P(x) &
Q(x))]’ will stand for P &
Q. For another example, it is typically assumed that there is
an operation, PLUG1,
that, given a two-place relation R and an object
d, generates the monadic property
PLUG1(R,d).
If ‘R’ and ‘d’ denote
R and d, respectively, then the
property
PLUG1(R,d)
will be denoted by the lambda term ‘[λx
R(d,x)].’ The property in question is
the one that something has when d bears the relation
R to it.

This way of talking certainly suggests that there are complex,
structured properties that really have ‘parts’ or
constituents pretty much like the linguistic expressions that we use
to speak about them. However, although some philosophers are willing
to take this road (Armstrong (1978, 36–39, 67f), Bigelow and
Pargetter 1989; Orilia 1998), many others (Bealer 1982; Cocchiarella
1986) believe that the appearance that some properties are literally
structured is an artifact of our use of structured terms to denote
them. But our use of structured terms and structural metaphors
doesn’t mean that the properties themselves are genuinely
structured or that they literally have parts (Swoyer 1998,
§1.2).