The world we inhabit isn’t an undifferentiated bog. Everywhere
there’s repetition and, importantly, we can even distinguish
different types of repetition. We see one cat and then
another cat. But we can also see that our cat is on top
of the mat and subsequently notice that the cat from next door is
on top of the fence. Repetition in the first sense requires
only one thing and then another. By contrast, repetition in the second
sense requires two (or more) things and then two (or more) other
things. Properties are typically introduced to account for repetition
in the first sense, whereas relations are typically introduced to
account for repetition in the second sense. There’s cat
repetition because there is more than one thing that has a certain
property, the property of being a cat. There’s above-and-below
repetition because there is more than one thing that bears a certain
relation to something else, the relation that holds between two things
when one is on top of the other.

It’s doubtful whether the distinction between properties and
relations can be given in terms that do not ultimately presuppose
it—the distinction is so basic. Nevertheless, there are
elucidations on offer that may help us better appreciate the
distinction. Properties merely hold of the things that have
them, whereas relations aren’t relations of anything,
but hold between things, or, alternatively, relations are
borne by one thing to other things, or, another
alternative paraphrase, relations have a subject of inherence
whose relations they are and termini to which they
relate the subject. More examples may help too. When we say that a
thing A is black, or A is long, then we are asserting
that there is some property A has. But when we say that
A is (wholly) inside B then we are asserting that there
is a relation in which A stands to B.

Be careful though not to be misled by these examples. A can
only be (wholly) inside B if A is distinct from
B. So the relation in which A stands to B if
A is (wholly) inside B requires a distinct subject from
terminus. By contrast, A can be black without prejudice to
anything else. But we cannot infer straightaway that every relation
holds between more than one thing because there may be some relations
that a thing bears to itself, if, for example, identity is a relation.
So we cannot distinguish properties from relations by appealing to the
number of distinct things required for their exhibition, since these
may be the same, viz. one. Hence the plausibility of thinking that a
relation differs from a property because a relation, unlike a
property, proceeds from a subject to a terminus,
even if the subject and terminus are identical.

Theories of relations add to, subtract from or qualify this basic
package of ideas in various ways. But with the distinction between
properties and relations in hand we can already do some worthwhile
conceptual geography, distinguishing four regions of logical space.
(1) Rejection of both properties and relations. (2) Acceptance of
properties but rejection of relations. (3) Acceptance of relations but
rejection of properties. (4) Acceptance of both properties and
relations. (1) amounts to a form of thoroughgoing nominalism and is
typically motivated by a blanket aversion to the doctrine that general
words like “black” or “before” refer to
worldly items, whether properties or relations. By contrast, (2), (3)
and (4) amount to different forms of realism, whether about properties
and/or relations. Typically they are motivated either by an especial
antipathy toward relations (2) or, alternatively, an appreciation
of their distinctive utility ((3) and (4)). Here we will focus upon
what it is about relations in particular that makes philosophers
either love them or hate them.
 
1. Preliminary Distinctions

To understand the contemporary debate about relations we will need to
have some logical and philosophical distinctions in place. These
distinctions aren’t to be taken for granted. Part of the
development of the debate has consisted in the refinement of precisely
these distinctions. But you need to understand how, relatively
speaking, things got started.

To begin let’s distinguish between the “degree” or
“adicity” or “arity” of relations (see, e.g.,
Armstrong 1978b: 75). Properties are “one-place” or
“monadic” or “unary” because properties are
only exhibited by particulars or other items, e.g., properties,
individually or one by one. Relations are “many-place” or
“n-adic” or “n-ary” (where
n>1)n>1)n\gt 1) because they are exhibited by particulars only in relation
to other particulars. A “2-place” or “dyadic”
or “binary” relation is exhibited by one particular only
in relation to another. A “3-place” or
“triadic” or “ternary” relation is exhibited
by one particular only in relation to exactly two others. And so on.
Some examples. The relation that x stands to y whenever
x is adjacent to y is binary. This is because
it takes two things to be adjacent to one another. The relation that
x stands to y and z whenever x is
between y and z is ternary because it takes
three things for one to fall between the other two. A
“unigrade” relation R is a relation that has a
definite degree or adicity: R is either binary or
ternary… or n-ary (for some unique n). By
contrast a relation is “multigrade” if it fails to be
unigrade (the expression is owed to Leonard & Goodman 1940: 50).
Putative examples include causal, biological, physical, geometrical,
intentional and logical relations. Causation appears to be multigrade
because a certain number of events may be required to bring about an
effect on one occasion, and a different number of events may be
required to bring about an effect on another. Similarly, entailment
appears to be a multigrade relation because a certain number of
premises may be required to entail one conclusion but a different
number of premises to entail another. Whether there are any multigrade
relations is a contentious issue. Armstrong (1978b: 93–4, 1997:
85, 2010: 23–5) argues against them, whilst MacBride (2005:
569–93) argues for them.

Next, let’s draw a preliminary three-fold distinction between
binary relations in terms of their behaviour with respect to the
things they relate. A binary relation R is symmetric
iff whenever x bears R to y, y bears
R to x. By contrast, R is non-symmetric
iff R fails to be symmetric. Asymmetric relations are
a special case of non-symmetric ones: R is asymmetric iff whenever
x bears R to y then y does not bear
R to x. So whilst all asymmetric relations are
non-symmetric, not all non-symmetric relations are asymmetric. Some
examples. Whenever x is married to y, y is
married to x. So the relation in which x stands to
y when x is married to y is a symmetric relation.
But if x loves y, it isn’t guaranteed that
y loves x. Because, alas, sometimes love is unrequited.
So the relation in which x stands to y when x
loves y is a non-symmetric relation. But love doesn’t
have to go unrequited otherwise far fewer people would get married,
only cynics and gold diggers. So this relation isn’t asymmetric.
By contrast, the relation in which x stands to y when
x is taller than y is asymmetric because if x is
taller than y then y isn’t taller than x.
This doesn’t exhaust the logical classification of relations.
It’s easy to see that further distinctions will need be drawn.
Consider, for example, the between relation. It’s a
ternary relation that is symmetric in the sense that if x is
between y and z then x is between z and
y. But the between relation isn’t
completely or strictly symmetric because it’s
not the case that if x is between y and z then
y is between x and z. So the distinction between
symmetric and non-symmetric relations for n-ary relations,
where n>2n>2n \gt 2, will need to be qualified. (In what follows we
restrict ourselves to the more straightforward cases discussed in the
philosophical literature on relations. But see Russell 1919:
41–52 for a more wide-ranging discussion of the logical variety
of relations.)

Nevertheless, equipped with this three-fold distinction for binary
distinction we can now appreciate the significance of one contemporary
debate about relations. Our ordinary and scientific views of the world
are replete with descriptions of things that are non-symmetrically or
asymmetrically related. For this reason, Russell advocating admitting
both non-symmetric and asymmetric relations alongside symmetric ones
(Russell 1903: §§212–6, 1914: 58–9, 1924: 339).
But, more recently, it has been questioned whether it is necessary to
admit non-symmetric and asymmetric relations at all, i.e., it has been
argued that the world contains only symmetric relations by Armstrong
1997: 143–4; Dorr 2004: 180–7; Simons 2010: 207–1,
but for counter-arguments see MacBride 2015: 178–94.

Now non-symmetric relations, including asymmetric ones, are typically
described as imposing an order upon the things they relate; they admit
of what is also called differential application (Fine 2000:
8). This means that for any such non-symmetric R there are
multiple different ways in which R potentially applies to the
things it relates. Why? If the way that loves applies to
a and b when a loves b were no different
from the way that loves applies to them when b loves
a, then the loves relation couldn’t be
non-symmetric, because otherwise a couldn’t love b
without b’s loving a. So we have to distinguish
between the two different ways that loves is capable of
applying to a and b. Similarly we can distinguish the
six different ways that the ternary between relation
potentially applies to three things. By contrast, we’re not
required by the same reasoning to distinguish between the different
ways in which a (strictly) symmetric relation applies to the things it
relates. There’s no corresponding necessity to distinguish the
way that the adjacency relation applies to a and
b when a is adjacent to b from the way that the
adjacency relation applies to them when b is adjacent to
a because a cannot be adjacent to b without
b being adjacent to a.

Putting the ideas of the last three paragraphs together, philosophers
often seek to capture what is distinctive about relations by
describing them in the following manner. Unlike properties, binary
relations aren’t exhibited by particulars but by pairs
of particulars. Similarly ternary universals aren’t exhibited by
particulars but by triples of particulars, etc. But, we have
seen, non-symmetric relations, including asymmetrical ones, are
order-sensitive. So the pairs, triples, etc., of objects that exhibit
these relations must be themselves ordered. It is only ordered pairs,
ordered triples, more generally, n-tuples or sequences that
exhibit relations (Kim 1973: 222; Chisholm 1996: 53; Loux 1998:
23).

There are a number of reasons we should be wary of characterising
relations in such quasi-mathematical terms. First, sequences
presuppose order, the difference between a thing’s coming first
and thing’s coming second, so cannot be used to explain order
without our going around in a tight circle. Second, it’s
problematic to try to explain a relation between two things in terms
of another thing, a sequence, which is those two things put together
in an order (MacBride 2005: 590–2). If a sequence
sss (=⟨x,y⟩=⟨x,y⟩=\langle x, y \rangle) is conceived as a “one”
such that a relation RRR is really only a monadic feature of it,
R(s)R(s)R(s), then it’s mysterious what RRR’s holding of
sss has to do with xxx and yyy being arranged one way rather
than another with respect to RRR. If you don’t see the mystery
straightaway, reflect that sss may have a monadic feature FFF,
which is, so to speak, only to do with sss itself rather than its
members. But if RRR and FFF are conceived alike, as monadic
features of sss, isn’t it mysterious that the possession by
sss of RRR has consequences for xxx and yyy whereas FFF
doesn’t? If, alternatively, a sequence is conceived as a
“many”, just xxx and yyy, such that RRR applies to
them directly, then it’s unclear what the appeal to sequences
has achieved.

We cannot avoid the difficulties associated with sequences by
appealing to the Kuratowski definition of sequences in terms of
unordered sets (where, e.g., ⟨x,y⟩={{x},{x,y}}⟨x,y⟩={{x},{x,y}}\langle x, y\rangle = \{\{x\}, \{x,
y\}\}). There are indefinitely many other set-theoretic
constructions upon which we may rely to model sequences, e.g.,
Wiener’s, hence the familiar objection that we cannot
legitimately fix upon any one such construction as revelatory of the
nature of sequences (see Kitcher (1978: 125–6) generalising upon
a point originally made by Benacerraf (1965: 54–62)). But there
is also the less familiar objection that the Kuratowski definition
cannot be used to analyse the order inherent in the sequence ⟨x,y⟩⟨x,y⟩\langle
x, y\rangle. Compare: we cannot analyse personal identity in terms
of memory because it’s built into the what we mean by memory
that you can only remember your own experiences, i.e., the
very notion that we set out to explain, viz. personal identity, is
presupposed by our analysans. Similarly {{x},{x,y}}{{x},{x,y}}\{\{x\}, \{x, y\}\} only
serves as a model of ⟨x,y⟩⟨x,y⟩\langle x, y\rangle relative to the
assumption that the thing that belongs to a singleton member, namely 
{x}{x}\{x\}, of the first class comes first in the pair
⟨x,y⟩⟨x,y⟩\langle x, y\rangle, so the notion of order is presupposed
(Hochberg 1981).

The next idea that needs to be introduced is the idea of a
converse relation. For any given binary relation RRR, the
converse of RRR may be defined as the relation R∗R∗R^* that xxx
bears to yyy whenever yyy bears RRR to xxx (Fine 2000: 3; van
Inwagen 2006: 459). Note that the relationship between a relation and
its converse isn’t a matter of happenstance; there’s no
possibility of a converse of RRR floating free from RRR and
holding between things independently of how RRR arranges them.
Rather it’s a more intimate relationship which, if it holds,
holds of necessity. For xxx to have one to yyy is, so to speak,
for yyy to have the other to xxx; they neither exist nor can be
observed apart from one another but can only be distinguished in
thought (Geach 1957: 33). Before and after,
above and below are prima facie examples of
mutually converse relations. Non-symmetric relations, including
asymmetric ones, are distinct from their converses (if they have
them). Suppose RRR is a non-symmetric relation which xxx bears to
y.y.y. Then the converse of RRR is borne by yyy to xxx. But
suppose that RRR, as it may, fails to be borne by yyy to xxx.
Then something is true of the converse of RRR that isn’t true
of RRR itself, viz. that it is borne by yyy to xxx.
Hence, the converse of RRR must be distinct from RRR. More
generally, whilst a binary non-symmetric relation has only one
converse, a ternary one has five mutual, distinct converses, a
quadratic relation has 23 converses, etc. The issue of whether
relations have converses is another issue to which we will return
later.

The final distinction we will need, or more accurately, family of
distinctions, is between internal and external relations.
What makes them members of a single family is that a relation is
internal if its holding between things is somehow fixed by the things
themselves or how those things are; external relations are relations
whose holding between things isn’t fixed this way. Different
versions of the internal-external distinction correspond to different
explanations of how internal relations are fixed (Ewing 1934:
118–36; Dunn 1990: 188–192). We don’t need to
describe every version of the distinction but here are three that are
essential to understanding the contemporary debate.

The first version of the distinction is owed to Moore. According to
Moore’s (1919: 47), a binary relation RRR is internal iff if
xxx bears RRR to yyy then xxx does so necessarily. From the
internality of RRR, in Moore’s sense, it follows that if xxx
exists at all then xxx indeed bears RRR to yyy. But if
it’s possible that xxx exist whilst failing to bear RRR to
yyy, then RRR is external. The doctrine of the necessity of origin
provides one putative example of a relation that’s internal in
Moore’s sense. If you essentially come from your biological
parents then you could not have existed whilst failing to be their
offspring, i.e., the relation of biologically originating
from must be internal in Moore’s sense.
 The second version of the internal-external distinction is
favoured by Armstrong (1978b: 84–5, 1989: 43, 1997: 87–9,
van Inwagen 1993: 33–4). According to Armstrong, a relation
RRR is internal iff it’s holding between xxx and yyy is
necessitated by the intrinsic natures, i.e., non-relational
properties, of xxx and yyy; otherwise RRR is external. The third
version is owed to Lewis. Lewis (1986: 62) advanced the view that an
internal relation is one that supervenes upon the intrinsic natures of
its relata. But Lewis’s definition of “external”
is more involved: RRR is external iff (1) it fails to supervene upon
the nature of the relata taken separately, but (2) it does supervene
on the nature of the composite of the relata taken together.
 
Suppose that
xxx is a cube and yyy is also a cube. It follows that xxx is the
same shape as y.y.y. So the relation that xxx bears to yyy when
xxx is the same shape as yyy is internal in Armstrong’s
sense. By contrast, spatio-temporal relations are external (in his
sense) because the intrinsic characteristics of xxx and yyy
don’t necessitate how close or far apart xxx and yyy are.
Lewis intends his distinction to classify the same way. If xxx is
the same shape as yyy, but www is not the same shape as z, then
there must be some difference in intrinsic nature either between xxx
and www or else between yyy and zzz. So the relation that xxx
bears to yyy when xxx is the same shape as yyy is internal in
Lewis’s sense. Lewis also claims that the distance between xxx
and yyy is an external relation because the following conditions are
met: (1) xxx may be closer to yyy than www is to zzz even
though xxx is an intrinsic duplicate of www, i.e., shares all and
only the same intrinsic characteristics, and yyy an intrinsic
duplicate of zzz; (2) the distance between xxx and yyy does
supervene upon the nature of the composite x+yx+yx+y. (We’ll
return in
 section 3
 to the question whether, as Lewis claims, distance relation supervene
upon the nature of composites.) But the relation that xxx bears to
yyy when xxx is the same shape as yyy isn’t internal in
Moore’s sense because, let us suppose, xxx might have been
spherical whilst yyy remained a cube; so it doesn’t follow
from the mere fact that xxx exists that xxx is the same shape as
yyy.
2. Eliminativism, External Relations and Bradley’s Regress

Some philosophers are wary of admitting relations because they are
difficult to locate. Glasgow is west of Edinburgh. This tells us
something about the locations of these two cities. But where is the
relation that holds between them in virtue of which Glasgow is west of
Edinburgh? The relation can’t be in one city at the expense of
the other, nor in each of them taken separately, since then we lose
sight of the fact that the relation holds between them
(McTaggart 1920: §80). Rather the
relation must somehow share the divided locations of Glasgow and
Edinburgh without itself being divided. This may sound peculiar if we
assume that middle-sized things like cities, which have locations in a
relatively straightforward sense, set a standard for how entities in
general ought to behave. But why shouldn’t we admit other kinds
of entity that have a different kind of relationship to space and time
from such readily located things. Or even go down the route of
conceiving relations as abstract, i.e., as “Nowhere and
nowhen” (Russell 1912: 55–6). As Lewis reflected,
“if the price is right, we could learn to tolerate it”
(Lewis 1986: 68). But is the price right? Do the theoretical benefits
of admitting relations outweigh the cost of offending pre-theoretic
intuition?

Other philosophers have been wary of admitting relations because, they
complain, relations are unsatisfactorily characterised, “neither
fish nor fowl”, i.e., neither substances nor attributes (Heil
2012: 141). Now it’s certainly true that nnn-adic relations,
where n>1n>1n\gt 1, cannot be characterised as either substances or
(monadic) attributes. But it only follows that relations are
unsatisfactorily characterised if we assume that substances and
attributes provide the benchmark for satisfactory characterisation.
But we shouldn’t assume this ahead of investigating whether the
theoretical benefits of admitting relations outweigh the costs.
It’s also been complained that relations are suspect because
they depend upon the existence of substances that bear them
(Campbell 1990: 108–9). Of course it’s true that in order
for a relation to be borne by one thing to another thing, then those
things must exist. But it doesn’t follow that relations
don’t exist if nothing bears them. Moreover, it doesn’t
follow straightaway from the reflection that to be borne by something
a relation needs things to bear it, that relations are suspect. It
doesn’t follow any more than it follows from the reflection that
to be had by something an attribute needs things to have it, that
attributes are suspect. If the price is right we should open our minds
to the possibility of things which are neither fish nor fowl but
vegetables, i.e., neither substances nor attributes but relations.

In light of the internal/external distinction introduced above, we can
distinguish two distinct questions here: (a) should we acknowledge
external relations? (b) should we acknowledge internal relations? In
the present section our focus will be upon whether to accept or reject
external relations, before turning to internal relations in the
next.

F.H. Bradley regarded himself the nemesis of external relations, but
not only them. Famously, Bradley brought a vicious regress argument
against external relations. In his original version (1893:
32–3), Bradley presented a dilemma to show that external
relations are unintelligible. Here’s the dilemma. Either a
relation RRR is nothing to the things aaa and bbb it
relates, in which case it cannot relate them. Or, it is
something to them, in which case RRR must be related to
them. But for RRR to be related to aaa and bbb there must be not
only RRR and the things it relates, but also a subsidiary relation
R′R′R' to relate RRR to them. But now the same problem arises with
regard to R′R′R'. It must be something to RRR and the things it
related in order for R′R′R' to relate RRR to them and this requires
a further subsidiary relation R′′R″R'' between R′R′R', RRR, aaa and
bbb. But positing more relations to fix up the problem is only
throwing good money after bad. We fall into an infinite regress
because the same reasoning applies equally to R′R′R' and however many
other subsidiary relations we subsequently introduce—this is
commonly called “Bradley”s Regress’. As Bradley
later summed up, 


“while we keep to our terms and relation as external, no
introduction of a third factor could help us to anything better than
an endless renewal of our failure” (Bradley 1935: 643; van
Inwagen 1993: 35–6). 


So whichever horn of Bradley’s dilemma we choose, whether a
relation RRR is nothing or something to the things it relates, we
cannot make sense of RRR relating them. Bradley concluded that we
should eliminate external relations from our ontology.

It is often claimed that Bradley’s eliminativism may be
addressed by positing a special category of entities, either (1) facts
(Hochberg 1978: 338–40; Armstrong 1989: 109–110, 1997:
118–9; Hossack 2007: 41–5) or (2) tropes (Maurin 2010:
321–3; Simons 2010: 201–3). The strategic idea they share
is that we can embrace the second horn of Bradley’s dilemma
without being stymied by his regress argument.  Bradley assumed
external relations to be general entities, i.e., universals,
capable of relating different things from whatever things they happen
to actually relate. It follows from this assumption that the mere
existence of RRR and the things it relates cannot suffice for RRR
to relate them, because RRR might have been engaged elsewhere
relating other things, and this problem will persist however many
subsidiary (universal) RRRs we introduce. But, it is argued, this
problem can be avoided by either positing facts or tropes, which are
particular rather than general entities. Both of these purported
solutions are open to question. It seems that they presuppose what
they set out to show: the capacity of relations to relate (MacBride
2011: 168–72). Why is this? 
 First, take (1): Hochberg, Armstrong and Hossack argue that the
fact that aRbaRba\Rel b does indeed suffice for RRR to hold between
aaa and bbb, because the fact that aRbaRba\Rel b cannot exist unless
RRR does hold between aaa and bbb. So once the fact that aRbaRba\Rel
b has been admitted into our ontology, the later stages of
Bradley’s regress either don’t arise or they harmlessly
supervene upon the admission of this fact. But, MacBride counters,
this presupposes that Bradley’s argument has already been
disarmed. Ask yourself: what is a fact? What distinguishes the fact
that aRbaRba\Rel b from the mere plurality of its constituents: RRR,
aaa, bbb? Just this: that the constituents of the fact are
related. But Bradley’s argument is intended to
establish that we cannot understand how it is possible for things to
be related. So unless we have already established where
Bradley’s argument goes wrong, we cannot appeal to the existence
of facts because facts are cast into doubt by his argument too. 
 Next, take (2). Maurin and Simons argue that if we reject
Bradley's assumption that relations are general entities,
i.e. universals, and hold instead that relations are a special class
of particular entities, i.e., non-transferable tropes, then we can
avoid Bradley’s Regress. What is a relation conceived as a
“non-transferable trope”? It’s a relation r1r1r_1
that’s borne essentially by the things it relates and which
could not have been borne by anything else (Simons 2002/3: 6). Suppose
r1r1r_1 is borne by aaa to bbb. Then r1r1r_1 is a trope in the
sense that it is non-repeatable and so is not a “one-over
many”, not a universal. And r1r1r_1 is non-transferable in the
sense that it could not be transferred from one pair of particulars to
another, i.e., r1r1r_1 could not be borne by ccc to ddd where c≠ac≠ac
\ne a and d≠bd≠bd \ne b. So, necessarily, if r1r1r_1 exists then (i)
aaa and bbb exist and (ii) ar1bar1ba\mathbin{r_1} b. So in virtue of
the manner in which r1r1r_1 depends upon the things it relates it
follows that the mere existence of r1r1r_1 accounts for aaa and
bbb’s being related without having to go down the route of
appealing to subsidiary relations to glue them together. But again,
this proposal assumes that relations really do relate, and therefore
that Bradley’s regress has already been disarmed. By way of
analogy, consider the Problem of Evil: the difficulty of theoretically
squaring God’s omnipotence, omniscience, omnibenevolence, etc.,
with the (apparent) fact of unnecessary evil in the world. Of course
if God exists then there cannot be any unnecessary evil, i.e., there
must be a solution to the Problem of Evil. But we don’t provide
a theoretical solution to the Problem by simply positing God. That
doesn’t make any easier the theoretical task of squaring what
appears to be unnecessary evil with the nature of an omnipotent,
omniscient, omnibenevolent deity.  Similarly we don’t provide an
effective theoretical response to Bradley’s argument by simply
positing relational tropes.  Positing them doesn’t provide an
explanation of how a relation can succeed in relating some things
without requiring to be related by a further relation to them.

Bradley's problem with relations would be resolved if we could achieve a perspective
whereby we appreciated that the bearing of a relation isn’t
itself a relation or require a further relation, whatever grammar may
suggest (Armstrong 1978a: 106–111; Grossman 1983: 167–8;
Lewis 2002: 6–7). But we won’t achieve that perspective
until we can provide a diagnosis of Bradley’s reasoning that
relieves us of the temptation to think that the bearing of a relation
is itself a relation.

Bertrand Russell dismissed Bradley’s argument on the grounds
that philosophers who disbelieve in the reality of external relations
cannot possibly interpret those numerous parts of sciences which
appear to be committed to external relations (Russell 1924: 339).
Russell’s argument bears comparison to Quine’s famous
indispensability argument for mathematics: just as we cannot make
sense of scientific discourse without taking seriously those portions
irredeemably committed to, e.g., numbers, we cannot make sense of
scientific discourse without taking seriously those portions committed
to, e.g., spatio-temporal relations (Quine 1981: 149–50). From a
methodological point of view, Russell deemed it more likely that an
error is concealed somewhere in Bradley’s argument than that
modern science should have incorporated so fundamental a falsehood,
i.e., portrayed a world of spatio-temporal relations when really there
are none. Of course even if we have good or even overwhelming reason
to think that Bradley’s argument must be wrong, this
doesn’t relieve us of the philosophical responsibility of
determining where exactly Bradley slipped up.
3. Reductionism about Internal Relations

What about internal relations? Do we need to acknowledge their
existence? We distinguished 3 senses of “internal
relation” in our preliminary discussion: internal relations are
determined by the mere existence of the things they relate, or
internal relations are determined by the intrinsic characters of the
things they relate, or internal relations supervene upon the intrinsic
characters of the things they relate. So, in one sense or another, it
suffices for the obtaining of an internal relation that either the
things it relates exist or that the things it relates have
such-and-such intrinsic characters. On this basis, some philosophers
have concluded that there is no need to admit internal relations as
additional pieces of furniture in the Universe (Fisk 1972:
146–9; Armstrong 1978b: 86; Campbell 1990: 99–101; Simons
2010: 204–5; 2014: 314–5; Lowe 2013: 242; Heil 2009:
316–7, 2012: 144–6). Why do they think this? Truths about
internal relations aren’t necessarily equivalent to truths about
the things they relate or the intrinsic characters of the things they
relate. Nevertheless, all the truths about internal relations are
determined by the existence or the intrinsic characters of the things
they relate, or supervene upon them. So internal relations are
variously declared to be “no addition of being”
(Armstrong) or “absent from the fundamental ontology”
(Heil) or, more clearly, “there are no such things”
(Simons).

Consider an example: 

Ben Vorlich, a Scottish mountain, is taller than Ben Vane, its
neighbour. 
 Ben Vorlich is 3094 ft high whilst Ben Vane is 3002 ft. 


(1) and (2) aren’t necessarily equivalent because Ben Vorlich
might have been taller than Ben Vane even if Ben Vorlich and Ben Vane
had had different heights from the ones they actually have, i.e., (2)
doesn’t follow from (1). Nevertheless, Ben Vorlich’s being
taller than Ben Vane is determined by its having the height it does
(3094 ft) and Ben Vane’s having the height it does (3002 ft); it
isn’t possible for these mountains to have the heights they do
whilst Ben Vorlich fail to be taller than Ben Vane. So the being
taller than relation is internal in Armstrong’s sense. This
relation is also internal in Lewis’s sense which, recall, relies
upon comparison between pairs of a relation’s relata (Lewis
1986: 62). Ben Lomond doesn’t stand to Ben More as Ben Vorlich
does to Ben Vane, because Ben Lomond is 3196 ft, Ben More, 3852 ft.
Hence Ben Vorlich’s being taller than Ben Vane supervenes, in
Lewis’s sense, upon the heights of Ben Vorlich and Ben Vane. So
once Ben Vorlich and Ben Vane have been bestowed with their respective
heights there is no need to admit a further (internal) relation to
account for Ben Vorlich’s being taller than Ben Vane (Campbell
1990: 100, 103; Lewis 1994: 294).

This, broadly speaking, reductionist argument is open to question in a
variety of respects. Some philosophers have maintained that it cannot
be effective because we literally perceive proportions and other
internal relations (Mulligan 1991; Hochberg 2013: 232). These
relations must exist, otherwise we couldn’t perceive them. So,
they conclude, something must have gone wrong with this argument
because it leads to the mistaken conclusion that there aren’t
any internal relations out there to be perceived.

More generally, this reductionist argument assumes that if an internal
relation RRR isn’t required to perform the role of determining
that RRR holds between the things it relates, because that role has
already been discharged by the intrinsic characteristics of the things
it relates, then RRR doesn’t exist at all or doesn’t
constitute “an addition to the world’s furniture”
(Armstrong 1997: 87). But from the fact that RRR doesn’t
fulfill one role it doesn’t follow that it isn’t required
to fulfill another. It doesn’t follow because there may still be
other good reasons for us to believe that internal relations exist, or
constitute “an addition to the world’s
furniture”.

To bring the issues here into focus we will need to take on board two
further distinctions. First, the distinction between
truth-making and ontological commitment. A
truth-maker for a statement SSS is (at least) something the
existence of which determines (necessitates) that SSS is true
(Armstrong 2004: 5–7). By contrast, something xxx is an
ontological commitment of SSS if, roughly speaking, SSS could not
be true unless xxx existed. Typically, a statement SSS incurs
ontological commitment to an entity or some entities because we refer
to it or quantify over them when we make the statement. It’s
easy to run truth-making and ontological commitment
together but it’s important to keep them separate. A statement
SSS cannot be true unless the entities to which SSS is
ontologically committed exist. So it’s a necessary
condition of the truth of SSS that the entities to which SSS is
ontologically committed exist. By contrast, it’s a
sufficient condition for the truth of SSS that a
truth-maker for SSS exist because a truth-maker for SSS determines
that SSS is true.

Armed with the distinction between truth-making and ontological
commitment, we are now able to state a very general shortcoming of the
argument. Let it be agreed that Ben Vorlich’s being the height
it is and Ben Vane’s being the height it is together make true
the claim that Ben Vorlich is taller than Ben Vane; so no further
truth-makers are required for this claim to be true. But it
doesn’t follow that we aren’t ontologically committed to
the existence of an internal relation between Ben Vorlich and Ben Vane
when we make this claim. We surely are ontologically committed to Ben
Vorlich and Ben Vane when we make the claim that one is taller than
the other even though they’re not themselves truth-makers for
this claim. They’re not truth-makers for this claim because they
might have existed even though Ben Vane was taller than Ben Vorlich or
the same height. But recognising that the class of ontological
commitments and the class of truth-makers for a given claim may be
different classes opens up the possibility that we may be
ontologically committed to an internal relation between Ben Vorlich
and Ben Vane even though this relation isn’t a truthmaker for
this claim either (MacBride 2011: 162–6).

The second distinction we need is between thick and
thin relations (Mulligan 1998: 342–7). Some examples.
Thick relations: loves, kills, gives. Thin
relations: identity, resemblance, greater
than. Thick relations have more of a “material”
content and are less “formal” than thin relations. It
correspondingly makes more sense to think of thick relations as
“topic-neutral”. Thin relations, by contrast to thick
relations, are typically internal.

We are now equipped state another, more specific gap in the
reductionist argument. Whilst Ben Vorlich and Ben Vane’s having
the heights they do avoids the need to admit the existence of a thick
(internal) relation that Ben Vorlich bears to Ben Vane, this
doesn’t avoid the need to admit the existence of a thin
(internal) relation. This is because we need to explain why Ben
Vorlich’s having the height it does (3094 ft) and Ben
Vane’s having the height it does (3004 ft) entails that Ben
Vorlich is taller than Ben Vane. The answer is that the thin relation
being greater than holds between the number of feet in height
that Ben Vorlich has and the number of feet in height that Ben Vane
has (Russell 1903: §214; Bigelow & Pargetter 1990:
55–6. So internal relations may not
(in general) be required to perform the role of truth-makers for
comparative claims. Nonetheless thin internal relations may perform an
indispensable role in explaining why the truth-makers for comparative
claims are equipped to make such claims true, rather than leaving this
a matter of brute inexplicable necessity—because, in this case,
the heights of the mountains in question lie in a certain relation of
proportion to one another. Similarly Ben Vorlich’s being taller
than Ben Vane’s supervenes upon their heights but this is only
intelligible because the height of Ben Vorlich is larger than the
height of Ben Vane.

This leaves us a choice. Either we can rewind the argument and admit
internal relations, whether thick or thin, as additions to the
world’s furniture (Bigelow & Pargetter 1990: 56–60).
Or we can adopt the more austere view that only admits thin (internal)
relations to hold amongst intrinsic characteristics (Mulligan 1998:
347). 

The situation may be summed up in schematic terms. There are true
comparative claims of the form aRbaRba\Rel b which are either determined
to be true by, or supervene upon, the intrinsic natures of the things
they relate, Fa&GbFa&GbFa \amp Gb. Philosophers of a reductionist persuasion
have argued that this shows there is no need to admit an internal
relation (R)(R)(R) over and above the intrinsic characteristics or
monadic foundations of the things related (F,G)(F,G)(F, G). But the
intrinsic characteristics of the things related only determine the
truth of the claim that aRbaRba\Rel b, or the truth of the claim that
aRbaRba\Rel b only supervenes upon Fa&GbFa&GbFa \amp Gb, because these
characteristics stand in an internal relation themselves, FRGFRGF \fR G.
Because the monadic foundations, FaFaFa and GbGbGb, are only empowered
to determine that aRbaRba\Rel b because FFF and GGG lie in this
internal relation, RR\fR, it follows that internal relations still
perform an indispensable role in our theorising about the world.

The case against reductionism about internal relations has proceeded
so far from a relatively a priori basis. But there’s
also a case to be made against it on a posteriori grounds.
Grant for the sake of argument the claim that if a relation is
internal then it doesn’t count as an ontological addition. The
significance of this claim, when it comes to providing an inventory of
the world’s furniture, depends upon the extent to which
relational truths have monadic foundations. But relativity theory,
quantum theory and even classical mechanics provide an a
posteriori basis for doubting that there are very many, if any,
FFFs and GGGs capable of serving as monadic foundations for target
RRRs, i.e., intrinsic properties to which a significant range of
relations may be reduced.
 It is often taken for granted by metaphysicians that the
fundamental quantities of physics provide a ready source of monadic
foundations because physical quantities are intrinsic
characteristics. The vision of reality metaphysicians typically
ascribe to physics is akin to Lewis’s doctrine of “Humean
Supervenience”, according to which there are intrinsic
properties which need nothing bigger than a point to be instantiated
and there’s no difference without a difference in the
arrangement of intrinsic properties over points (Lewis 1986:
ix–xvi). And certainly some metaphysicians have endeavoured to
make good upon this vision, arguing, for example, that velocity is an
intrinsic property (Tooley 1988; Bigelow & Pargetter 1990:
62–82). But not only is this view contentious, there are many
other notions in classical mechanics, such as force, stress, strain
and elasticity, represented using vectors and tensors, that belie the
conception of fundamental physical quantities as intrinsic
(Butterfield 2006, 2011).

When we turn from classical mechanics to relativity theory and quantum
theory, the a posteriori case against conceiving physical
quantities as intrinsic is even stronger. Consider mass and charge,
most metaphysicians’ favourite and commonly relied upon examples
of intrinsic properties of a piece of matter (in particular a point
particle). In relativity theory, mass is identified with energy
(“mass-energy”). In a relativistic field theory, such as
Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism, the all-pervading
electromagnetic field has mass-energy. It also has momentum, stress
and other traditionally mechanical properties. So mass is no longer
conceived as an intrinsic property of localized lumps of stuff, let
alone of point particles. Furthermore, the attribution of mass,
momentum, stress, etc., to the electromagnetic field, or to a matter
field such as a continuous fluid, depends upon the metrical structure
of spacetime. So these quantities are not intrinsic, but, rather,
relational properties. They are properties that the radiation or
matter field in question has in virtue of its relation to spacetime
structure (Lehmkuhl 2011).

In quantum theory there are even fewer candidates for intrinsic
properties. Even in elementary quantum mechanics, the closest analogue
of a point particle as classically understood (“a quantum
particle”) is an all-pervading field, viz. an
assignment, for each instant of time, of a (complex) number to every
point of space. Here, the mass of the quantum particle cannot be
attributed to any single point of space, but must be associated with
the whole field, although not in the simple manner of “spreading
the mass out” as a classical mass density distribution. (The
same remark applies to the quantum particle’s charge.) Turning
to quantum field theory: here again, the notion of particle is
radically changed from the idea of a classical point particle
and from the idea of a quantum particle. There are not
various quantum particles, each of them represented by a
complex-valued field as above, and each of them, say, electrons.
Rather there is a single all-pervading electron field and
each electron, as treated in elementary quantum mechanics, is replaced
by a unit of energetic excitation of the electron field. The same goes
for other types of matter, such as quarks. According to quantum field
theory, quarks are really excitations of an all-pervading quark field.
Besides, quantum field theory exhibits a second, and fundamentally
different, way in which mass and charge fail to be intrinsic
properties. This goes under the label of
“renormalization”. In short, the mass and charge of a
particle à la quantum field theory, i.e., a unit of
excitation of an all-pervading field, depends upon the length-scale at
which you choose to describe, or to experimentally probe, the field
(Butterfield 2014, 2015).

So, to sum up this case against reductionism about relations: there
seem to be far fewer (if any) monadic physical properties than the
reductionist view needs. But this it is not the only case that has
been made. It has also been argued on the basis of quantum
entanglement, the fact that the quantum states of entangled particles
cannot be described independently of one another, that physics is
committed to relations that don’t supervene upon intrinsic
properties (Teller 1986). More radically, it has been argued that a
consideration of quantum entanglement pushes us towards the
metaphysical outlook that there are no intrinsic properties (Esfeld
2004) or even that there are no objects but only relations (French and
Ladyman 2003; Ladyman & Ross 2007: 130–89).

Consider next the related suggestion that spatio-temporal relations
are internal relations between, variously, space-time points, regions
or events (Simons 2010: 207–8, 2014: 312–4; Heil 2012:
147; Lowe forthcoming). General relativity makes serious trouble for
this suggestion. The thinking behind the suggestion is that it belongs
to the essential natures of space-time points, etc., that they bear
the catalogue of spatio-temporal relations they do. In philosophy of
physics, the view is called “metrical essentialism”, the
doctrine that points have their metrical properties and relations
essentially (Maudlin 1988). From metrical essentialism it follows that
the mere existence of a point, etc., already suffices to determine
that it inhabits this network of spatio-temporal relations. Hence, it
is argued, there is no need to admit spatio-temporal relations, or at
least consider spatio-temporal relations as ontological additions to
the furniture of the Universe. But, as well as the a priori
concerns already aired, this argument for refusing to admit
spatio-temporal relations as ontological additions is encumbered by
the a posteriori difficulties of the metrical essentialism it
presupposes.

These difficulties for metrical essentialism arise from the fact that
in general relativity space-time structure varies from one model,
i.e., possible world, to another (Butterfield 1989: 16–27). We
cannot leave points or regions to themselves to settle their internal
relations, because general relativity denies the idea of a
spatial-temporal framework whose make-up is settled independently of
the matter or radiation. So there isn’t a stable
once-and-for-all class of points or regions which once posited suffice
for the purposes of modern physics, hence no stable class of
truth-makers that suffice for making all the distance-duration claims
true.

It may help to understand this debate about space-time points if we
consider the following line of response on behalf of metrical
essentialism. According to metrical essentialism, points have their
metrical properties and relations, i.e., space-time framework,
essentially. So if the space-time framework differs between models
then the points must differ between models too. But this view
isn’t compromised by the fact, as Butterfield (1989) points out,
that in general relativity the space-time framework varies from one
model to another; it only follows that the points must vary between
these models too. What, however, this line of response fails to take
into account is how extremely fragile spatio-temporal relations must
be conceived to be when metrical essentialism is combined with general
relativity.

Take a possible world which is truly described by a dynamical theory
of space-time (i.e., described by general relativity and any likely
successor to it). Now take a second possible world which differs from
the first only with respect to a tiny change, on a millimeter scale as
regards length, and on a milligram scale as regards mass. This
involves altering spatio-temporal relations throughout the entire
universe. Hence it’s a consequence of metrical essentialism that
in the second possible world, all space-time points are non-identical
to those in the first. But surely it’s implausible that such a
small adjustment should add up to such a world-altering difference
(thanks here to Jeremy Butterfield).

We are now in a position to evaluate David Lewis’s claim that
whilst distance relations fail to supervene on the intrinsic
characters of the things they relate, there is nevertheless a
different way in which relations of distance do supervene on intrinsic
character: 


If, instead of taking a duplicate of the electron and a duplicate of
the proton, we take a duplicate of the whole atom, then it will
exhibit the same electron-proton distance as the original atom.
Although distance fails to supervene on the intrinsic nature of the
relata taken separately, it does supervene on the intrinsic nature of
the composite of the relata taken together - in this case the
composite hydrogen atom. (1986: 62) 


This remark has suggested to some philosophers that we can do away
with relations generally because we need only posit the composites
upon whose intrinsic nature the relation supervenes (Parsons 2009:
223–5). But Lewis’s view and the more general form of
reductionism inspired by it encounter a dilemma. Either (1) the
composite is just the proton and electron taken together. But then the
distance between them fails to supervene upon the intrinsic character
of the composite, because there are duplicates of the proton and
duplicates of the electron that vary in distance. Or (2) the composite
is more than just the proton and electron, i.e., the proton and
electron related together in some (external) way. But then we
haven’t gotten rid of external relations in favour of internal
ones but only presupposed them.

Can this dilemma for Lewis be sidestepped by the following manoeuvre?
Suppose the composite is the mereological fusion of the proton and the
electron. Then can't we say that the fusion has its intrinsic
character, and the distance relation between the parts of the fusion
supervenes on this character?

But this can’t be enough to say. We don’t really have any
idea of what the intrinsic properties of fusions are because the
axioms of mereology are silent about the intrinsic characters of
fusions. So we don’t really have any idea of whether the
distance relations of their parts supervene upon their properties.
Perhaps fusions don’t have much, if any, intrinsic character!
Since we don’t know much about these things, we’re not in
a position to rule out the possibility of a duplicate of Lewis’s
proton-electron fusion being a fusion that has parts which are a
different distance apart than the original proton and electron Lewis
described.

Of course, there’s no logical bar to putting forward a theory
that posits a rich supply of fusions whose intrinsic natures are such
that the distance relations that hold between the parts of these
fusions supervenes upon their intrinsic characters. But why believe
such a theory? It’s difficult to see how the supervenience of
distance relations upon intrinsic characters of fusions could ever be
explained (’superdupervenience’), because it’s
difficult to see how an intrinsic property F of one thing
X can intelligibly give rise to an external relation R
between two other things x and y, even if x and
y are parts of X.

Finally, in the light of the foregoing discussion, Lewis’s view
is open to an objection from physics: there is no absolute fact of the
matter about the distance between the electron and proton
independently of facts about the physical fields more generally, e.g.,
the electromagnetic field and the electron field, i.e., facts
concerning what is happening elsewhere. So the distance relation of
the electron and fusion cannot supervene upon the intrinsic character
of the proton-electron fusion. It follows that distance relations
cannot be external in Lewis’s sense.
4. The Nature of Relations: Order and Direction

Supposing they exist, what is the nature of relations, whether
internal or external? It is the crucial feature of binary
non-symmetric relations, which distinguishes them from binary
symmetric relations, or, more generally, distinguishes relations which
fail to be strictly symmetric from strictly symmetric ones, that they
bestow order upon the things they relate. Non-symmetric relations do
so, because they admit of differential application, i.e., for
any such relation there are multiple ways in which it potentially
applies to the things it relates. So, in particular, for every binary
non-symmetric RRR, aRb≠bRaaRb≠bRaa\Rel b \ne b\Rel a. But can we say anything
more about how it is possible for non-symmetric relations to admit of
differential application? More generally, can we say anything
discursive about the origins of order?

According to what is sometimes called the “standard”
account of non-symmetric relations, we can (Russell 1903: §94;
Grossman 1983: 164; Paul 2012: 251–2). A non-symmetrical
relation RRR has a direction whereby it travels
from one thing to another. What distinguishes
aRbaRba\Rel b from bRabRab\Rel a is that RRR runs from aaa to bbb in
the former case and bbb to aaa in the latter. So differential
application is possible because non-symmetric relations have
direction, i.e., because non-symmetric relations run one way, rather
than another, amongst the things they relate.

The standard account faces the serious objection that it is liable to
over-generate relations, specifically converse ones, giving
rise to an over-abundance of states that results from the
holding of converse relations (Fine 2000: 2–5; c.f. Russell
1913: 85–7; Castañeda 1975: 239–40; Armstrong 1978b: 42,
94). Employing the notion of direction that the standard
account uses to explain order, we can define the converse of a
non-symmetric RRR as the relation R∗R∗R^* that runs from bbb to
aaa whenever RRR runs from aaa to bbb. But once given this
notion of a (distinct) converse, it is difficult to deny that RRR
has a converse. This is because it would be arbitrary to admit the
existence of RRR whilst denying its converse (or vice
versa). Hence, the standard view is committed to the general
principle,

(Converses) Every non-symmetric relation has a distinct
converse.

But the admission of converse relations threatens to conflict with two
plausible sounding principles about the number of states that arise
from the holding of non-symmetric relations and their converses.

(Identity) Any state that arises from the holding of a
relation RRR is identical to a state that arises from the holding of
its converse R∗R∗R^*.

(Uniqueness) No one state arises from the holding of more
than one relation.

Support for Identity is garnered from
intuitions: that the cat’s being on top of the mat is
the very same state as the mat’s being underneath the
cat, that Obama’s being taller than Putin is the very
same state as Putin’s being shorter than Obama, and so
on. Uniqueness is based upon more overtly theoretical
grounds. States are often conceived as complexes of things, properties
and relations. They are, so to speak, metaphysical molecules built up
from their constituents, so states built up from different things or
properties or relations cannot be identical. Hence it cannot be the
case that the holding of two distinct relations give rise to the same
state.

Now one problem with the standard view is that
Converses, Identity and Uniqueness form an
inconsistent triad, assuming there are non-symmetric relations. Take
the cat’s being on top of the mat. Identity dictates
that this state is the very same state as the mat’s being under
the cat. But if there is only one state in play here,
Uniqueness tells us that this state can only arise from the
holding of one relation. So the relation that holds between the cat
and the mat in virtue of which the cat is on top of the mat must be
identical to the relation that holds between the cat and the mat in
virtue of which the mat is underneath the cat. But this conflicts with
Converses which tells us these relations are distinct.

In the face of this inconsistency a number of theoretical options are
open to us. If we wish to maintain the standard view that
non-symmetric relations have direction then something has to give. (1)
Either we can give up Identity, Uniqueness, or both,
or we can ditch Converses. Indeed it has been argued that
Converses should be ditched anyway because it gives rise to a
special kind of semantic indeterminacy: we cannot establish by our use
of a sign for a binary non-symmetric relation RRR that we mean to
pick it out rather than its converse R∗R∗R^*. This is because
a non-symmetric relation and its converse are so closely bound
together that whatever construction we use to notionally pick one out,
we might equally well have used the same construction to notionally
pick out the other. So, for example, we might have used the
construction “aaa is before bbb” to mean what we
currently mean by “bbb is after aaa” and vice
versa (Williamson 1985: 252–55, 1987; van Inwagen 2006:
458–68). But whether Converses is ditched to avoid
semantic indeterminacy, or because Converses,
Identity and Uniqueness form an inconsistent triad,
or for some other reason, the link between Converses and the
standard view will have to be broken. (2) Alternatively we can
jettison Converses but throw out the standard view with it.
But if that’s the option we choose, then we will have to go back
to the drawing board to provide a fresh account of differential
application that doesn’t appeal to direction.

There is certainly room for development if we go down route (1). The
intuitions that provide evidence for Identity are, like
intuitions generally, considered by many philosophers to be relatively
weak sources of evidence, because there may be all variety of
psychological, historical and sociological forces responsible for our
holding this or that view to be intuitive which have little to do with
whether the view is true or credible. There’s also a tradition
of conceiving states or facts as capable of being analysed into more
than one collection of constituents, i.e., a tradition that denies
Uniqueness (Frege 1884: §64; Hodes 1982).

Alternatively we may leave Identity and Uniqueness
in place but question whether the standard view really does give rise
to Converses. According to one line of thought (Russell 1913:
86–7), it would be arbitrary for us to choose from the inside,
so to speak, one binary non-symmetric relation at the expense of its
converse. But, it may be argued, this doesn’t preclude nature
choosing for us from the outside, providing an externalist rather than
an internalist foundation for admitting a non-symmetric relation but
not its converse. Nevertheless, even if Converses is ditched
there is another obstacle to the standard view, namely that it gives
rise to questions about direction for which there are no sensible
answers, even if doesn’t over-generate converse relations and
states to house them (MacBride 2014: 5–7, 9–10). Consider
the states, (a) Antony is married to Fulvia and (b) Antony is to the
left of Fulvia. If these states arise from their respective relations
travelling from one thing they relate to another, then there must be a
fact of the matter about which things proceed from and which to. So,
we may ask, do they both proceed from the same thing or do they
proceed from different things? It doesn’t seem that there could
be a sensible answer to this question and so we should avoid an
account of differential application that commits us to there being
such recherché and undetectable facts of the matter.

What are the options if we go down route (2)? Some philosophers have
suggested that if we ditch Converses then we will have to
give up non-symmetric relations altogether (van Inwagen 2006: 453).
But this presupposes that the only way to account for the distinctive
feature of non-symmetric relations, viz. differential
application, is to appeal to the standard view. However, philosophers
that go down this second route endeavour to account for differential
application by different means than direction and thereby
earn the right to hold onto non-symmetric relations. We can
distinguish three broad strategies for explaining differential
application without direction, namely (1) positionalism, (2)
anti-positionalism, and (3) primitivism, although
this does not exhaust the range of possibilities considered in the
literature (see Bergmann 1981: 146–7; Hochberg 1987, 1999:
177–81; Tegtmeier 2004; Orilia 2008; Johansson 2011).

First, positionalism may be roughly sketched as the view that
an nnn-ary relation has nnn argument positions, where argument
positions are conceived as themselves entities, and, crucially, there
is no intrinsic order to the argument places of a relation; neither
argument position of a binary relation is the first or the second,
etc. (Castañeda 1972, 1975; Williamson 1985: 257; Grossman 1992: 57;
Armstrong 1997: 90–1; Fine 2000: 10–16; Orilia 2011; Gilmour 2013). In the case of
a binary non-symmetric relation RRR, this amounts to the idea that
RRR is associated with two further entities, % and #, its argument
positions, and RRR holds between two given relata aaa and bbb
relative to an assignment of objects to % and #. The difference
between aRbaRba\Rel b and bRabRab\Rel a (differential application) is then
explained in terms of the different relative assignments of aaa and
bbb to % and #: aaa to % and bbb to # in one case, and bbb to
% and aaa to # in the other. But since the argument positions do not
themselves exhibit any significant order or direction, there is no
basis here for introducing converses, i.e., relations that differ only
with respect to their direction of travel. Different versions of
positionalism vary with regard to (i)(i)(i) the nature of argument
positions, crucially upon whether they can be shared by different
relations, whether they are themselves particular or universal, and
(ii)(ii)(ii) the variety of argument positions, whether we can distinguish
between positions specifically suited to agents, specifically suited
to patients and so on (Orilia 2011, 2014).

There are two immediate challenges faced by positionalism. Can the
account be generalized to include symmetric relations? If, for
example, the binary symmetric relation that holds between two things
aaa and bbb whenever aaa is next to bbb has two argument
positions, £ and $, then there should be two possible ways of
assigning aaa and bbb to £ and $. But this means (absurdly)
that there are two different ways for aaa and bbb to be next to
one another, i.e., symmetric relations admit of differential
application too! Whether positionalism can convincingly handle this
case, or examples of more complex symmetric relations, remains a
subject of dispute (Fine 2000: 17–18, 2007: 58–9; MacBride
2007: 36–44; Donnelly forthcoming). The more general challenge
that faces positionalism is whether we have a better understanding of
positions and the assignment relation that positionalism presupposes,
than we do of the relations that positions and assignment are used to
explain (Fine 2000: 16; 2014: 11–12;
Orilia 2014: 302–3).

Both the standard view and positionalism assume that the
differential application of a non-symmetric relation RRR with
respect to aaa and bbb is to be explained “locally” in
terms of RRR, whether its direction or argument positions, and the
things it relates, aaa and bbb. Anti-positionalism is the
doctrine, due to Kit Fine, which eschews direction and argument
positions and explains differential application by abandoning the
assumption that differential application is to be explained locally
(Fine 2000: 20–32; Leo 2013, 2014).  According to
anti-positionalism, the difference between aRbaRba\Rel b and bRabRab\Rel a
arises from how these states are inter-connected with other states
that arise from RRR holding of other relata. So order is not a
feature of given state capable of being isolated, but only emerges
over a totality of states to which RRR gives rise. What
distinguishes aRbaRba\Rel b from bRabRab\Rel a is that inter-connectedness
with other states such as cRdcRdc\Rel d. Pay special attention to the
relative arrangement of the schematic names in the following
sentence. Whereas the state aRbaRba\Rel b is a completion of RRR by
a,ba,ba, b in the same manner as cRdcRdc\Rel d is a completion of RRR by
c,dc,dc, d, the state bRabRab\Rel a isn’t.  The state bRabRab\Rel a is
a completion of RRR by bbb, aaa in the same manner as cRdcRdc\Rel
d is a completion of RRR by c,dc,dc, d (Fine 2000: 21). However,
Fine doesn’t take the notion of two states being put together
“in the same manner” as primitive, but explains this in
terms of a substitution relation. To say that a state sss is a
completion of relation RRR by a1,a2…,ana1,a2…,ana_1, a_2 \ldots, a_n in the same
manner as a state ttt is completion of RRR by b1,b2…,bnb1,b2…,bnb_1, b_2 \ldots,
b_n is to say that sss is completion of RRR by a1,a2…,ana1,a2…,ana_1, a_2
\ldots, a_n that results from simultaneously substituting a1,a2…,ana1,a2…,ana_1, a_2
\ldots, a_n for b1b1b_1, b2…,bn2…,bn_2 \ldots, b_n in ttt (and vice
versa) (Fine 2000: 25–6). Fine goes on to suggest that the
notion of simultaneous substitution of many objects may be defined,
under certain conditions, in terms of the single substitution of one
object (Fine 2000: 26 n. 15).  Converses is avoided because
the notion of direction, in terms of which the distinction between
converse relations is drawn, is eschewed. Substitution is doing all
the work.

By abandoning the assumption that differential application is to be
explained locally, anti-positionalism in effect tells us that
we’re misconceiving the logical form of our ordinary relational
judgements. Contrary to their surface form, relational judgements
always have a suppressed argument position for other states, by which
means the state we are making a judgement about is implicitly compared
to another. The following two objections arise. First of all,
anti-positionalism presupposes a non-symmetric relation of
substitution to explain differential application. But this suggests
that the explanation anti-positonalism provides involves a circularity
because it uses a non-symmetric relation, substitution, whose
differential application is take for granted. Take the state aRbaRba\Rel
b. The result of substituting aaa for bbb is the state aRaaRaa\Rel
a; where the result of substituting bbb for aaa is the state
bRbbRbb\Rel b. The outcomes are different so the substitution relation
must be order sensitive. Secondly, anti-positionalism entails that
there cannot be lonely binary relations, i.e., relations which only
hold of exactly two things. But prima facie we should be able
to distinguish aRbaRba\Rel b from bRabRab\Rel a even if RRR holds
between nothing except aaa and bbb, Antony’s loving
Cleopatra from Cleopatra’s loving Antony even if the world is
otherwise loveless (MacBride 2007: 47–53, also see
replies by Fine in his 2007: 59–62, and Leo 2014:
279–81).

The third strategy, primitivism, seeks to avoid the
difficulties that threaten positionalism and
anti-positionalism by taking the radical step of asking us to
reconfigure our explanatory settings. It’s a familiar thought
that we cannot account for the fact that one thing bears a relation
RRR to another by appealing to a further relation R′R′R' relating
RRR to them—that way Bradley’s regress beckons. To avoid
the regress we must recognise that a relation is not related to the
things it relates, however language may mislead us to think otherwise.
We simply have to accept as primitive, in the sense that it cannot be
further explained, the fact that one thing bears a relation to
another. But, according to primitivism, it is not only the fact
that one thing bears a (non-symmetric) relation RRR to
another that needs to be recognised as ultimate and irreducible.
How RRR applies, whether the aRbaRba\Rel b way or the bRabRab\Rel
a way, needs to be taken as primitive too (MacBride 2014:
14–15). The difficulties encountered by
attempts to provide an analysis of differential application provide
corroborative evidence for primitivism. Does refraining from providing
an analysis of differential application constitute shirking an
obligatory task for systematic philosophy? Hardly. Remember what Lewis
correctly said about predication: “Not every account is
an analysis” (1983: 352). What we need, according to
this third strategy, is a form of realism committed to the existence
of relations but which denies that the manner of their application,
their differential application, can be further explained.