Richard Rorty (1931–2007) developed a distinctive and
controversial brand of pragmatism that expressed itself along two main
axes. One is negative—a critical diagnosis of what Rorty takes
to be defining projects of modern philosophy. The other is
positive—an attempt to show what intellectual culture might look
like, once we free ourselves from the governing metaphors of mind and
knowledge in which the traditional problems of epistemology and
metaphysics (and indeed, in Rorty's view, the self-conception of
modern philosophy) are rooted. The centerpiece of Rorty's critique is
the provocative account offered in Philosophy and the Mirror of
Nature (1979, hereafter PMN). In this book, and in the closely
related essays collected in Consequences of Pragmatism (1982,
hereafter CP), Rorty's principal target is the philosophical idea of
knowledge as representation, as a mental mirroring of a mind-external
world.  Providing a contrasting image of philosophy, Rorty has sought
to integrate and apply the milestone achievements of Dewey, Hegel and
Darwin in a pragmatist synthesis of historicism and naturalism.
Characterizations and illustrations of a post-epistemological
intellectual culture, present in both PMN (part III) and CP
(xxxvii-xliv), are more richly developed in later works, such as
Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (1989, hereafter CIS), in
the popular essays and articles collected in Philosophy and Social
Hope (1999), and in the four volumes of philosophical papers,
Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth (1991, hereafter ORT);
Essays on Heidegger and Others (1991, hereafter EHO);
Truth and Progress (1998, hereafter TP); and Philosophy
as Cultural Politics (2007, hereafter PCP). In these writings,
ranging over an unusually wide intellectual territory, Rorty offers a
highly integrated, multifaceted view of thought, culture, and
politics, a view that has made him one of the most widely discussed
philosophers in our time. 
 
1. Biographical Sketch


Richard Rorty was born on October 4th, 1931, in New York City. He grew
up, as he recounts in Achieving Our Country (1998, hereafter
AC), "on the anti-communist reformist Left in mid-century" (AC 59),
within a circle combining anti-Stalinism with leftist social activism.
"In that circle," Rorty tells us, "American patriotism,
redistributionist economics, anticommunism, and Deweyan pragmatism went
together easily and naturally." (AC 61) In 1946 Rorty went to the
University of Chicago, to a philosophy department which at that time
included Rudolph Carnap, Charles Hartshorne, and Richard McKeon, all of
whom were Rorty's teachers. After receiving his BA in 1949, Rorty
stayed on at Chicago to complete an M.A. (1952) with a thesis on
Whitehead supervised by Hartshorne. From 1952 to 1956 Rorty was at
Yale, where he wrote a dissertation entitled "The Concept of
Potentiality." His supervisor was Paul Weiss. After the completion of
his Ph.D., followed by two years in the army, Rorty received his first
academic appointment, at Wellesley College. In 1961, after three years
at Wellesley, Rorty moved to Princeton University where he stayed until
he went to the University of Virginia, in 1982, as Kenan Professor of
the Humanities. Rorty left the University of Virginia in 1998,
accepting an appointment in the Department of Comparative Literature at
Stanford University. In the course of his career, Rorty received
several academic awards and honours, including a Guggenheim Fellowship
(1973-74) and a MacArthur Fellowship (1981-1986). He  held a number
of prestigious lectureships, giving, among others, the Northcliffe
Lectures at University College, London (1986), the Clark Lectures at
Trinity College, Cambridge (1987), and the Massey Lectures at Harvard
(1997).  Rorty died June 8, 2007. 
2. Against Epistemology

2.1 Epistemological Behaviorism
2.2 Antirepresentationalism
2.3 Rationality, Science, and Truth



On Rorty's account, modern epistemology is not only an attempt to
legitimate our claim to knowledge of what is real, but also an attempt
to legitimate philosophical reflection itself—a pressing task,
on many accounts, once the advent of the so-called new
science of the sixteenth and seventeenth century gradually gave
content to a notion of knowledge obtained by the methodological
interrogation of nature herself. Because the result of this kind of
interrogation, theoretical empirical knowledge, is so obviously
fruitful, and also carries with it seemingly uncontentious norms of
progress, its mere presence poses a legitimation challenge to a form
of thought, and claim to knowledge, that is distinct from
it. Cartesian epistemology, in Rorty's picture, is designed to meet
this challenge. It is sceptical in a fundamental way; sceptical doubts
of a Cartesian sort, that is, doubts that can be raised about any set
of empirical claims whatever, and so cannot be alleviated by
experience, are tailor-made to preserve at once a domain and a job for
philosophical reflection. Rorty's aim in PMN is to undermine the
assumptions in light of which this double legitimation project makes
sense.
2.1 Epistemological Behaviorism


That any vocabulary is optional and mutable is the basic conviction
behind Rorty's attack on representationalist epistemology carried out
in PMN. It informs, for instance, the genealogy (chapter one) and
deconstruction (chapter two) of the concept of mind offered in the
book's first part, "Our Glassy Essence." This historicist conviction,
however, is not itself a central theme of PMN, and it emerges for
explicit discussion only in the final section of the book,
"Philosophy," which is the shortest and in some ways least developed of
its three parts. The argumentative core of PMN is found in its second
part, "Mirroring". Here Rorty develops and extends a diverse lot of
arguments—notably from Wilfrid Sellars, Willard van Orman Quine,
Thomas Kuhn, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Donald Davidson—into a general
critique of the defining project of modern epistemology, viz. the
conceptions of mind, of knowledge and of philosophy bequeathed by the
17th and 18th centuries. Rorty's key claim is
that "the Kantian picture of concepts and intuitions getting together
to produce knowledge is needed to give sense to the idea of
‘theory of knowledge’ as a specifically philosophical
discipline, distinct from psychology." (PMN 168). According to Rorty, 
This is equivalent to saying that if we do not have the
distinction between what is "given" and what is "added by the mind," or
that between the "contingent" (because influenced by what is given) and
the necessary (because entirely "within" the mind and under its
control), then we will not know what would count as a "rational
reconstruction" of our knowledge. We will not know what epistemology's
goal or method could be. (PMN 168-9)


Epistemology, in Rorty's account, is wedded to a picture of mind's
structure working on empirical content to produce in itself
items—thoughts, representations—which, when things go
well, correctly mirror reality. To loosen the grip of this picture on
our thinking is to challenge the idea that epistemology—whether
traditional Cartesian or 20th century linguistic—is the essence
of philosophy. To this end, Rorty combines a reading of Quine's attack
on a version of the structure-content distinction in "Two Dogmas of
Empiricism" (1952), with a reading of Sellars' attack on the idea of
givenness in "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind" (1956/1997). On
Rorty's reading, though neither Sellars nor Quine is able fully to
take in the liberating influence of the other, they are really
attacking the same distinction, or set of distinctions. While Quine
casts doubt on the notion of structure or meaning which
linguistically-turned epistemology had instated in place of mental
entities, Sellars, questioning the very idea of givenness, came at the
distinction from the other side:
…Sellars and Quine invoke the same argument, one
which bears equally against the given-versus-nongiven and the
necessary-versus-contingent distinctions. The crucial premise of this
argument is that we understand knowledge when we understand the social
justification of belief, and thus have no need to view it as accuracy
of representation. (PMN 170)


The upshot of Quine's and Sellars' criticisms of the myths and dogmas
of epistemology is, Rorty suggests, that "we see knowledge as a matter
of conversation and of social practice, rather than as an attempt to
mirror nature." (PMN 171) Rorty provides this view with a label:
"Explaining rationality and epistemic authority by reference to what
society lets us say, rather than the latter by the former, is the
essence of what I shall call ‘epistemological
behaviorism,’ an attitude common to Dewey and Wittgenstein."
(PMN 174)


Epistemological behaviorism leaves no room for the kind of
practice-transcending legitimation that Rorty identifies as the
defining aspiration of modern epistemology. Assuming that epistemic
practices do, or at least can, diverge, it is not surprising that
Rorty's commitment to epistemological behaviorism should lead to
charges of relativism or subjectivism. Indeed, many who share Rorty's
historicist scepticism toward the transcending ambitions of
epistemology—friendly critics like Hilary Putnam, John McDowell
and Daniel Dennett—balk at the idea that there are no
constraints on knowledge save conversational ones. Yet this is a
central part of Rorty's position, repeated and elaborated as recently
as in TP and PCP. Indeed, in TP he invokes it precisely in order to
deflect this sort of criticism. In "Hilary Putnam and the Relativist
Menace," Rorty says:
In short, my strategy for escaping the self-referential
difficulties into which "the Relativist" keeps getting himself is to
move everything over from epistemology and metaphysics into cultural
politics, from claims to knowledge and appeals to self-evidence to
suggestions about what we should try. (TP 57)


That epistemological behaviorism differs from traditional forms of
relativism and subjectivism is easier to see in light of Rorty's
criticism of the notion of representation, and the cluster of
philosophical images which surround it. 
2.2 Antirepresentationalism


Rorty's enduring attitude to relativism and subjectivism is that both
are products of the representationalist paradigm. Though the theme is
explicit in PM and CP ("Pragmatism, Relativism, Irrationalism"), it is
with Rorty's later and further appropriation of Davidson that his
criticism of the idea of knowledge as representation becomes fully
elaborated (ORT "Introduction" and Part II). Drawing on Davidson's
criticism of the scheme-content distinction ("On the Very Idea of a
Conceptual Scheme") and of the correspondence theory of truth ("The
Structure and Content of Truth"), Rorty is able to back up his
rejection of any philosophical position or project which attempts to
draw a general line between what is made and what is found, what is
subjective and what is objective, what is mere appearance and what is
real. Rorty's position is not that these conceptual contrasts never
have application, but that such application is always context and
interest bound and that there is, as in the case of the related notion
of truth, nothing to be said about them in general. Rorty's commitment
to the conversationalist view of knowledge must therefore be
distinguished from subjectivism or relativism, which, Rorty argues,
presuppose the very distinctions he seeks to reject. Equally, Rorty's
epistemological behaviorism must not be confused with an idealism that
asserts a primacy of thought or language with respect to the unmediated
world, since this, too, is a position that is undercut by Rorty's
Davidsonian position. In light of the view of truth and of meaning that
Rorty appropriates from Davidson, his conversationalism is not a matter
of giving priority to the subjective over the objective, or to mind's
power over world's constraint. Rather it is the other side of his
anti-representationalism, which denies that we are related to the world
in anything other than causal terms. Differently put, Rorty argues
that we can give no useful content to the notion that the world, by its
very nature, rationally constrains choices of vocabulary with which to
cope with it. (TP "The Very Idea of Human Answerability to the World:
John McDowell's Version of Empiricism"). 
2.3 Rationality, Science, and Truth


Attacking the idea that we must acknowledge the world's normative
constraint on our belief-systems if we are to be rational subjects,
Rorty has drawn a great deal of criticism that takes science,
particularly natural science, as its chief reference point. Two general
kinds of criticisms are often raised. The first insists that science
consists precisely in the effort to learn the truth about how things
are by methodically allowing us to be constrained in our beliefs by the
world. On this view, Rorty is simply denying the very idea of science.
The other kind of criticism seeks to be internal: if Rorty's view of
science were to prevail, scientists would no longer be motivated to
carry on as they are; science would cease to be the useful sort of
thing that Rorty also thinks it is (see, eg., Bernard Williams, "Auto
da Fe" in Malachowski). However, Rorty's view of science is more
complicated than he himself sometimes implies. He says: "I tend to view
natural science as in the business of controlling and predicting
things, and as largely useless for philosophical purposes." ("Reply to
Hartshorne," Saatkamp 32) Yet he spends a good deal of time drawing an
alternative picture of the intellectual virtues that good science
embodies (ORT Part I). This is a picture which eschews the notion that
science succeeds, when it does, in virtue of being in touch with
reality in a special way, the sort of way that epistemologists, when
successful, can clarify. It is in this sense specifically that Rorty
disavows science as philosophically significant. Good science may
nevertheless be a model of rationality, in Rorty's view, exactly in so
far as scientific practice has succeeded in establishing institutions
conducive to democratic exchange of view. 


The provocative and counterintuitive force of Rorty's treatment of
rationality and science in terms of conversational ethics is
undeniable. It is important to realize, though, that Rorty is not
denying that there is any bona fide use of notions like truth,
knowledge, or objectivity. Rather his point is that our ordinary uses
of these notions always trade for their content and point on particular
features of their varying contexts of application. His further point is
that when we abstract away from these different contexts and practices,
in search of general notions, we are left with pure abstract
hypostatizations incapable of providing us with any guide to action at
all. The upshot, Rorty holds, is that we simply do not have a concept
of objective reality which can be invoked either to explain the success
of some set of norms of warrant, or to justify some set of standards
over against others. This is perhaps clearest in Rorty's treatment of
the concept of truth. With regard to truth, Rorty's rhetoric and
philosophical strategy has indeed shifted over the last three decades.
As late as in 1982 (in CP) he still attempted to articulate his view of
truth by drawing on William James's famous definition in terms of what
is good in the way of belief. Soon after this, however, Rorty comes to
doubt the point of any theory of truth, and, following Davidson's lead
explicitly rejects all attempts to explicate the notion of truth in
terms of other concepts. Rorty's mature view of the point and
significance of the concept of truth is first elaborated in "Davidson,
Pragmatism and Truth," in ORT. Recent expressions are found in the
first of the two Spinoza Lectures given at the University of Amsterdam
in 1997, "Is it Desirable to Love truth?", in the paper, "Is Truth a
Goal of Inquiry? Donald Davidson versus Crispin Wright" (TP), as well
as in the introductions to, respectively, TP and PSH. In these writings
Rorty argues that while "truth" has various important uses, it does not
itself name a goal towards which we can strive, over and above warrant
or justification. His argument is not that truth is reducible to
warrant, but that the concept has no deep or substantive criterial
content at all. That is, there are only semantic explanations to be
offered for why it is the case that a given sentence is true just when
its truth conditions are satisfied. So aiming for truth, as opposed to
warrant, does not point to a possible line of action, just as we have
no measure of our approximation to truth other than increasing warrant.
Indeed, for Rorty, this is part of what makes the concept so useful, in
a manner not coincidentally analogous with goodness; it ensures that no
sentence can ever be analytically certified as true by virtue of its
possession of some other property. Rorty's attitude to the concept of
truth has been much criticized, often on the grounds that the very
notion of warrant, indeed the concept of belief in general, presupposes
the notion of truth. However, it may be that we can do justice to these
connections without supposing that the notion of truth thus involved
backs up the notions of belief and warrant with any substantive
normative content of its own. Indeed, that neither the concept of
truth, nor those of objectivity and of reality, can be invoked to
explain or legitimate our inferential practices and our standards of
warrant, is the essence of Rorty's conversationalism, or
epistemological behaviorism.
3. Pragmatized Culture

3.1 Naturalism
3.2 Liberalism
3.3 Ethnocentrism



Taking epistemological behaviorism to heart, Rorty urges, means that we
can no longer construe the authority of science in terms of ontological
claims. Though many disagree, this is not, for Rorty, to denigrate or
weaken the authority of science. Indeed, a prominent feature of Rorty's
post-metaphysical, post-epistemological culture, is a thoroughgoing
Darwinian naturalism. 
3.1 Naturalism


To be a naturalist in Rorty's sense, 
is to be the kind of antiessentialist who, like Dewey, sees
no breaks in the hierarchy of increasingly complex adjustments to novel
stimulation—the hierarchy which has amoeba adjusting themselves to
changed water temperature at the bottom, bees dancing and chess players
check-mating in the middle, and people fomenting scientific, artistic,
and political revolutions at the top. (ORT 109)


In Rorty's view, both Dewey's pragmatism and Darwinism encourage us to
see vocabularies as tools, to be assessed in terms of the particular
purposes they may serve. Our vocabularies, Rorty suggests, "have no
more of a representational relation to an intrinsic nature of
things than does the anteater's snout or the bowerbird's skill at
weaving." (TP 48) 


Pragmatic evaluation of various linguistically infused practices
requires a degree of specificity. From Rorty's perspective, to suggest
that we might evaluate vocabularies with respect to their ability to
uncover the truth, would be like claiming to evaluate tools for their
ability to help us get what we want—full stop. Is the hammer or the
saw or the scissors better—in general? Questions about usefulness can
only be answered, Rorty points out, once we give substance to our
purposes.


Rorty's pragmatist appropriation of Darwin also defuses the
significance of reduction. He rejects as representationalist the sort
of naturalism that implies a program of nomological or conceptual
reduction to terms at home in a basic science. Rorty's naturalism
echoes Nietzsche's perspectivism; a descriptive vocabulary is useful
insofar as the patterns it highlights are usefully attended to by
creatures with needs and interests like ours. Darwinian naturalism, for
Rorty, implies that there is no one privileged vocabulary whose purpose it
is to serve as a critical touchstone for our various descriptive
practices.


For Rorty, then, any vocabulary, even that of evolutionary
explanation, is a tool for a purpose, and therefore subject to
teleological assessment. Typically, Rorty justifies his own commitment
to Darwinian naturalism by suggesting that this vocabulary is suited to
further the secularization and democratization of society that Rorty
thinks we should aim for. Accordingly, there is a close tie between
Rorty's construal of the naturalism he endorses and his most basic
political convictions.
3.2 Liberalism


Rorty is a self-proclaimed romantic bourgeois liberal, a believer in
piecemeal reforms advancing economic justice and increasing the
freedoms that citizens are able to enjoy. The key imperative in Rorty's
political agenda is the deepening and widening of solidarity. Rorty is
sceptical toward radicalism; political thought purporting to uncover
hidden, systematic causes for injustice and exploitation, and on that
basis proposing sweeping changes to set things right. (ORT Part III;
EHO; CIS Part II; AC) The task of the intellectual, with respect to
social justice, is not to provide refinements of social theory, but to
sensitize us to the suffering of others, and refine, deepen and expand
our ability to identify with others, to think of others as like
ourselves in morally relevant ways. (EHO Part III; CIS Part III)
Reformist liberalism with its commitment to the expansion of democratic
freedoms in ever wider political solidarities is, on Rorty's view, an
historical contingency which has no philosophical foundation, and needs
none. Recognizing the contingency of these values and the vocabulary in
which they are expressed, while retaining the commitments, is the
attitude of the liberal ironist. (CIS essays 3,4) Liberal ironists have
the ability to combine the consciousness of the contingency of their
own evaluative vocabulary with a commitment to reducing suffering—in
particular, with a commitment to combatting cruelty. (CIS essay 4, ORT
Part III) They promote their cause through redescriptions, rather than
arguments. The distinction between argumentative discourse and
redescription corresponds to that between propositions and
vocabularies. Change in belief may result from convincing argument. A
change in what we perceive as interesting truth value candidates
results from acquiring new vocabularies. Rorty identifies romanticism
as the view that the latter sort of change is the more significant one.
(CIS "Introduction", essay 1). 


Rorty's romantic version of liberalism is expressed also in the
distinction he draws between the private and the public. (CIS) This
distinction is often misinterpreted to imply that certain domains of
interaction or behaviour should be exempted from evaluation in moral or
political or social terms. The distinction Rorty draws, however, has
little to do with traditional attempts to draw lines of demarcation of
this sort between a private and a public domain—to determine which
aspects of our lives we do and which we don't have to answer for
publically. Rorty's distinction, rather, goes to the purposes of
theoretical vocabularies. We should, Rorty urges, be "content to treat
the demands of self-creation and of human solidarity as equally valid,
yet forever incommensurable." (CIS xv) Rorty's view is that we should
treat vocabularies for deliberation about public goods and social and
political arrangements, on the one hand, and vocabularies developed or
created in pursuit of personal fulfilment, self-creation, and
self-realization, on the other, as distinct tools.
3.3 Ethnocentrism


Rorty's liberal ironist, recognizing—indeed, affirming—the
contingency of her own commitments, is explicitly ethnocentric. (ORT
"Solidarity or Objectivity") For the liberal ironist, 
…one consequence of antirepresentationalism is the
recognition that no description of how things are from a God's-eye
point of view, no skyhook provided by some contemporary or
yet-to-be-developed science, is going to free us from the contingency
of having been acculturated as we were. Our acculturation is what
makes certain options live, or momentous, or forced, while leaving
others dead, or trivial, or optional. (ORT 13)


So the liberal ironist accepts that bourgeois liberalism has no
universality other than the transient and unstable one which time,
luck, and discursive effort might win for it. This view looks to many
readers like a version of cultural relativism. True, Rorty does not say
that what is true, what is good, and what is right is relative to some
particular ethnos, and so in that sense he is no relativist. But the
worry about relativism, that it leaves us with no rational way to
adjudicate conflict, seems to apply equally to Rorty's ethnocentric
view. Rorty's answer is to say that in one sense of "rational" that is
true, but that in another sense it is not, and to recommend that we
drop the former. Rorty's position is that we have no notion of rational
warrant that exceeds, or transcends, or grounds, the norms that liberal
intellectuals take to define thorough, open-minded, reflective
discussion. It is chimerical, Rorty holds, to think that the force or
attractiveness of these norms can be enhanced by argument that does not
presuppose them. It is pointless, equally, to look for ways of
convicting those who pay them no heed of irrationality. Persuasion
across such fundamental differences is achieved, if at all, by concrete
comparisons of particular alternatives, by elaborate description and
redescription of the kinds of life to which different practices
conduce. 
4. Rorty and Philosophy

4.1 Critical Responses
4.2 Claim to Pragmatism
4.3 Analytic Philosophy



The broad scope of Rorty's metaphilosophical deconstruction, together
with a penchant for uncashed metaphor and swift, broad-stroke
historical narrative, has gained Rorty a sturdy reputation as an
anti-philosopher's philosopher. While his writing enjoys an unusual
degree of popularity beyond the confines of the profession, Rorty's
work is often regarded with suspicion and scepticism within academic
philosophy. 
4.1 Critical Responses


As we have seen in connection with Rorty's attitude to science, it is
particularly Rorty's treatment of truth and knowledge that has drawn
fire from philosophers. While a great variety of philosophers have
criticized Rorty on this general score in a great variety of ways, it
is not very difficult to discern a common concern; Rorty's
conversationalist view of truth and knowledge leaves us entirely unable
to account for the notion that a reasonable view of how things are is a
view suitably constrained by how the world actually is. This criticism
is levelled against Rorty not only from the standpoint of metaphysical
and scientific realist views of the sort that Rorty hopes will soon be
extinct. It is expressed also by thinkers who have some sympathy with
Rorty's historicist view of intellectual progress, and his critique of
Kantian and Platonist features of modern philosophy. Frank B. Farrell,
for instance, argues that Rorty fails to appreciate Davidson's view on
just this point, and claims that Rorty's conversationalist view of
belief-constraint is a distorted, worldless, version of Davidson's
picture of how communication between agents occurs. Similarly, John
McDowell, while also critical of Davidson's epistemological views,
claims that Rorty's view of the relation between agent and world as
merely causal runs foul of the notion that our very concept of a
creature with beliefs involves the idea of a rational constraint of the
world on our epistemic states. 


However, critics are concerned not only with what they see as a
misguided view of belief, truth, and knowledge, whether relativist,
subjectivist, or idealist in nature. An important reason for the high
temperature of much of the debate that Rorty has inspired is that he
appears to some to reject the very values that are the basis for any
articulation of a philosophical view of truth and knowledge at all.
Rorty is critical of the role of argument in intellectual progress, and
dismissive of the very idea of theories of truth, knowledge,
rationality, and the like. Philosophers such as Hilary Putnam and Susan
Haack have increasingly focussed on this aspect of Rorty's views.
Haack, in particular, frames criticism of Rorty along these lines in
moral terms; to her mind, Rorty's efforts to abandon the basic concepts
of traditional epistemology are symptoms of a vulgar cynicism, which
contributes to the decline of reason and intellectual integrity that
Haack and others find to be characteristic of much contemporary
thought. The charge of intellectual irresponsibility is sometimes
raised, or at last implied, in connection with Rorty's use of
historical figures. Rorty's reading of Descartes and of Kant in PMN have
often been challenged, as has his more constructive uses of Hegel,
Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Wittgenstein. The kind of appropriation of
other writers and thinkers that Rorty performs will at times seem to do
violence to the views and intentions of the protagonists. Rorty,
however, is quite clear about the rhetorical point and scholarly limitations
of these kinds of redescriptions, as he explains in "The Historiography
of Philosophy: Four Genres."
4.2 Claim to Pragmatism


One particularly contentious issue has arisen in connection with
Rorty's appropriation of earlier philosophers; prominent readers of
the classical American pragmatists have expressed deep reservations
about Rorty's interpretation of Dewey and Peirce, in particular, and
the pragmatist movement in general. Consequently, Rorty's entitlement
to the label "pragmatist" has been challenged. For instance Susan
Haack's strong claims on this score have received much attention, but
there are many others. (See, for example, the discussions of Rorty in
Thomas M.  Alexander, 1987; Gary Brodsky, 1982; James Campbell, 1984;
Abraham Edel, 1985; James Gouinlock, 1995; Lavine 1995; R.W: Sleeper,
1986; as well as the essays in Lenore Langdorf and Andrew R. Smith,
1995.) For Rorty, the key figure in the American pragmatist movement
is John Dewey, to whom he attributes many of his own central
doctrines. In particular, Rorty finds in Dewey an anticipation of his
own view of philosophy as the hand-maiden of a humanist politics, of a
non-ontological view of the virtues of inquiry, of a holistic
conception of human intellectual life, and of an anti-essentialist,
historicist conception of philosophical thought. To read Dewey his
way, however, Rorty explicitly sets about separating the "good" from
the "bad" Dewey. (See "Dewey's Metaphysics," CP, 72-89, and "Dewey
between Hegel and Darwin", in Saatkamp, 1-15.) He is critical of what
he takes to be Dewey's backsliding into metaphysics in Experience
and Nature, and has no patience for the constructive attempt of
Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. Rorty thus imposes a scheme of
evaluation on Dewey's works which many scholars object to. Lavine, for
instance, claims that "scientific method" is Dewey's central concept
(Lavine 1995, 44). R.W. Sleeper holds that reform rather than
elimination of metaphysics and epistemology is Dewey's aim (Sleeper
1986, 2, chapter 6).


Rorty's least favourite pragmatist is Peirce, whom he regards as
subject to both scheme-content dualism and to a degree of scientism. So
it is not surprising that Haack, whose own pragmatism draws inspiration
from Peirce, finds Rorty's recasting of pragmatism literally unworthy
of the name. Rorty's key break with the pragmatists is a fundamental
one; to Haack's mind, by situating himself in opposition to the
epistemological orientation of modern philosophy, Rorty ends up
dismissing the very project that gave direction to the works of the
American pragmatists. While classical pragmatism is an attempt to
understand and work out a novel legitimating framework for scientific
inquiry, Haack maintains, Rorty's "pragmatism" (Haack consistently uses
quotes) is simply an abandonment of the very attempt to learn more
about the nature and adequacy conditions of inquiry. Instead of aiding
us in our aspiration to govern ourselves through rational thought,
Rorty weakens our intellectual resilience and leaves us even more
vulnerable to rhetorical seduction. To Haack and her sympathisers,
Rorty's pragmatism is dangerous, performing an end-run on reason, and
therefore on philosophy.
4.3 Analytic Philosophy


Nevertheless, the founding impulses of Western philosophy clearly
express themselves in Rorty's fundamental concern with the connection
between philosophical thinking and the pursuit of human happiness.
Rorty's relationship to the traditions of Western philosophy is more
nuanced than his reputation might suggest. So, too, is Rorty's relation
to analytical philosophy in particular. Rorty is sometimes portrayed as
a renegade, as someone who went through a transformation from bona fide
analytical philosopher to something else, and then lived to tell a tale
of liberation from youthful enchantment. This portrayal, however,
distorts both Rorty's view of analytical philosophy and the trajectory
of his thinking. 


In the mid nineteen sixties, Rorty gained attention for his
articulation of eliminative materialism (cf., "Mind-Body Identity,
Privacy and Categories," 1965). Around that time, he also edited, and
wrote a lengthy introduction to, a volume entitled The Linguistic
Turn (1967, reissued with a new introduction in 1992). Though the
introduction to the 1967 volume and the early papers in philosophy of
mind show Rorty adopting frameworks for philosophical problems he has
since dispensed with, these writings at the same time clearly bear the
mark of the fundamental metaphilosophical attitude which becomes
explicit in the next decade. In the "Preface" to PMN, referring to
Hartshorne, McKeon, Carnap, Robert Brumbaugh, Carl Hempel, and Paul
Weiss, Rorty says,
I was very fortunate in having these men as my teachers,
but, for better or worse, I treated them all as saying the same thing:
that a "philosophical problem" was a product of the unconscious
adoption of a set of assumptions built into the vocabulary in which the
problem was stated—assumptions which were to be questioned before the
problem itself was taken seriously. (PMN xiii)


This way of stating the lesson, however, appears to leave open the
possibility that certain philosophical problems eventually may
legitimately be taken seriously—that is, at face value in the sense
that they require constructive solutions—provided the assumptions
which sustain their formulation stand up to proper critical scrutiny.
Taken this way, the attitude Rorty here expresses would be more or less
the same as that of all those philosophers who have diagnosed their
predecessors' work as mixtures of pseudo-questions and genuine problems
dimly glimpsed, problems which now, with the proper frame of
questioning fully clarified, may be productively addressed. But the
full force of the lesson Rorty learned emerges only with the view that
this notion of proper critical scrutiny is illusory. For Rorty, to
legitimate the assumptions on which a philosophical problem is based,
would be to establish that the terms we require to pose it are
mandatory, that the vocabulary in which we encounter it is in principle
inescapable. But Rorty's construal of the linguistic turn, as well as
his proposals for eliminating the vocabulary of the mental, are really
at odds with the idea that we might hope to construct a definitive
vocabulary for philosophy. Even in his early days, Rorty's approach to
philosophy is shaped by the historicist conviction that no vocabularies
are inescapable in principle. This means that progress in philosophy is
gained less from constructive solutions to problems than through
therapeutic dissolution of their causes, that is, through the invention
of new vocabularies by the launch of new and fruitful metaphors. (PMN
"Introduction"; ORT "Unfamiliar Noises: Hesse and Davidson on
Metaphor") 


To hold that no vocabulary is final is also to hold that no
vocabulary can be free of unthematized yet optional assumptions. Hence
any effort to circumvent a philosophical problem by making such
assumptions visible is subject to its own circumvention. Accordingly,
the fact that Rorty often distances himself from the terms in which he
earlier framed arguments and made diagnoses is in itself no reason to
impose on him, as some have done, a temporal dichotomy. It may be that
Rorty's early work, inspired by a less critical, less dialectical
reading of Quine and Sellars than that offered in PMN, is more
constructive than therapeutic in tone and jargon, and therefore from
Rorty's later perspective in an important sense misguided. However,
what ties together all Rorty's work, over time and across themes, is
his complete lack of faith in the idea that there is an ideal
vocabulary, one which contains all genuine discursive options. Rorty
designates this faith Platonism (an important theme in CIS). That there
are no inescapable forms of description is a thought which permeates
Rorty's work from the 1960s right through his later therapeutic
articulations of pragmatism. These characterizations of pragmatism in
terms of anti-foundationalism (PMN), of anti-representationalism (ORT),
of anti-essentialism (TP) are explicitly parasitic on constructive
efforts in epistemology and metaphysics, and are intended to high-light
the various ways that these efforts remain under the spell of a
Platonic faith in ideal concepts and mandatory forms of
descriptions.


Rorty's use of Quine and Sellars to make his fundamental points
against the idea of philosophy as a knowledge legitimation project, as
well as his articulation of his critique in terms of typically
"analytical" philosophical problems, has contributed to an impression
of PMN as an internal indictment of analytic philosophy as such.
Many—some gleeful, some chagrined—have read PMN as a purported
demonstration of the bankruptcy of one of the two contemporary main
streams of Western philosophy. Such readers draw support for this view
also from the fact that much of Rorty's writings since PMN has been
concerned to show the virtues in thinkers like Heidegger and Derrida.
(EHO) Twenty years later, however, it seems better not to superimpose
the analytic-continental divide onto the message of PMN, or on Rorty.
In PMN, his central point is that philosophy needs to break free from
the metaphor of mind as a medium of appearances, appearances that
philosophy must help us sort into the mere and the
reality-corresponding ones. Rorty made this point in a vocabulary that
was developed by Anglo-American (whether by birth, naturalization, or
late adoption) philosophers in the course of the preceding
half-century. It is not necessary, and probably misleading, to see
Rorty's criticism of epistemology and the assumptions that make it
appear worthwhile as a criticism of a particular philosophical style of
philosophy or set of methodological habits. Reading PMN in conjunction
with the essays in CP (see particularly essay 4, "Professionalized
Philosophy and Transcendentalist Culture", essay 12, "Philosophy in
America Today", and also "Introduction"), one quickly sees that the
target of PMN cannot be a putative school or branch of the subject
called "Analytic Philosophy". Because Rorty thinks philosophy has no
essence, has no defining historical task, fails to mark out a special
domain of knowledge, and is not, in short, a natural kind (CP 226), he
leaves no ground from which to level that sort of critique. Nor is it
his intention to do so. Around the time of the publication of PMN,
Rorty's view of the matter was ‘that "analytic philosophy" now
has only a stylistic and sociological unity’ (CP 217). He then
qualifies this point as follows: "In saying….[this], I am not
suggesting that analytic philosophy is a bad thing, or is in bad shape.
The analytic style is, I think, a good style. The esprit
de corps among analytic philosophers is healthy and useful." (CP
217) However, while Rorty apparently bears no prejudice against
analytic philosophy in particular, the very reason for his
tolerance—his antiessentialist, historicist view of philosophy and its
problems—has for many critics been a point of objection. After his
faint praise, Rorty goes on:
All I am saying is that analytic philosophy has become,
whether it likes it or not, the same sort of discipline as we find in
the other "humanities" departments—departments where pretensions to
"rigor" and to "scientific" status are less evident. The normal form of
life in the humanities is the same as that in the arts and in
belles-lettres; a genius does something new and interesting and
persuasive, and his or her admirers begin to form a school or movement.
(CP 217-218)


This is perfectly consonant with the attitude to the notion of
philosophical method Rorty expresses 20 years later: "So-called
methods are simply descriptions of the activities engaged in by the
enthusiastic imitators of one or another original mind—what Kuhn
would call the "research programs" to which their works gave rise."
(TP 10) Rorty's metaphilosophical critique, then, is directed not at
particular techniques or styles or vocabularies, but toward the idea
that philosophical problems are anything other than transient tensions
in the dynamics of evolving, contingent vocabularies. If his critique
has bite specifically against analytic philosophy, this may be because
of a lingering faith in philosophical problems as lasting intellectual
challenges that any honest thinker has to acknowledge, and which may
be met by making progress in methodology. Rorty himself, however,
nowhere says that this faith is part of the essence of analytical
philosophy.  On the contrary, it would seem that analytical
philosophers, people like Sellars, Quine, and Davidson, have provided
Rorty with indispensable critical tools in his attack on the
epistemological legitimation-project which has been a central concern
in philosophy since Descartes.