R. G. Collingwood (1889–1943) was a British philosopher and
practising archaeologist best known for his work in aesthetics and the
philosophy of history. During the 1950s and 1960s his philosophy of
history in particular occupied centre stage in the debate concerning
the nature of explanation in the social sciences and whether or not
they are ultimately reducible to explanations in the natural sciences.
Primarily through the interpretative efforts of W. H. Dray,
Collingwood's work in the philosophy of history came to be seen as
providing a powerful antidote against Carl Hempel's claim for
methodological unity.


Collingwood is the author of one of the most important treatises in
meta-philosophy written in the first half of the twentieth century,
An Essay on Philosophical Method (1933), which is a sustained
attempt to explain why philosophy is an autonomous discipline with a
distinctive method and subject matter that differ from those of the
natural and the exact sciences.


He is often described as one of the British Idealists, although the
label fails to capture his distinctive kind of idealism, which is
conceptual rather than metaphysical. In his correspondence with Gilbert
Ryle, Collingwood himself explicitly rejected the label
“idealist” because he did not endorse the arch-rationalist
assumptions that shaped much British idealism at the end of the 19th
and the early part of the 20th century and consequently did not wish to
be identified with it.


From the mid-thirties onwards Collingwood's work increasingly
engaged in a dialogue with the newly emerging school of analytic
philosophy. In An Essay on Metaphysics (1940) he attacked the
neo-empiricist assumptions prevalent in early analytic philosophy and
advocated a logical/epistemological transformation of metaphysics from
a study of being or ontology to a study of the absolute presuppositions
or heuristic principles which govern different forms of enquiry.
Collingwood thus occupies a distinctive position in the history of
British philosophy in the first half of the 20th century. He rejects
equally the neo-empiricist assumptions that prevailed in early analytic
philosophy and the kind of metaphysics that the analytical school
sought to overthrow. His epistemological reform of metaphysics also
ensures a distinctive role and subject matter for philosophical enquiry
and is thus far from advocating a merely therapeutic conception of
philosophy or the dissolution of philosophical into linguistic analysis
in the manner of ordinary language philosophy.

See the separate entry for a discussion of
  Collingwood's aesthetics.
 
1. Biographical Sketch


R.G. Collingwood was born in Cartmel Fell, Lancashire, at the southern
tip of Windermere in 1889. His father, W.G. Collingwood, was an
archaeologist, artist, and acted as John Ruskin's private secretary in
the final years of Ruskin's life; his mother was also an artist and a
talented pianist. When he was two years old the family moved to
Lanehead, on the shore of Coniston Water, close to Ruskin's house at
Brantwood. 


Collingwood was taught at home until the age of thirteen when he
went to preparatory school and the following year to Rugby School. In
1908 he went up to University College, Oxford, to read Literae
Humaniores. Before his final examinations in 1912 he became a
fellow of Pembroke College.


On beginning his philosophical studies he came under the influence
of the Oxford realists, especially E.F. Carritt and John Cook Wilson.
Until around 1916 he was a professed realist; however, his realism was
progressively undermined by his close engagement with continental
philosophy, especially the work of Benedetto Croce and Giovanni
Gentile. This was partly the result of his friendship with J.A. Smith,
Waynflete Professor of Metaphysical Philosophy from 1910 to 1935. In
1913 he published an English translation of Croce's The Philosophy
of Giambattista Vico and he was later to translate many other
works by both Croce and Guido de Ruggiero, who became a close
friend.


Much of Collingwood's early work was in theology and the philosophy
of religion, under the influence of the ‘Cumnor Circle’, a
group of Church of England modernists. In 1916 he published an essay on
‘The Devil’ in a collection produced by this group, and
also his first book Religion and Philosophy.


At the same time he was engaged in serious archaeological work, from
1912 onwards spending his summers directing excavations of Roman sites
in the north of England. Although he sometimes described his
archaeology as a hobby, he became an authority on the history and
archaeology of Roman Britain, conducting many excavations, writing
hundreds of papers, and producing books still in use to this day, in
particular his work on Roman inscriptions.


In late 1919 he wrote a survey of the history of the ontological
proof together with an analysis of the argument. He drew on this in
later work, especially in Faith and Reason (1928), An
Essay on Philosophical Method (1933) and An Essay on
Metaphysics (1940). In 1924 Collingwood wrote Speculum
Mentis. This was a dialectic of the forms of experience: art,
religion, science, history and philosophy. During this period he was
also lecturing on ethics, Roman history, the philosophy of history and
aesthetics: his Outlines of a Philosophy of Art (based on his
lectures) was published in 1925.


Throughout the 1920s and early 1930s Collingwood was also heavily
engaged in historical and archaeological work, publishing The
Archaeology of Roman Britain in 1930 and several editions of Roman
Britain, the culmination of this work was his survey of Roman Britain
in Roman Britain and the English Settlements (1936) and his
contribution to Tenney Frank's Economic Survey of Ancient Rome
(1937). To add to his self-imposed burden of overwork, his abilities as
a polymath (able to read scholarly work in English, French, Spanish,
Italian, German, Latin and Greek) were in great demand from 1928
onwards in his capacity as a Delegate to the Clarendon Press.


Partly as a result of serious overwork coupled with insomnia,
Collingwood's health went into decline from the early 1930s. In April
1931 he suffered complications arising from chicken pox and began to
suffer from high blood pressure. He was granted leave of absence by the
university; following his return, in the Autumn of 1932, he began
writing an important new book, regarded by many as the pinnacle of his
philosophical achievement — An Essay on Philosophical
Method (1933). This had its origins in the methodological
introduction to the lectures on moral philosophy he had been delivering
annually over the preceding decade. It was a sustained investigation
into the nature of philosophical reasoning through an examination of
the distinctive character of philosophical concepts. Following
publication of the Essay, he focused his philosophical
energies on the philosophy of history and the philosophy of nature. The
lectures he delivered at this time later formed the basis of the
posthumously published The Idea of History (1946) and The
Idea of Nature (1945).


In 1935 Collingwood succeeded J.A. Smith as Waynflete Professor of
Metaphysical Philosophy and moved from Pembroke to Magdalen College. He
delivered his inaugural lecture on The Historical Imagination in
October of that year. He had been elected as a Fellow of the British
Academy in 1934 and delivered his lecture on Human Nature and Human
History there in May 1936. These two lectures were later incorporated
into The Idea of History.


In 1937 he wrote The Principles of Art; whilst correcting
the proofs he suffered a stroke, the first of many to come. From this
time onwards he was aware that he was writing on borrowed time. His
An Autobiography (1939) records his determination to put on
record an account of the work he hoped to do but might not live to
complete. During a recuperative voyage to the Dutch East Indies in
1938–9 he wrote An Essay on Metaphysics (1940) and began work
on what he regarded as his magnum opus, The Principles of
History (not published until 1995). In 1939 he sailed around the
Greek islands with a group of Rhodes scholars studying at Oxford, a
journey memorably recollected and evoked in The First Mate's
Log (1940). On his return to Oxford he lectured on moral and
political philosophy and worked at The New Leviathan (1942)
which he saw as his contribution to the war effort. He wrote the book
against a background of increasingly debilitating strokes.


R.G. Collingwood died in Coniston in January 1943; he was nearly 54.
He is buried in Coniston churchyard in an unassuming grave between his
parents and John Ruskin. He was succeeded in the Waynflete Chair in
1945 by Gilbert Ryle.
2. Metaphilosophy
2.1 Philosophical Distinctions and the overlap of classes


Collingwood's first mature work, An Essay on Philosophical
Method (1933), is a substantial treatise in metaphilosophy which
seeks to delineate the subject matter and method of philosophical
analysis. Philosophy, according to Collingwood, is a second-order
enquiry whose task is to offer a reflection on first-order forms of
knowledge. The subject matter of philosophical analysis is thus the
fundamental concepts and principles which govern different forms of
investigation and define the subject matters of the first-order
sciences. 


Central to Collingwood's account of philosophical method is
the doctrine of the overlap of classes. According to this doctrine, the
concepts and principles with which philosophy is concerned allow for
complete extensional overlap. Moral philosophers, for example, are
concerned with the distinction between dutiful and expedient actions.
The distinction between dutiful and expedient actions is not an
empirical classification since actions which conform to the principle
of utility could also be instances of the principle of duty, and moral
philosophers would want to distinguish between such principles even in
circumstances where prioritising one principle over the other would
make no difference to the action one has to perform. Aesthetic
distinctions, like moral ones, are distinctions without a difference.
Thus poetry and music may be jointly instantiated in a song but we may
still want to distinguish between the lyric and the melody.
Philosophical distinctions, in other words, are semantic distinctions
to which there may not correspond any empirical difference. The task of
the philosopher is precisely to distinguish concepts which coincide in
their instances. Philosophical distinctions differ from empirical
classifications because the coordinate species of an empirical
genus, unlike those of a philosophical one, form mutually
exclusive classes. Consider for example the empirical concept
“colour” and its coordinate species “red” and
“blue”, or the empirical concept “mammal” and
its coordinate species “cow” and “goat”. Whilst
the principle of duty and that of utility may be jointly instantiated
in an action, no object can be both blue and red all over, both a cow
and a goat. The concept of the good, unlike the concepts of
“colour” or “mammal”, is a philosophical
concept whose coordinate species, “duty” and
“utility”, may coincide in their instances or overlap
extensionally. The mind-body distinction, according to Collingwood, is
similar to the distinction between duty and utility; it is a semantic
distinction between concepts which coincide in their instances.
Philosophical distinctions, whether they are found in ethics,
aesthetics or the philosophy of mind, are semantic distinctions without
an empirical difference. This is why what philosophers do differs from
what natural scientists do: natural scientists classify, whereas
philosophers draw distinctions. 

2.2 Philosophical concepts and their justification


The doctrine of the overlap of classes entails, strictly speaking, that
there are no such things as ‘examples’ of philosophical
concepts. An action performed “out of duty”
illustrates the principle of morality, but it is not an
example of a moral action in the way in which Dolly is a specimen of a
sheep. It follows from this that philosophical concepts cannot be
justified empirically precisely because an object which illustrates one
concept could also illustrate another, even at the same level of
generality. Whilst a geologist may explain and justify the distinction
between sedimentary and crystalline rocks by pointing to specimens of
these, such an option is not open to the moral philosopher who cannot
justify the concept of duty by pointing to instances of dutiful actions
because, given the overlap of classes, an action which illustrates the
concept of duty could also illustrate that of utility. 


The justification for philosophical concepts lies in the fact that
they enable us to make crucial distinctions, such as the one between
duty and utility, music and poetry, actions and mere bodily
movements. The justification of philosophical concepts is accordingly
neither inductive nor deductive. It is not inductive because
philosophical concepts need to be presupposed in order to make the
relevant distinctions. It is not deductive because philosophical
concepts do not possess the status of Cartesian first principles on
which the edifice of knowledge is deductively built. They are rather
more like Kantian categories that are presupposed and implicit in
ordinary judgments. To justify a philosophical concept involves
regressing from a claim to the conditions of its possibility in the
manner of a transcendental argument. Philosophical justification is
therefore inevitably in a way circular, since in a regressive
argument, unlike a deductive one, the truth of the premises is not
established independently of the conclusion. Rather, the entitlement
to employ philosophical concepts lies in the fact that they ground our
knowledge claims.
2.3 Meaning and truth


According to Collingwood concepts have two aspects, intension and
extension. The extension of a concept is the class of objects that it
denotes. The intension of a concept is what it means. Collingwood argues that
the intension of a concept is not reducible to its extension. As he
puts it: “two concepts ‘are the same thing’ in the
sense that a thing which exemplifies the one exemplifies the other
also, but ‘their being is not the same’ in the sense that
being an instance of the one is not the same as being an instance of
the other” (EPM, 50). His refusal to define concepts in purely
extensional terms is crucial for his account of philosophical concepts
because, as we have seen, philosophical distinctions are for him purely
semantic in nature. Philosophical concepts do not carve out a segment
of reality but rather provide a way of describing it: in its
philosophical employment, the concept of action does not distinctively
denote a subset of objects, i.e., the deeds performed by animals of the
human species, but is rather a way of describing what happens as an
expression of rational as opposed to causal processes. Collingwood's
account of philosophical distinctions (distinctions to which there may
not correspond any empirical differences) and of the task of philosophy
(the distinguishing of concepts which coincide in their instances) is
thus clearly based on a rejection of a reductively truth-conditional
semantics because the meaning of the propositions in which such
concepts feature is not reducible to their truth conditions. As we have
seen, whilst an empirical concept may be justified extensionally with
reference to the class of objects that it denotes, no such
justification is available in the case of philosophical concepts. 
2.4 The role of philosophical analysis


Philosophy, Collingwood says, “does not, like exact or empirical
science, bring us to know things of which we were simply ignorant, but
brings us to know in a different way things which we already knew in
some way” (EPM, 161). It is the task of philosophical analysis to
make explicit principles which are implicit in the practices of first
order sciences. Thus, for example, it is the task of a philosophy of
history to reflect on the explanatory practices of historians and to
tease out the fundamental assumptions that govern them. In
Collingwood's understanding, history is a science of the mind or a
geisteswissenschaft (see below ‘Mind and Action’) and as
such it is to be contrasted with the sciences of nature. The
fundamental assumption which governs history, understood as a science
of the mind, is the view that what occurs is an expression of rational
rather than causal processes and that historical explanations must take
the form of rational reconstructions rather than inductive
generalisations. Historians are thus committed to the view that
“mind exists” in the very specific sense that reality, when
viewed from an historical perspective, comprises actions and is to be
explained rationally rather than causally. Whilst historians are
committed to the view that “mind exists”, natural
scientists are similarly committed to the view that “matter
exists”. Again, the proposition that “matter exists”
is to be understood as stating that reality, when viewed from the
perspective of natural science, is comprised of events which are to be
explained by the empirical method of observation and inductive
generalisation, not by proffering reasons. According to Collingwood,
neither the proposition “mind exists” nor the proposition
“matter exists” is a metaphysical proposition in the
traditional sense. They are not metaphysical propositions because they
do not assert the existence of metaphysical kinds (mind and matter) but
of the methodological assumptions that govern the study of mind and
nature. These propositions are, as Collingwood puts it, philosophical
propositions which define the domains of enquiry or subject matters of
the science of history and nature. Philosophical propositions, unlike
metaphysical propositions, make an epistemological claim, rather than
an ontological one. They assert that mind exists for the historian and
that matter exists for the natural scientist. Further, philosophical
propositions cannot be accommodated within a Humean epistemology since
they are neither about relations of ideas nor about matters of fact.
They are not propositions about matters of fact because they are not
empirically verifiable. They are not propositions about relations of
ideas because they are not self- evidently true analytical
propositions. Yet although philosophical propositions cannot be
accommodated within Humean epistemology, accepting them does not entail
a commitment to the metaphysics which Hume wanted to reject. As already
mentioned, philosophical propositions are not presented as necessary
existential claims but as methodologically necessary ones.
Philosophical analysis thus brings us to know “in a different way
things which we already knew in some ways” in so far as it
enables us to become aware of the assumptions that we implicitly and
unselfconsciously make in order to provide radically different and
sometimes incompatible descriptions of the same thing. 
2.5 The nature of philosophical problems


Collingwood's conception of the subject matter of philosophy (the
fundamental principles and concepts which underpin different forms of
investigation) and of its task (the distinguishing of concepts that
coincide in their instances) entails a particular view of the nature of
philosophical problems. Philosophical problems arise because there are
certain distinctions which do not map onto the empirical classification
of reality. The distinction between mind and matter, as we have seen,
is one such distinction, i.e. a distinction without a difference.
According to Collingwood this is why we have a problem of mind/body
dualism, why problems such as that of freedom of the will and
determinism, or of the criteria of personal identity versus bodily
continuity, arise in the first place. They arise because of our
implicit commitment to two concepts, that of mind and matter, which
entail a radically different way of looking at the world and of
explaining what occurs in it. 


To illustrate how Collingwood's doctrine of the overlap of classes
affects his view of philosophical problems, let us consider the
problem of mind-body dualism as it is discussed in contemporary
philosophy of mind. Many contemporary philosophers would endorse the
view that in spite of the progress of natural science we have been
unable to explain away the mind/body distinction. They may even
maintain that the so-called ‘explanatory gap’ is always
likely to remain with us. Some contemporary philosophers of mind then
try to explain the persistence of the mind-body problem by claiming
that there are two radically different modes of access to the mind and
the body and, given the ineradicability of these two modes of access,
we will continue to have two radically different descriptions of
reality. Admittedly, this position bears some surface similarities to
that defended by Collingwood, but it is in fact very different. Like
many contemporary philosophers of mind, Collingwood holds that the
mind/body distinction is ineliminable, but for him such
ineliminability is not connected to the existence of different modes
of access. It is rather due to the fact that we mean very different
things when we speak about mental phenomena than when we speak about
physical ones. The explanatory gap, according to Collingwood, is not
epistemological but semantic (D'Oro 2007). The resilience of the mind-body problem
is thus due not to the ineliminability of two modes of access, but to
the ineliminability of the analytic/synthetic distinction. As long as
we will make distinctions to which there correspond no empirical
differences there will be a role for philosophical analysis. The role
of philosophy is to discern different senses even when there is only
one referent. Thus moral philosophers distinguish between the
principles of duty and that of utility even when there is no
difference in the actions one has to perform, and philosophers of mind
distinguish between the human being and the person, even if a person
and a human being are in another important sense not two different
things.
3. Epistemology and Metaphysics
3.1 Metaphysics without ontology


A discussion of epistemological and metaphysical issues would normally
comprise two different topics. This is not the case with Collingwood
who thought that, in order to be possible, metaphysics should undergo
an epistemological reform and be transformed from an ontological
enquiry to an enquiry into the heuristic principles which enable us to
cognize reality. This is the main gist of what is arguably
Collingwood's second major work, An Essay on Metaphysics
(1940). Understood as an ontological enquiry or as the study of pure
being, metaphysics is not a possible science because it lacks a subject
matter of its own. According to Collingwood, a science in the Latin
sense of the word scientia must have a method and subject matter of its
own. Thus, for example, the study of mind (history) and the study of
matter (natural science) are sciences in this sense of the term for
they approach reality with a particular set of questions and with a
particular set of presuppositions. The historian asks after the motives
which inform actions because the goal of the historian is to
understand. The natural scientist enquires after constant conjunctions
because the goal of the natural scientist is to predict. In order for
either form of enquiry to be possible, historians and natural
scientists must make different presuppositions about the nature of
reality. Historians must assume that the real is
rational for otherwise they could not explain what occurs as an
expression of rational processes. By contrast, natural scientists must
presuppose that nature is uniform, or they would be unable to formulate
the inductive generalisations on which their predictions are based.
Metaphysics, traditionally understood as an ontological enquiry,
possesses no subject matter of its own since it undertakes to carry out
a study of what exists without asking any specific questions and making
any presuppositions. If therefore metaphysics is to be possible at all,
it must be subjected to an epistemological reform; it must take the
form not of ontology or a study of pure being, but of a study of the
presuppositions that underlie different forms of enquiry. 


To illustrate how different disciplines are governed by different sets
of presuppositions, Collingwood considers the way in which the term
‘cause’ is employed in the historical sciences and in the
practical and theoretical sciences of nature. He speaks of three
distinct meanings of the term “cause”. In the historical
sciences (sciences which deal with the mind) “that which is
caused is the free and deliberate act of a conscious and responsible
agent, and causing him to do it means affording him a motive for so
doing” (EM, 285). This is what Collingwood calls sense I of the
term cause. Secondly, the term cause is used in sense II in the
practical sciences of nature, sciences such as medicine and
engineering, where “that which is caused is an event in nature
and its cause is an event or state of things by producing or
preventing which we can produce or prevent that whose cause it is said
to be” (EM, 296–7). Finally, the term cause is also employed in
sense III in the theoretical sciences of nature where “that
which is caused is an event or state of things and its cause is
another event or state of things such that (a) if the cause happens or
exists, the effect must happen or exist even if no further conditions
are fulfilled (b) the effect cannot happen or exist unless the cause
happens or exists” (EM, 285–86). When we move from sense I to
sense III we effectively remove a teleological framework of
explanation. The main difference between sense II and sense III of the
term is that whereas in the practical sciences of nature the cause of
an event is an antecedent state of affairs considered from the point
of view of an interest in controlling and manipulating the natural
environment, in the theoretical sciences of nature the causes of
natural events are viewed independently of any impact that agents can
have on the natural environment: a cause in sense III is
unconditional. The main difference between sense I, on the one hand,
and sense II and III on the other, is that whereas the practical and
theoretical sciences of nature explain the occurrence of events by
appealing to empirical regularities, the historical sciences explain
actions by ascribing reasons to agents. The natural sciences are
concerned with empirical or external relations between events; the
historical sciences are concerned with internal, non-empirical
relations between actions and the motives/beliefs they express. The
term cause in sense I presupposes explanations that appeal to the
notion of a practical argument in which the premises function not as
antecedent conditions of the action, but as their logical ground. To
have the concept of an action, for Collingwood, is to understand how
the term cause is employed in sense I.
Collingwood's claim that we are here dealing with three different
senses of the term cause is specifically intended to draw attention to
the fact that we are providing different kinds of explanations, rather
than distinguishing between explanations that have ontological or
existential import (causal explanations) and explanations which do not
and which are consequently epiphenomenal (mere rationalizations). The
refusal to prioritise causation in a single sense, by granting
ontological status to explanations employed in the theoretical
sciences of nature, reflects Collingwood's attempt to provide an
epistemological reform of metaphysics or a “metaphysics without
ontology”.
3.2 The reform of metaphysics and early analytic philosophy


Collingwood's reform of metaphysics was partly developed as an attempt
to defend metaphysics against the attacks to which it was subjected by
A.J. Ayer in Language Truth and Logic. Ayer revitalized
Hume's critique of metaphysics by appealing to the principle of
verification. According to this principle, propositions which are not
empirically verifiable are meaningless (unless they are
tautologies). Collingwood’s critique of Ayer, in An Essay on
Metaphysics, is aimed at showing that the heuristic principles
which govern forms of enquiries are neither tautologies nor synthetic
propositions, but are nonetheless meaningful. Collingwood develops his
argument against Ayer in the context of his discussion of the logic of
question and answer, where he argues that there is an important
distinction between propositions and presuppositions. A statement,
according to Collingwood, may be either a proposition or a
presupposition. Whether it is a proposition or a presupposition
depends on the role it plays in the asking and answering of
questions. If a statement is offered in answer to a question, it is a
proposition; if a statement gives rise to a question it is a
presupposition.
Thus, for example, I may say “The salt is on the table”
in answer to the question “Where is the salt?” In this
case “The salt is on the table” is a proposition. Or on
the other hand I may ask “Can you pass the salt?” because
I presuppose it is lying next to you on the table. In this case
“The salt is on the table” is a presupposition which gives
rise to a question.
Whether a statement is a proposition or a presupposition thus
depends on its role. Propositions, Collingwood argues, have truth
values. The notion of truth and falsity, on the other hand, does not
apply to presuppositions. This is because presuppositions have the
power to give rise to questions (logical efficacy) not in so far as
they are true or false, but in so far as they are presupposed. The
presupposition “The salt is on the table”, for example,
would give rise to the question “Can you pass the salt”
even if it were false. The distinction between propositions and
presuppositions is the key to Collingwood’s critique of Ayer. The
heuristic principles which govern forms of enquiry, for Collingwood,
are presuppositions, not propositions. Since they are presuppositions,
the notion of truth and falsity does not apply to them, and it
consequently makes no sense to ask for their verification, as Ayer
does.
Consider for example, the sense of causation which governs the
practical sciences of nature, such as medicine and engineering. To be
a doctor or engineer requires presupposing that it is possible to
change the course of nature and thus that a cause “is an event
by producing or preventing which we can produce or prevent that whose
cause it is said to be”. No self-respecting doctor or engineer
could reject the claim that wind can be channelled to generate
electricity, or that vaccines can be administered to prevent
illnesses, without giving up on their form of enquiry. For them the
question “Do causes (understood as manipulable handles)
exist?” can be at best a rhetorical question that is necessarily
answered in the affirmative by doctors and engineers. The heuristic
principles which govern forms of enquiries are not proffered as
propositions (as answers to questions) with a definite truth value,
but as presuppositions. Since they are presuppositions, and the notion
of truth and falsity does not apply to them, the logical positivist’s
request that they should be verified is misguided.
Collingwood called the presuppositions which govern forms of
enquiries “absolute” and distinguished them from
“relative” presuppositions. Relative presuppositions are
presuppositions that are internal to a particular form of enquiry. To
illustrate: the statement “the cause of malaria is the bite of a
mosquito” is a relative presupposition. Relative presuppositions
are statements which could potentially be offered in answer to
questions and play the role of propositions which can be verified to
be true or false. Thus, for example, the presupposition that
“malaria is caused by the bite of a mosquito” could in
principle be offered as a verifiable true/false answer to the question
“What is the cause of malaria?” and could be abandoned by
medical practitioners without forsaking their form of enquiry. On the
other hand, that “we can prevent or produce certain effects by
preventing or producing their causes” is an absolute
presupposition of medical science. What makes the presupposition
absolute is that it cannot be forsaken without at the same time
undermining the form of enquiry which it makes possible. Therefore,
the absolute presupposition that “a cause is an event that can
be manipulated to produce or prevent certain results” is never a
genuine answer to a non-rhetorical question, at least not for the
practitioners of that form of enquiry.
Collingwood’s reply to Ayer is that the principle of verification
does not show that all claims which are not verifiable are
meaningless. The heuristic principles which govern forms of enquiry
are meaningful even if they are unverifiable because they are not
propositions at least not in Collingwood’s technical use of the term.
If, as Collingwood argues, there are presuppositions which are
meaningful, even if unverifiable, this means that metaphysics does
have a legitimate subject matter after all, even if it is not
“pure being” and that Collingwood has succeeded in
defending the possibility (of some form of) metaphysics against the
logical positivist’s critique. Collingwood agrees with Ayer that
metaphysics traditionally understood as a science of pure being
yielding presuppositionless knowledge of reality is not possible. But
he also argues that the demand that the principles which structure our
knowledge should be verified in the manner of propositions is based on
a misunderstanding of the logical role that these principles play in
the logic of question and answer.
Whether Collingwood has genuinely succeeded in defending the
possibility of some kind of metaphysics against Ayer’s critique is
still a matter of debate. Some (Beaney 2005) have argued that
Collingwood has ended up accepting the principle of verification and
conceding far too much to logical positivism. Others (Connelly 2009;
D'Oro 2014) have argued that for Collingwood the principle of
verification is not a general criterion of meaning but a heuristic
principle of empirical investigation, an absolute presupposition of
empirical enquiry.
3.3 Realism, idealism and anti-realism


Although Collingwood was a critic of realism, he was often wary of the
label idealist. In his correspondence with Ryle he explicitly rejected
it. Nonetheless, since he is often described as one of the British
idealists, it is important to explain in what sense if any he might
legitimately be called an idealist. His reform of metaphysics suggests
that he might be more appropriately described as a weak anti-realist
rather than as an idealist, since his commitment to idealism is not a
commitment to immaterialism, but to the claim that there is no
epistemically unmediated access to reality. In other words, the
‘realism’ which constitutes the target of Collingwood's
critique is not the ontological thesis that there exist mind
independent objects, but the epistemological thesis that there is such
a thing as presuppositionless knowledge of reality. Collingwood's
rejection of this realism develops out of an attempt to explain how
forms of enquiry which make mutually exclusive absolute
presuppositions can co-exist alongside one another. His reform of
metaphysics entails that ontology or the study of what is must be
subordinated to epistemology and thus that the subject matter of
different forms of enquiry, such as nature and history, are distinct
from one another not in virtue of the entities that they designate but
of the way in which they investigate them. The realism that
Collingwood attacks seems ill positioned to explain how can there be a
distinction in the subject matters of two sciences without there being
a distinction in the entities which they investigate. 


Collingwood advances one main argument against epistemological
realism. This argument is restated in a number of different ways. As
we have already seen, in An Essay on Metaphysics, he claims
that the idea of presuppositionless knowledge is an oxymoron because
there can be no science of pure being; a science of pure being is a
science without a subject matter and thus not a science at all. This
argument is also developed in An Autobiography (1939) where
Collingwood claims that realism is committed to the view that
“knowing makes no difference to what is known” and that
such a view is self-contradictory since one cannot consistently claim
to know an object independently of any other predicate that may be
ascribed to it i.e., to know it as merely existing without further
qualification. Collingwood's argument against realism is thus a
development of the claim that existence is not a real predicate and
that as such it fails to describe an object in any way.  Objects to
which no predicate other than existence is ascribed, are unknown since
we cannot say anything about them other than that they are. With this
in mind, Collingwood's reluctance to accept the description of his
philosophy as idealist may be explained by the fact that his idealism,
as a form of epistemological anti-realism, differs significantly from
that of British idealists such as Bradley and Bosanquet, who were much
more confident in the ability of thought to grasp the
‘ultimate’ nature of reality and whose work has a
rationalistic flavour that is absent from Collingwood's
philosophising (Connelly 1997).
4. Mind and Action
4.1 History as the study of Mind


According to Collingwood, the science which is dedicated to the study
of mind is history. Collingwood's philosophy of mind and action is
thus to be found in his philosophy of history, primarily in The
Idea of History (1946) and The Principles of History
(1999) both of which were posthumously published. The claim that
history is the study of mind is prima facie counter-intuitive
because many of us tend to think of history as a descriptive science
of the past rather than as a normative science of
thought. Collingwood's claim that history is the study of mind is in
line with the distinction between the
Naturwissenschaften and the Geisteswissenschaften that is found in continental
philosophy of social science. Collingwood arrives at the claim that
history is the study of mind by reflecting on what we mean when we use
the word ‘history’. He claims that when speaking about
history we do not usually mean ‘natural history’. For
example, we would not class palaeontology as a historical science. In
ordinary usage history tends to be identified not with natural history
but with the history of human affairs. Moreover, if we reflect
carefully on what we mean by history, we find that we do not mean the
history of human beings in so far as they are purely natural beings,
but a history of human beings in so far as they are rational beings.
There is an evolutionary history of the species homo sapiens,
but such a natural history is not what we properly mean when we speak
about human history. We tend to identify history in the proper sense
with the history of human beings not in so far as they are natural
beings but in so far as they are civilized beings: 
… a great many things which deeply concern human
beings are not, and never have been, traditionally included in the
subject-matter of history. People are born, eat and breathe and sleep,
and beget children and become ill and recover again, and die; and these
things interest them, most of them at any rate, far more than art and
science, industry and politics and war. Yet none of these things have
been traditionally regarded as possessing historical interest. Most of
them have given rise to institutions like dining and marrying and the
various rituals that surround birth and death, sickness and recovery;
and of these rituals and institutions people write histories; but the
history of dining is not the history of eating, and the history of
death-rituals is not the history of death. (PH, 46).


The subject matter of history, therefore is provided not by natural
but rational processes. As Collingwood puts it, the so-called Res
Gestae “are not the actions, in the widest sense of that
word, which are done by animals of the species called human; they are
actions in another sense of the same word, equally familiar but
narrower, actions done by reasonable agents in pursuit of ends
determined by their reason.” (PH, 46). History proper, then, is
the history of mind.
4.2 Actions and Events


As we have seen, the subject matter of history, understood as a
science of the mind, is actions--actions understood not simply as the
doings of human beings but of human beings in so far as they are
rational.  Actions, in the sense in which they constitute the subject
matter of historical investigation have an ‘inside’ that
events lack. To explain an event all we need to do is to subsume it
under a general law that is obtained by inductive generalisation,
through the observation of repeated events of type B following events
of type A. In order to understand an action, by contrast, we need to
render it intelligible by reconstructing the thought processes that
inform it. Whereas in event-explanations the relation between
the explanans and the
explanandum is empirical, in action-explanations the
relationship between the explanans and the
explanandum is a logical or conceptual relation. To explain an
action is not to look for an antecedent condition that, together with a
general empirical law, explains the occurrence of an event, it is
rather to look for the motive that renders behaviour intelligible and
as such more than mere behaviour. 


Collingwood's description of actions as having an inside which mere
events lack led many of his early commentators to conclude that he
believed the distinction between actions and events to be a
distinction between inner psychological processes which are
inaccessible from a third person perspective and outer bodily movement
which are observable form a third person perspective. Collingwood was
thus accused of subscribing to what Ryle called the doctrine of the
ghost in the machine. Most contemporary commentators, on the other
hand, would argue that the inside/outside distinction is not to be
taken literally, that it is a mere metaphor intended to draw attention
to the fact that the term “because” has different meanings
in different explanatory contexts. The distinction between actions and
events, far from being a distinction between inner psychological
processes and outer bodily movements, is a distinction between the
explanatory practices of different sciences. As Collingwood puts it in
The New Leviathan (1942), the relationship between the mind
and the body “is a relation between the sciences of the body, or
natural sciences, and the sciences of the mind; that is the relation
inquiry into which ought to be substituted for the make-believe
inquiry into the make-believe problem of ‘the relation between
body and mind” (NL, 2.49/11). In line with Collingwood's
conception of philosophical analysis as a second order enquiry into
first order forms of knowledge, it is the task of the philosophy of
history to make explicit the explanatory principles that are implicit
in the practice of historians. It is also the task of the philosophy
of history to detect bad history or explanations that pass themselves
as historical whilst they are not. As we have seen, history for
Collingwood differs from natural science because in the former as
opposed to the latter the relationship between the explanans
and the explanandum is logical or conceptual rather than
empirical. The question that the genuine historian asks is not
“what kind of event usually precedes the event that I am trying
to explain?” but “what reasons make the action
intelligible?” In other words the historian is concerned with
rational connections rather than with inductive
generalisations. Further, only to the extent that this point is
acknowledged is the study of history genuinely distinct from the study
of nature.
Collingwood denounces historians who employ the method of inductive
generalisations as writing pseudo-histories. The pseudo history that
Collingwood has in mind is of the kind one finds in Hume's account of
miracles. According to Hume, a historian who comes across statements
which are, in the eyes of the historians, false, should simply discard
them. Historians who come across statements asserting the occurrence
of miracles should ask themselves whether an inductive generalisation
based on their own experience of reality would provide probabilistic
evidence for the occurrence of miraculous events. If the experience of
the historian fails to provide such probabilistic support, then the
historian is justified in deeming the statement false and cutting it
from the available evidence. Collingwood calls this kind of history
scissors-and-paste history and condemns it as a pseudo
history. Genuine history seeks to recover the meaning behind the
statements, not whether they are true or false (Haddock 1995). To recover such
meanings historians must try, as far as possible, to bear in mind the
epistemic and motivational premises of agents, even when they regard
them as false. Thus an historian who comes across a statement claiming
that certain agents changed their itinerary in order to avoid crossing
mountains inhabited by devils, should not discard the statement as
false but rather understand the decision making process in the light
of the agent's beliefs, even if these are not shared by the
historian. In investigating the actions of historical agents,
Collingwood reminds us, historians cannot presuppose that the agents
whose actions they are trying to interpret share the same background
epistemic premises.  Whilst the uniformity of nature is an absolute
presupposition of natural science (the assumption that nature is
uniform is necessary in order to carry out the inductive
generalisations that enable us to predict and control the natural
environment), historians cannot presuppose that the agents whose
thoughts they are trying to recover share their same background
beliefs. The presumption of rationality is a presupposition of
historical enquiry; but historians must presuppose that agents are
rational not in the substantive sense that they hold true beliefs, but
in the more minimal sense that they can infer validly from premises to
conclusions and act on the practical syllogism.
4.3 Philosophical hermeneutics and the rejection of psychologism


Collingwood's defence of the autonomy of action explanations and his
identification of the historical sciences with a search for meaning has
sometimes been compared with the project of philosophical hermeneutics
pursued by H. G. Gadamer in Truth and Method. Gadamer himself
acknowledged Collingwood's influence in his introduction to the German
edition of Collingwood's An Autobiography. Gadamer's
philosophical hermeneutics constitutes an attack on psychologism
because it refuses to identify meaning with authorial intentions. The
meaning of a text, far from being just what's intended by the author,
emerges through the process of interpretation. The interpreter brings
to this process the fore-conceptions or fore-judgments of his
Zeitgeist. In the process of interpretation, these
fore-conceptions are tested to see whether they can yield a coherent
explanation. If they fail to do so, the interpreter must revise his or
her understanding of the text accordingly. Although understanding a
text is not a matter of merely imposing one's prejudgments upon it,
meaning is ultimately rethought in a new way as the Zeitgeist
of the interpreter changes. Gadamer's anti-psychologism thus leads him
to the view that the meaning of the text is not only rediscovered by
each generation of interpreters; it changes with each generation of
interpreters. 


Collingwood's philosophy of history shares with Gadamer the view that
meaning (in Collingwood's case the meaning of an action rather than a
text) is not to be identified with inner psychological processes. An
action's meaning is to be found in a publicly re-enactable
syllogism. It is because meaning is not a hidden psychological entity
that it is inter-subjectively accessible. But although Collingwood,
like Gadamer, eschews a psychologistic account of meaning, he does not
endorse the quasi-sceptical conclusion according to which the meaning
of a text is different for each generation of interpreters. For
Collingwood there is such a thing as seeing the world from the agent's
point of view. Taking the agent's point of view does not mean entering
the agent's mind by some quasi-miraculous telepathic process; it
requires rather that we temporarily suspend our own epistemic and
motivational premises in order to understand the inferential processes
that guide agents with radically different beliefs. Failing to take
the agent's epistemic and motivational premises on board leads the
historian to write bad historical narratives, the narratives
Collingwood refers to as scissors-and-paste histories. Thus, whilst
Collingwood's philosophy of history, like Gadamer's philosophical
hermeneutics, rejects psychologism, Collingwood, unlike Gadamer is not
sceptical about the possibility of reaching inter-generational
agreement about the meaning of past actions (Kobayashi & Marion
2011).
4.4 The argument against methodological unity


The relevance of Collingwood's defence of the autonomy of history to
debates about the method and subject matter of the social sciences was
brought to the attention of a wider audience by W. H. Dray during the
1950s and 60s. Dray (1958; 1963) located Collingwood's action/event distinction
within the context of contemporary debates in the philosophy of social
science and drew on the work of Collingwood to counter the claim for
methodological unity advanced by Hempel in his influential 1942
article: “The Function of General Laws in History”. Hempel
claimed that explanations in history and the social sciences at large
are covertly nomological explanations for historians, just as natural
scientists rely upon general laws, even if they do not explicitly
mention them. Dray argued that Hempel failed to see that what
distinguishes action from event explanations is the nature of the
connection between the explanans and the
explanandum. In naturalistic explanations the
explanans is an antecedent condition, an event which precedes
in time the event whose cause it is said to be; in mentalistic
explanation the explanans is the logical ground of an action,
the motive or thought that renders it intelligible. 


Whilst in the 1950s and 60s Collingwood played an important role in
the debate about the nature and goal of explanation in the human
sciences, his work in the philosophy of history is now very rarely
mentioned. This is probably due to two factors. First, the publication
of Davidson's seminal 1963 essay “Actions. Reasons and
Causes” brought about a paradigm shift in the way the
action/event distinction was understood.  Prior to Davidson's essay,
the consensus was that the philosophical issue at stake in the
action/event distinction was a conceptual one: “what does it
mean to explain something as an action?” “What does it mean to
explain something as an event?”. After Davidson, the consensus
has been that the philosophical question raised by the action/event
distinction is not conceptual but metaphysical: “how can action
explanations co-exist alongside event explanations?” Discussions
of the action/event distinction have accordingly tended to focus not
on methodological issues but on the problem of causal
over-determination. The relative neglect in which Collingwood's
philosophy of history has fallen may also be due to the fact that as
the discussion of the action/event distinction moved from a
methodological to a metaphysical plane, it has tended to occur in the
philosophy of mind and action rather than in the philosophy of social
science. In spite of this neglect Collingwood's philosophy of history
articulates a non-causalist position that is relevant to the reasons
versus causes debate in its contemporary incarnation.
4.5 Reasons and causes


According to Collingwood the distinction between reasons and causes is
a distinction between different forms of explanations (rational and
causal explanations), not a distinction between mere elucidation and
causation. In contemporary philosophy of mind and action the
reasons/causes distinction is taken to be a distinction between
explanations that have ontological or metaphysical import and
explanations which do not. By contrast, in line with his project of
developing a metaphysics without ontology, Collingwood does not
construe the distinction between reasons and causes in this way. This
is why in An Essay on Metaphysics he describes the distinction
between these different kinds of explanations as employing different
senses of the term cause: reasons and causes are species of the same
philosophical genus, “explanation”, and as such they can
coincide in their instances. Thus, what could be described by the
natural scientist as the movement of the biceps could be described by
the historian as an action embodying a motive, e.g. opening a window.
The action and the bodily movement are ontologically the same but
conceptually distinct. Collingwood's distinction between actions and
events in the philosophy of history thus rests on an endorsement of the
overlap of classes as outlined in his earlier treatise in
meta-philosophy. 
 

It is important to point out that the dual aspect theory that lies at
the basis of Collingwood's action/event distinction differs
substantially from the dual aspect theories developed in the twentieth
century by non-reductive physicalists wedded to a theory of mind-body
supervenience. For the latter there is a kind of explanation that is
metaphysically basic (causal explanation). Reasons are thus said to be
causes only in so far as the actions which they elucidate are
re-described as events. For Collingwood, by contrast, there is no
level of explanation that has ontological primacy because all
explanations, including causal explanations, are relative to subject
matter. Collingwood's dual aspect theory is grounded not in a
theory of supervenience which grants ontological priority to the
explanatory framework of natural science, but in a claim concerning
the conceptual irreducability of the mental to the physical that has
its roots in his understanding of metaphysics as a science of absolute
presuppositions. Collingwood occupies what may be referred to as a
pre-Davidsonian position in the reasons versus causes debate
(D'Oro 2005 and 2012). His non-reductivism in the
philosophy of action bears a greater resemblance to that defended by
Von Wright (1971), F. Stoutland (1976) and, more recently, T. Burge
(1993) and L. Rudder Baker (1993), than to that of D. Davidson.
4.6 Re-enactment


One of the best-known aspects of Collingwood's philosophy of history is
his account of re-enactment. Collingwood's account of re-enactment is
developed in answer to the question “what does it mean to
understand historically?” Historical understanding differs from
explanation in natural science because historians do not formulate
empirical hypotheses but think through the actions of historical agents
in order to make them intelligible. 


One of the most discussed aspects of Collingwood's account of
re-enactment is the claim that when historians re-enact the thought of
an historical agent, they do not re-enact a thought of a similar kind
but the very same thought of the agent. This claim has often been
regarded as counterintuitive since to say that the thought of the
agent and that of the historian are the same appears to presuppose
that there is only one rather than two numerically distinct acts of
thought, that of the historian and that of the agent. Collingwood's
point, however, is that, since thought proper is conceptually distinct
from the physiological process in which it is instantiated, the
criterion of numerical identity that is usually applied to
physiological processes is not applicable to thought.  Thoughts, in
other words, are to be distinguished on the basis of purely
qualitative criteria, and if there are two people entertaining the
(qualitatively) same thought, there is (numerically) only one thought
since there is only one propositional content. Collingwood makes this
point by saying that “… in its immediacy, as an actual
experience of his own, Plato's argument must undoubtedly have grown up
out of a discussion of some sort, though I do not know what it was,
and been closely connected to such a discussion. Yet if I not only
read his argument but understand it, follow it in my own mind
re-enacting it with and for myself, the process of argument which I go
through is not a process resembling Plato's, it is actually Plato's so
far as I understand him correctly ” (IH, 301). As the last
clause in the sentence makes clear, Collingwood's account of
re-enactment is designed to establish a conceptual point about what
thought is and a related point about the criteria for identifying and
distinguishing thoughts, not a method for the recovery of past
thoughts (Saari 1984 and 1989; Van der Dussen 1981 and 1995; D'Oro
2000). The doctrine of re-enactment has, however, often been read as
an attempt to establish a methodological as opposed to a conceptual
point. Thus, in the aftermath of the publication of The Idea of
History, the re-enactment doctrine was widely associated with
Dilthey's account of empathetic understanding and accused of ascribing
to the historian telepathic powers of access to other minds (Gardiner
1952a and 1952b). On the conceptual reading the re-enactment doctrine
establishes merely that it is possible in principle to re-enact the
thoughts of others because thoughts, unlike physiological processes,
are not private items unique to the person who has them, but publicly
rethinkable propositional contents. It is important to point out that
although the conceptual reading of the re-enactment doctrine was
developed primarily as an antidote to the claim that Collingwood
presumed historians to have telepathic powers, not all methodological
readings endorse intuitionism. Some have a distinctly constructivist
feel (Goldstein 1970, 1976, 1977; Nowell-Smith 1977; Nielsen
1981). Nonetheless if the point of the re-enactment doctrine is
conceptual rather than methodological, then Collingwood's project
differs substantially from that of contemporary simulation theorists
(Stueber 2006) and it is inappropriate to champion him as a forefather
for this project (Davies & Stone 2000).
4.7 Re-enactment, radical interpretation and radical translation


The question that Collingwood asks — how is it possible to
understand the thoughts of agents who lived in a distant past? —
bears some surface similarities to the question asked by Davidson
(2001) and Quine, namely, “how is it possible to understand
agents whose language is radically alien to us?” But despite
surface similarities there are key differences between Collingwood's
account of re-enactment and the accounts of radical interpretation and
radical translation as found in the work of Davidson and Quine
respectively. Collingwood believes that in order to understand the
thoughts of historical agents the historian must suspend his own
beliefs and temporarily adopt those of the agents, even if they are
deemed to be false. As we have seen in the context of Collingwood's
critique of pseudo histories, such as scissors-and-paste history,
historians must be sensitive to the fact that historical agents may not
share their own epistemic beliefs, indeed, that many beliefs that are
logically efficacious, and that render the actions of historical agents
intelligible, may well be false. On Davidson's and Quine's accounts, by
contrast, the interpreter/translator must assume the speakers of the
(alien) language to hold broadly true beliefs. The so-called principle
of charity is a pre-condition of radical interpretation/translation.
Davidson's and Quine's accounts of radical interpretation/translation
thus indirectly rest on the endorsement of a kind of truth conditional
semantics. Whereas meaning and truth are intimately tied in Davidson's
and Quine's accounts of radical interpretation/translation, they are
separated in Collingwood's account of re-enactment. For Collingwood,
understanding the difference between truth and meaning is the starting
point for acknowledging the autonomy of the sciences which study the
mind (D'Oro 2004 and 2013). 
5. Interpretative Problems
5.1 Historicism and the ‘radical conversion’ hypothesis


One main point of contention in Collingwood scholarship is whether
Collingwood's epistemological reform of metaphysics was also intended
as a ‘historicist’ revision of this science. The question
is important because if this were indeed the case, then Collingwood
would effectively be advocating a naturalization of epistemology. The
question as to whether Collingwood advocated a reduction of philosophy
to history arises primarily because of a number of passages in An
Essay on Metaphysics which have a decidedly historicist flavour.
Collingwood says, for example, that it is the task of metaphysics to
study what different people believed in different periods of
time. Such claims are clearly different in character from those found
elsewhere in the book where he identifies metaphysics without ontology
not with a genetic enquiry, but with the normative task of discovering
the logical ground on which our claims rest. On this view the task of
the metaphysician is to show what our presuppositions logically commit
us to believe, rather than what people believe as a matter of
historical fact. The accusation of historicism is usually levelled
against Collingwood's later work (An Autobiography, An
Essay on Metaphysics) and it is thus concluded that his
philosophy underwent a radical change of direction. In his earlier
work (paradigmatically An Essay on Philosophical Method) he
seems to conceive of philosophy as a normative activity and thus as
distinct from the descriptive enquiry of natural science, whereas in
his later years he appears to retract this claim. The hypothesis of a
radical conversion to historicism was first advanced by Malcolm Knox
in the editorial introduction to the posthumously published The
Idea of History. It was also endorsed by early commentators such
as A.  Donagan (1962 and 1972), Toulmin (1972)and N. Rotenstreich
(1972). The expression “radical conversion hypothesis”,
however, was actually coined by Rubinoff (1966) who alongside Mink
(1969) rejected it as an inadequate description of Collingwood's
position. This is still a live debate in Collingwood scholarship,
although more recent studies (Martin 1989; Modood 1989; Connelly 1990;
Oldfield 1995; Beaney 2005; D'Oro 2010) tend to emphasise the unity
rather than discontinuity in Collingwood's thought.
5.2 The ontological argument and the Collingwood-Ryle correspondence


One of the most baffling aspects of Collingwood's work is his
allegiance to the ontological proof. Collingwood's interest in the
ontological argument spans his entire career. He wrote extensively on
the ontological proof in 1919 and both of his major works, An Essay
on Philosophical Method (1933) and An Essay on
Metaphysics (1940), contain substantial and sympathetic
discussions of it. Collingwood's rehabilitation of the ontological
argument is baffling because it seems to be incompatible both with the
doctrine of the overlap of classes as developed in An Essay on
Philosophical Method and with the project of providing a
metaphysics without ontology in the form of a theory of absolute
presuppositions in An Essay on Metaphysics. It is incompatible
with the doctrine of the overlap of classes because this doctrine
entails that philosophical concepts are to be understood in purely
intensional terms. Collingwood's sympathetic treatment of the
ontological argument is also clearly incompatible with the project of
developing a metaphysics without ontology, precisely because a
metaphysics of absolute presuppositions is concerned with
methodologically necessary claims, not with ontologically necessary
truths. Collingwood's emotional attachment to the ontological proof,
therefore, is problematic whether one interprets his epistemological
reform of metaphysics as remaining loyal to the idea of epistemology as
a normative enquiry or whether one believes that Collingwood sought to
develop an historicist epistemology that rejects a conception of
philosophy as ‘first science’. 


Collingwood's discussion of the ontological argument in An Essay
on Philosophical Method gave rise to a lively epistolary exchange
with Ryle in 1935. The correspondence was triggered by the publication
of an article in Mind by Ryle which clearly attacked
Collingwood's sympathetic appraisal of the ontological proof on the
grounds that there are no such things as propositions which are
necessary and existential, i.e., no such things as metaphysical
propositions, like that asserting the necessary existence of
God. Ryle's main reason for rejecting the ontological proof lies in
the endorsement of the Humean fork, according to which there are only
two kinds of propositions, propositions concerning relations of ideas,
which are necessary and hypothetical, and propositions concerning
matters of fact, which are existential and contingent. In the
correspondence Collingwood replies to Ryle by claiming that that there
is a third kind of proposition, propositions which employ
philosophical concepts. Such propositions are necessary but not merely
hypothetical because they are necessarily instantiated in the
judgments employed by the practitioners of a given science. The
concept of mind, for example, necessarily exists for historians
because when we try to understand an action historically, we
understand it as an expression of mind or of a rational process. In
other words, the concept of mind is necessarily instantiated in the
reconstruction of every occurrence as an action. The historian
presupposes it every time he or she reconstructs what occurs as
intelligent behaviour. This is why, Collingwood claims, there is a
kernel of truth in the ontological argument that is worth restating,
even if we must accept that the ontological argument is incapable of
establishing either the necessary existence of God or that of any
other entity. It simply involves the claim that there are concepts
which cannot be verified empirically and which are nonetheless
necessary in order to make empirical knowledge claims in any given
area of enquiry. The main bone of contention in the correspondence
between Ryle and Collingwood is thus not strictly speaking the
ontological argument in its traditional form, but whether or not there
is a third kind of propositions which are neither about relations of
ideas nor about matters of fact, but are “synthetic a
priori” in the sense that they express methodologically
necessary claims rather than existentially necessary ones.
Ryle and Collingwood often talk at cross purposes. Ryle refuses to
acknowledge that the ontological proof could properly be interpreted
as Collingwood suggests, i.e., as an argument which establishes purely
methodological claims. Collingwood, for his part, instead of seeking
to establish the point that there are methodologically necessary
propositions identifiable independently of the ontological proof,
continues to try to salvage the proof by providing an
epistemologically implausible reading of it. The correspondence is
nonetheless very interesting for it offers a window onto the origins
of early analytic philosophy. Early analytic philosophers such as
Ryle, Ayer and Russell, rejected the metaphysical project, a project
which they associated with classical rationalism and its revival at
the hands of Hegel and the British Idealists. But not only did early
analytic philosophers reject this kind of metaphysics, they also
refused to acknowledge the possibility of another kind of metaphysics,
a ‘metaphysics of experience’ or what Collingwood calls,
in An Essay on Metaphysics, a metaphysics of absolute
presuppositions. Ryle's refusal to accept Collingwood's revision of
the ontological argument may therefore be merely a foil for a
commitment to a Humean epistemology and an unwillingness to
acknowledge anything other than relations of ideas and matters of
fact. If this is the case then the Collingwood-Ryle correspondence, in
spite of the misunderstandings it involved, clearly reveals some of
the issues which truly troubled philosophers in the first half of the
twentieth century (D'Oro 2000; Vrijen 2006).
5.3 Intellectual influences and affiliations


Another problem of interpretation which has been at the centre of
recent scholarship concerns the issue of intellectual influences. Which
thinkers exercised a major influence on Collingwood? Was it the Italian
idealists? Was it Hegel or was it Kant? Collingwood was reading Kant's
Groundwork by the time he was eight years old and it seems
very possible that his reading of Kant's moral philosophy informed,
however indirectly, his own reflections on ethics and the repeated
drafting of the introductions to his lectures on moral philosophy,
introductions which eventually took on a life of their own and became
An Essay on Philosophical Method. Collingwood's work is full
of implicit and explicit references, both sympathetic and
unsympathetic, to Hegel, which show he had read his work
carefully. And he was also familiar with the work of Italian idealists
such as Croce, De Ruggiero and Gentile. The relationship of
Collingwood's philosophy to Italian idealism has been relatively
under-explored until recently (Connelly 1995; Peters 2013). The issue
of Collingwood's relation to Hegel has been the subject of a monograph
by Gary Browning (Browning 2004), which argues for a strong Hegelian
influence against the neo-Kantian reading of D'Oro (D'Oro 2002). The
issue of Collingwood's relationship to Kant and Hegel is complex, but
important since it forces us to reflect carefully on the precise
nature of Collingwood's ‘idealism’, whether Collingwood's
idealism is, like Kant's, a merely conceptual idealism, committed to
developing a metaphysics without ontology, or whether it stands nearer
to the absolute idealism of Hegel (Connelly 2005), and is thus ultimately continuous
with the project of classical rationalism, as his fondness for the
ontological proof has led some to suspect.