Until fairly recently secession has been a neglected topic among
philosophers. Two factors may explain why philosophers have now begun
to turn their attention to secession. First, in the past two decades
there has been a great increase not only in the number of attempted
secessions, but also in successful secessions, and philosophers may
simply be reacting to this new reality, attempting to make normative
sense of it. The reasons for the frequency of attempts to secede are
complex, but there are two recent developments that make the prospect
of state-breaking more promising: improvement in national security and
liberalization of trade. As the fear of forcible annexation diminishes
and trade barriers fall, smaller states become feasible, and
independent statehood looks more feasible for regions within states.
Second, in roughly the same time period, the idea that there is a
strong case for some form of self-government for groups presently
contained within states has gained ground. Once one begins to take
seriously the case for special group rights for
minorities—especially if these include rights of
self-government—it is difficult to avoid the question of whether
some such groups may be entitled to full independence. 
 
1. Philosophical Issues of Secession

Political scientists, sociologists, and political economists attempt
to describe and explain the causes and effects of secessionist
movements and of states’ reactions to them. Philosophers focus on the
moral issues and on clarifying the conceptual framework for thinking
about secession. Philosophical work on secession can be divided into
three categories: (1) attempts to articulate the conditions under
which a group has the moral right to secede; (2) examinations of the
compatibility or incompatibility of secession with constitutionalism,
(3) attempts to determine what position international law should take
regarding secession. Thus far, philosophical theories of secession
have not been integrated with two areas of normative theorizing that
are directly relevant to them. The first is just war theory. This is
surprising, since part of what motivates systematic thinking about
secession is a realization that attempts to secede often involve or
provoke large-scale violence. The second is theories of territorial
justice. This, too, is surprising, because ideally a theory of
secession would be situated within a broader normative theory of a
range of claims to territory, including, but not limited to claims to
sovereign jurisdiction of the sort now associated with statehood. 

It is useful to distinguish secession from other ways in which
“separation” or “state-breaking” can occur. In
what might be called secession in the classic sense, a group in a
portion of the territory of a state attempt to create a new state
there; secessionists attempt to exit, leaving behind the original
state in reduced form. Second, there is irredentist secession, wherein
the attempt is not to create a new state, but to merge the seceding
territory with a neighboring state. This typically occurs when the
majority in the seceding area are of the same ethno-national as that
which is predominant in the neighboring state. A third case,
exemplified by the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, occurs when there is
agreement between the populations or at least the leaders of two
regions (which together comprise the whole territory of the state), to
split the state into two new states. A fourth case is that of
externally-imposed partition of an existing state into two or more new
states. In the past partition usually occurred when a deal was struck
between two powerful neighboring states at the expense of the state
that was partitioned, as with the partitioning of Poland between Nazi
Germany and the Soviet Union. At present, externally-imposed partition
is more likely to be considered as a last resort for dealing with
intractable ethno-national conflict within a state. In what follows,
the focus is on secession in the classical sense, but with some
attention also to irredentist secession.
1.1 The distinction between a (mere) justification and having a claim-right

Though many who pursue the first project do not make this explicit,
they are concerned with the moral justification of unilateral
secession or the moral right to secede unilaterally, that is with
secession that is undertaken without the consent of the state and
without constitutional sanction. A theory of the right to unilateral
secession is most urgently needed, not only because unilateral
secession occurs more frequently than consensual secession, but also
because it is both more controversial and more likely to result in
large-scale violence. 

Consensual secession is secession that results either from a
negotiated agreement between the state and the secessionists (as
occurred when Norway seceded from Sweden in 1905) or through
constitutional processes (as the Supreme Court of Canada recently
envisioned for the secession of
 Quebec).[1]
 Constitutionally sanctioned secession is achieved either by the
exercise of an explicit constitutional right to secede (which only a
few constitutions currently contain) or by constitutional
amendment.

Sometimes it is not clear whether a theorist is advancing a theory of
the conditions under which secession is morally justified, that is,
the conditions under which a group has a moral liberty-right or mere
moral permission to secede, or a theory of the conditions under which
a group has the claim-right to secede. Talk about “the right to
secede” is ambiguous between these alternatives. A claim-right
includes not only a liberty-right or mere permission (i.e., that a
group is justified in seceding in the sense that if they do so they do
not thereby act impermissibly), but also a correlative obligation on
the part of others not to interfere with the attempted secession.

The distinction between establishing that a group is morally justified
in (unilaterally) seceding (in the sense of having a liberty-right)
and establishing that the group has a moral claim-right to secede
(unilaterally) is crucial, though rarely explicitly drawn by
philosophers writing about secession. Having the liberty-right does
not imply having the claim-right: A group might be morally justified
in seceding and yet it might not be the case that others (including
the state from which the group is seceding) are obligated to refrain
from interfering with the group’s attempt to secede. Therefore, an
argument that suffices to establish that a group is justified in
seceding under such and such conditions may not suffice to establish
that the group has a (claim-) right to secede under those conditions.
Yet when philosophers attempt to develop a moral theory of secession
by appealing to intuitions about hypothetical examples of secession,
it is often unclear whether the intuition elicited is about the moral
justifiability of the secession (the mere permissibility) or about the
existence of a moral
 claim-right.
 
1.2 Constitutional theorizing about secession

Some philosophers have distinguished between the question whether and,
if so, under what conditions a group has a moral claim-right to secede
and the question of whether and, if so, under what conditions a
constitution ought to or may include a right to secede. For example,
while acknowledging that secession may sometimes be morally justified
(where this presumably means the group in question has the claim-right
to secede), Cass Sunstein has argued that constitutional recognition
of a right to secede is incompatible with the principles of
constitutionalism (or at least democratic
 constitutionalism)[2]
 (Sunstein 1991). Sunstein argues that a basic principle of
constitutionalism is that political institutions, including the
constitution itself, must be designed so as to encourage citizens to
engage in the hard work of democratic politics, where this means
competing in the public forum on grounds of principle, with a minimum
of strategic bargaining. Following Albert O. Hirschman (1970), he then
contends that if the constitution acknowledges a right to secede then
discontent minorities will be tempted to shirk the hard work of
principled, democratic politics either by actually seceding when the
majoritarian decisions go against their preferences or by using the
threat of secession as a strategic bargaining tool as a de facto veto
over majority rule. In either case, democracy will be undermined.

However, as argued Buchanan (1991: 132), Sunstein fails even to
consider the possibility that a constitution could so hedge the right
to secede as to reduce the threat of exit by minorities to acceptable
proportions. The analogy here is with the right of constitutional
amendment as found in the United States Constitution. This right is
significantly hedged: two super-majorities, one in the Congress, the
other among the States, are required for amendment. Similarly, an
appropriately hedged right to secede is not incompatible with the
principles of constitutionalism: Well-designed procedural hurdles
(super-majorities, waiting periods, etc.) can make secession
sufficiently difficult to avoid an unacceptable risk of premature exit
or strategic bargaining by minorities, while still making secession
possible under appropriate conditions. The current Ethiopian
Constitution in fact includes such a hedged right to secede, requiring
not only two super-majorities in favor of secession, but also a
waiting period. So although appropriate constitutional design
regarding secession must cope with the risks that secession will
impair democratic processes, constitutional recognition of a right to
secede does not appear to be incompatible with constitutionalism.

Wayne Norman goes further, arguing that there are significant
advantages to constitutionalizing conflicts over secession (Norman
2003). The Supreme Court of Canada recently took the same position,
arguing that the potentially disruptive process of secession by Quebec
can be subjected to the rule of law by a process of negotiation and
constitutional
 amendment.[3]


There is yet another argument for including a right to secede in a
constitution. In some cases, when a new political entity is being
created out of two or more independent or semi-autonomous entities,
including a right to exit in the constitution of the new entity may be
necessary as an inducement to join the new union. Under conditions of
uncertainty as to how the new union will work, constitutional
recognition of a “bail out” option may be necessary to get
the new union
 going[4]
 (Buchanan 1991: ch. 4). 

There is much philosophical work to be done on the question of when
and if so how the right to secede might be constitutionalized. It will
require both an account of the principles of constitutionalism and of
the morality of secession and an empirically-based knowledge of the
conditions under which various constitutional arrangements can be
reasonably expected to realize the principles of constitutionalism in
a manner that is consistent with the morality of secession.
2. Theories of the Right to Secede

In the philosophical literature a distinction is drawn between two
theories of the right to secede (understood as a unilateral
claim-right): Remedial Right Only Theories and Primary Right
 Theories.[5]
 Remedial Right Only Theories analogize the right to secede to the
right to revolution, understanding it as a right that a group comes to
have only as a result of violations of other rights. On this view
secession is justified only as a remedy of last resort for persistent
and serious injustices. The right to unilateral secession thus
understood is not primary, but rather derivative upon the violation of
other, more basic rights; hence the label ‘remedial right
only’. Sometimes the term “Just Cause Theories” is
used to refer to Remedial Right Only Theories and the term
“Choice Theories” to refer to Primary Right Theories.

Different versions of Remedial Right Only Theories specify different
lists of the injustices that can ground the remedial right. Consider,
for example, a Remedial Right Only Theory that includes among the
grounds for the (unilateral) right to secede the following: (a)
large-scale and persistent violations of basic human rights, (b)
unjust taking of the territory of a legitimate state (where secession
is simply the taking back of wrongly taken territory, as with the
secession of the Baltic Republics from the Soviet Union in 1991), and
(c) in certain cases, the state’s persisting violation of agreements
to accord a minority group limited self-government within the state
(Buchanan 2004). A more austere Remedial Right Only Theory would
recognize only (a), persistent, large-scale violations of basic human
rights (in the most extreme case, genocide or other mass killings) as
sufficient to justify unilateral
 secession.[6]


Primary Right Theories of the unilateral right to secede recognize
that a group can have a right to secede on remedial grounds, but they
contend that the (unilateral) right to secede can exist even when the
group has not been subject to any injustice. This second type of
theory thus holds that there is a right to unilateral secession over
and above whatever remedial and hence derivative right there may be.


Primary Right Theories are of two types: Ascriptivist (predominantly
nationalist) Theories and Plebiscitary (or majoritarian) Theories. The
former hold that certain groups whose memberships are defined by what
are sometimes called ascriptive characteristics, simply by virtue of
being those sorts of groups, have a unilateral (claim-)right to
secede. Ascriptive characteristics are those that are ascribed to
individuals independently of their choice and include being of the
same nation or being a “distinct people”. The most common
form of Ascriptivist theory holds that nations as such have a right of
self-determination that includes the right to secede in order to have
their own state.

Plebiscitary Theories in contrast hold that a unilateral moral
claim-right to secede exists if a majority residing in a portion of
the state chooses to have their own state there, regardless of whether
or not they have any common characteristics, ascriptive or otherwise,
other than the desire for independence. They need not be co-nationals
or members of a distinct society. 

What the two types of Primary Right Theories have in common is that
they do not require injustice as a necessary condition for the
existence of a unilateral (claim-)right to secede. They are Primary
Right Theories because they do not make the unilateral (claim-)right
to secede derivative upon the violation of other, more basic rights,
as the Remedial Right Only Theories
 do.[7]


No attempt will be made here to provide a comprehensive comparative
evaluation of these rival theories (see Buchanan 1997). Instead we
will only identify only their major strength and weaknesses. 
2.1 The right to secede as a right to territory

As Lea Brilmayer has rightly stressed, secession is not simply the
formation of a new political association among individuals or the
repudiation by a group of persons of their obligation to obey the
state’s laws (Brilmayer 1991). It is the taking of a part of the
territory claimed by an existing state. Accordingly, rival theories of
secession must be understood as providing alternative accounts of what
it takes for a group to come to have a claim to territory that is at
the time included in the territory of an existing state. We discover
below that the most serious objections to the two varieties of Primary
Right Theories question the cogency of their accounts of exactly what
it is that gives a group within this state a claim to a portion of the
territory claimed by the state. In contrast, the Remedial Right Only
approach appears to provide a more cogent account of the
secessionists’ claim to territory. 
2.2 Remedial Right Only Theories

This approach to unilateral secession recognizes at least two ways a
group can have the requisite valid claim to territory: (a) by
reclaiming territory over which they were sovereign but which was
unjustly taken from them (as with the Baltic Republics’ secession from
the Soviet Union in 1991); or (b) by coming to have a claim to
sovereignty over the territory as a result of availing themselves of a
last resort remedy against serious and persistent violations of basic
human rights. A more expansive reading of (b) would include among the
injustices that can ground a unilateral right to secede, not only the
violation of basic human rights, but also the state’s major violations
of, or unilateral revocation of, intrastate autonomy agreements (as
with Milosovic’s destruction of Kosovo’s autonomy in 1989).

With respect to (a), the basis of the secessionists’ claim to
territory is straightforward: they are simply reclaiming what was
recognized by international law as theirs. With respect to (b) the
Remedial Right Only Theory begins with the presumption that existing
states that are accorded legitimacy under international law have valid
claims to their territories but then argues that such claims can be
overridden or extinguished in the face of persistent patterns of
serious injustices towards groups within the state. The idea is that
the validity of the state’s claim to the territory cannot be sustained
when secession is the only remedy that can assure that the fundamental
rights of the group will be respected.

Given the tendency for unilateral secession to provoke massive
violence, the obvious strength of the Remedial Right Only approach is
that it places a significant constraint on unilateral
secession—namely, the requirement of a serious and persistent
grievance of injustice suffered by the secessionists. To that extent,
it captures the intuition that nonconsensual state-breaking, like
revolution, is a grave affair requiring a weighty justification. More
specifically, this view provides a plausible explanation of how the
state can come to lose its entitlement to the territory: it does so by
failing to do what gives states a moral claim to control territory in
the first place, namely, providing justice for those within its
jurisdiction.

Another strength of the Remedial Right Only approach is that it
appears to provide the right incentives: States that are just (or at
least do not persist in very serious injustices) are immune to legally
permitted unilateral secession and entitled to international support
in maintaining their territorial integrity. On the other hand, if, as
the theory recommends, a unilateral right to secede as a remedy for
serious and persistent injustices is acknowledged, this will give
states an incentive to act more justly.

Some critics have complained that the Remedial Right Only approach to
unilateral secession is disturbingly irrelevant to the concerns of
many groups seeking self-determination. They say that in most cases it
is nationalism that fuels the quest for self-determination, not
grievances of injustice per se (Moore 1998a). An advocate of the
Remedial Right Only view might respond that the latter is only an
account of unilateral secession, not a comprehensive theory of
self-determination. Thus the Remedial Right Only approach to
unilateral secession is compatible with a fairly permissive stance
toward intrastate autonomy, including various forms of self-government
for national minorities within the state. The point is to uncouple the
unilateral (claim-)right to secede from the various legitimate
interests that groups—including national minorities—can
have in various forms of self-determination short of statehood.

Moreover, the Remedial Right Only approach need not reject claims to
independence on the part of nations; it only rejects the much stronger
assertion that nations as such have a unilateral right to secede. In
many cases the groups that suffer persistent grave injustices are in
fact nations, and therefore would be accorded the right to secede by
the Remedial Right Only Theory. To that extent it is inaccurate to say
that this type of theory ignores the realities of national
self-determination movements. But just as important, the Remedial
Right Only Theory, when integrated into a comprehensive theory of
self-determination that includes a principled account of when
intrastate autonomy arrangements warrant international support, will
address the concerns of national minorities in cases in which they do
not have a unilateral right to secede.

What the Remedial Right Only approach does not do is concede that
nations as such—independently of any persisting pattern of grave
injustices—have a unilateral right to secede. But it can be
argued that this is a virtue of the account, not a defect. It thereby
avoids the objection to which Ascriptivist Theories are vulnerable,
namely, that they endorse a unilateral right to secede for all nations
in a world in which virtually every state contains more than one
nation and in which nations are not neatly sorted into discrete
regions of the state’s territory, but instead claim the same
territories. The point is not simply that the Ascriptivist view is
unfeasible; in addition its support for the idea of the ethnically
exclusive state is an incitement to ethnic cleansing if not genocide.
However, this line of argument can supply an effective reply to the
objection that Remedial Right Only Theories neglect the importance of
nationalism only if the account of the right to secede they advance is
properly situated in a plausible, more comprehensive theory of
self-determination.
2.3 Plebiscitary Theories

The appeal of Plebiscitary Theories is that they appear to make the
determination of boundaries a matter of choice or, more accurately, of
majority rule. To that extent they seek to bask in the popularity of
democracy (Philpott 1995). Plebiscitary Theories typically add another
necessary condition, beyond majority preference (in the region in
question) for secession: Both the seceding unit and the remainder
state must be able adequately to perform the basic functions that
justify or legitimize states in the first place. Call this the State
Viability Requirement.

The appeal of Plebiscitary Theories is two-fold. First, they avoid a
problem that afflicts the other main type of Primary Right Theory,
Ascriptivist Theories, because they do not require either an account
of what constitutes a nation or an explanation of why nations have a
right to their own state. Second, they are less conservative than
Remedial Right Only Theories, allowing a democratic path to the
redrawing of state boundaries, and this may be appealing, given the
fact, as noted earlier, that existing boundaries may reflect national
security needs and the need for large internal
markets—considerations that are no longer as important in an era
in which interstate wars are quite rare and markets extend across
state borders.

However, given what is at stake in secession, it is far from clear
that the mere fact that a majority of persons residing in a portion of
a state desire independence should be a sufficient reason to give them
a unilateral right to secede, in the absence of any grievances. Why
should one assume that the mere fact of residence in an area
authorizes persons to decide by majority vote not only to change their
own citizenship but also to deprive others (the nonsecessionists) of
their citizenship and to remove a part of the territory of the state
without the consent of the citizens who happen to live outside the
area in question? 

In short, a serious weakness of existing Plebiscitary Theories, as
Brilmayer (1991) emphasizes, is that they provide no account of the
normative implications of occupancy of territory. The most developed
versions of Plebiscitary Theories ground the right to secede in a
right of political association, but the right of political association
considered in itself tells us nothing about the right to territory.
What is needed is an account of why the fact that a group that happens
to find itself in a particular region of the state has the right to
transform their political association in that particular piece of
territory into sovereign jurisdiction over it. 

To put the point bluntly, the Plebiscitary Theory seems to fly in the
face of the doctrine of popular sovereignty. According to that
doctrine, which lies at the core of the liberal-democratic conception
of the state, the state’s territory is properly conceived of as the
territory of the people as a whole, not just those who at a particular
time happen to reside in a portion of it. But if this is so, it is
hard to understand how the mere fact that a majority of citizens in a
certain portion of the peoples’ territory desire to have that
territory become an independent state could confer on them the right
unilaterally to appropriate it.

Absent an account of the normative significance of the fact of
occupancy, Plebiscitary Theories do not make a convincing case that
majority preference plus satisfaction of the State Viability Proviso
imply the right to independent statehood. Notice that it will not due
for the Plebiscitary Theorist to add the premise that a group that is
entitled (by the right to political association) to have its own
territory. That would not explain why they have a right to the
particular territory they happen to occupy.

In addition, critics of the Plebiscitary view have pointed out that
the justifications for democratic governance within given political
boundaries do not support the thesis that boundaries may be redrawn
simply by majority rule (Buchanan 1998a). There are two chief
justifications for democratic governance. The first is that democracy
is intrinsically valuable from the standpoint of a very basic
principle of morality, namely, that all persons are entitled to equal
consideration. The core idea is that the basic moral equality of
persons requires that they have an equal say in the decisions that
determine the basic character of their polity. But it appears that
this justification for democracy does not imply that the decision
whether to secede should be determined unilaterally by a majority in
favor of secession in a portion of the territory of an existing state
as opposed to being determined by a majority of all the citizens.

The first justification for democracy tells us that all who are
members of a particular polity—all who must live under one
system of rules that determine the fundamental character of social
life—should have an equal say or should participate as equals in
deciding what those rules are to be. But the principle of democratic
rule cannot tell us what the boundaries of the polity should be,
because in order to implement the democratic rule we must already have
fixed the boundaries of the polity. The right to democratic governance
is a principle that specifies a relation of equality among members of
the same polity, not a right to determine the membership of polities
or their territorial boundaries.

The second chief justification for democracy is instrumental: It holds
that democratic governance tends to promote important goods, including
peace, freedom, and other dimensions of well-being. Once again, the
force of the justification depends upon the assumption that what is
being justified is a process of decision making for a polity. The
claim is that the well-being of all the citizens will be best served
if all the citizens are allowed to express their preferences through
voting, at least on fundamental matters that affect all. Plainly, this
argument cannot support the assertion that only some citizens (those
in a particular portion of the polity) ought to be able unilaterally
to decide a matter that will affect all citizens of the polity. Hence
it cannot support the Plebiscitary Right view of the unilateral right
to secede. Because neither of the justifications for democracy
supports the Plebiscitary view, the latter is not entailed by the
commitment to democracy.

There is one more problem that proponents of the Plebiscitary approach
have not addressed, at least not explicitly. A successful secession
can create security risks for the remainder state, and it is not clear
that this eventually is adequately taken into account in the
Plebiscitary Theory’s State Viability Proviso. The issue is clearest
in the case of irredentist secession. Suppose that a portion of the
territory of a state, S, whose inhabitants are predominantly members
of minority ethnic group E1, secede in order to merge that territory
with the territory of a neighboring state S1, in which the E1 ethnic
group is the majority. Depending on the relationship between S1 and
S2—perhaps there is a history of conflicts as is the case with
India and Pakistan—the result of the secession may be an
intolerable threat to S1’s security. (Perhaps the seceding territory
contains natural barriers to invasion from S2 and expensive
fortifications). It is at least worth asking whether the interest that
the secessionist group have in linking up with their ethnic comrades
in S2 is morally weightier than the interest of the majority of the
citizens of S1 in national security. (Remember that by hypothesis, the
secessionist group has not suffered injustices at the hands of S1).
Even if S2 does not invade S1, the new security situation created by
the change of borders (and the augmentation of S2s population) may
make S1 subject to domination by S2. It is not clear that the
Plebiscitary Theory’s state viability criterion provides adequate
resources for addressing this problem. It is not that S1 lacks the
capacity to perform the legitimizing functions of a state; rather, the
problem is that it has become vulnerable as a result of the
secession.

Reflections on the security problem lead to a methodological point.
The contours of a moral right to secede may depend on what
institutional resources exist outside the state for protecting the
interests of the secessionists and/or of the people of the remainder
state. If international or regional organizations can provide
effective guarantees to S1 that if part of its territory secedes and
becomes part of a neighboring state it will not face a security risk,
then it will be harder for S1 to justify forcibly resisting the
session. In contrast, if international security arrangements are weak,
then in cases where there is a serious security risk for the state if
irredentist secession occurs, the irredentist group’s right to secede
looks more doubtful. Similarly, if regional or international
organizations can be counted on to provide support for intrastate
autonomy arrangements short of full independence, then it may be
reasonable to conclude that a group that can significantly benefit
from such arrangements does not have the right to secede. In contrast,
if a dissatisfied minority group cannot rely on such external
resources to protect its interests by securing some meaningful form of
self-determination within the state, then it may have a stronger case
for seceding. In
 Section 4
 we develop this line of thought further, introducing a distinction
between theories of secession that assume that only features of the
state and the new state that would be formed from it by secession are
relevant to determining the contours of the moral right to secede and
theories that recognize that facts about regional and international
institutions can be relevant.
2.4 Ascriptivist Theories

This approach to unilateral secession has a long pedigree, reaching
back at least to Nineteenth Century nationalists such as Mazzini, who
proclaimed that every nation should have its own state. Critics of the
Ascriptivist variant of Primary Right Theory (Buchanan 1991, Gellner 2008) argue that it would
legitimize virtually unlimited unilateral, forcible border changes
because it confers an entitlement to its own state on every nation (or
“people” or distinct society). For reasons noted above
this appears to be not only unfeasible, but a recipe for increasing
ethno-national conflict.

However, those who advocate the Ascriptivist Theory reply that it does
not require every nation (or distinct people) to exercise its
unilateral right to secede and have conjectured that were their theory
generally accepted not every group upon which it confers this
entitlement would choose to secede. Nevertheless, given the historical
record of ethno-nationalist conflict, the worry remains that
institutionalizing the principle that every nation is entitled to its
own state would exacerbate ethno-national violence, along with the
human rights violations it inevitably entails. Thus the moral costs of
incorporating the Ascriptivist version of Primary Right Theory into
international law may appear prohibitive—especially if there are
less risky ways to accommodate the legitimate interests of nations,
such as better compliance with human rights norms and recourse to
intrastate autonomy arrangements.

There are variants of Ascriptivist theory that go some distance toward
allaying the worry that acceptance of the theory would add fuel to the
fires of ethno-national conflict by qualifying the unilateral right of
secession for nations (or distinct peoples) in various ways. For
example, the Ascriptivist may hold that there is a presumption in
favor of each nation or distinct people having a right to its own
state if it so desires, or a prima facie unilateral right to secede
for all such groups, but the international legal system is justified
in requiring some groups to settle for autonomy arrangements short of
full independence to avoid dangerous instability or to accommodate
similar claims by other groups to the same territory. This way of
responding to the worry about adding fuel to ethno-national conflicts
comes at a price: What was originally billed as a unilateral right of
every nation as such to its own state now looks more like a highly
defeasible presumption in favor of independence for nations. And
unless a fairly concrete account of the conditions under which the
presumption is not defeated is provided, it is hard to know what the
practical implications of this qualified Ascriptivist view are. What
is needed is an account of how the putative presumption in favor of
statehood for nations is to be weighed against competing claims and
values. So far, proponents of Ascriptivist Theories have not provided
this.

Earlier, we observed that critics of the Ascriptivist version of
Primary Right Theory tend to focus on the potential costs in terms of
exacerbated ethno-national conflict of incorporating the view into
international law. However, it is not enough to note the potential
costs of acceptance of the Ascriptivist Theory and its incorporation
into international law. It is also necessary to understand the
putative benefits of having a system in which the rights of nations to
their own states is acknowledged. Accordingly, David Miller has
usefully distinguished two ways in which Ascriptivist theories can be
supported: by arguments to show that nations need states or by
arguments to show that states need to be mono-national (Miller
1995).

The first type of argument has two variants: One can argue that
nations need to have their own states, either (1) in order to be able
to protect themselves from destruction or from forces that threaten
their distinctive character, or (2) in order for co-nationals to have
the institutional resources to be able to fulfill the special
obligations they owe one another as members of an “ethical
community”, in Miller’s phrase. Both of these considerations
can, under certain circumstances, weigh in favor of some form of
political self-determination for nations, but it is not clear that
either is sufficient to ground a general right of all nations to full
independence and hence a unilateral right to secede. Indeed Miller
marshals them in support of a weaker conclusion: that nations have a
“strong claim” to self-determination, but does not specify
when the claim constitutes a full-fledged right.

The second type of justification for the view that nations are
entitled to their own states also has two variants: The first, which
dates back at least to John Stuart Mill’s Considerations On
Representative Government (Mill [1861] 1991), asserts that
democracy can only flourish in mono-national states, because states in
which there is more than one nation will be lacking in the solidarity,
trust, or shared sentiments and values that democracy requires. The
second, advanced by David Miller, asserts that states need to be
mononational in order to achieve distributive justice, because
distributive justice requires significant redistribution of wealth
among citizens and the better off will only be willing share their
wealth with their less fortunate fellow citizens if they see them as
co-nationals (Miller 1995). Both forms of the “states need to be
mononational”argument raise very interesting questions about the
motivational conditions necessary if crucial state functions are to be
successfully performed.

Mill apparently based his judgment that multination states are
incompatible with democracy on historical experience. However, some
would argue that there are cases of multinational democratic states:
Canada, Belgium, and perhaps Switzerland (depending upon whether one
regards the last as multinational or merely multi-ethnic). One might
also add the United States, since most Indian tribes have a legal
status that approaches sovereignty.

Of course modern proponents of Mill’s argument would be quick to point
out that the continued existence of Belgium and Canada are in doubt
due to nationalist secession movements. (However, at present the
secession of Quebec seems very unlikely.) On the other hand, it could
be argued that Mill’s generalization is prematurely pessimistic:
genuine democracies are a very recent phenomenon and until even more
recently there have been almost no serious attempts, even on the part
of democratic states, to recognize the claims of nations within
states, through various forms of autonomy
 arrangements.[8]
 So as a justification for acknowledging a right to independent
statehood for all nations, with the risk of instability and violence
this might entail, Mill’s pessimism about multinational democracies
may seem to some to be premature. The most reasonable strategy would
seem to be to do more to ensure that states respect the human rights
of their minorities and to encourage intrastate autonomy agreements
rather than giving up on the idea of multinational states.

The second version of the “states need to be
mono-national” argument also faces serious objections. First,
whether or not nationalism will facilitate or instead block
large-scale redistribution of wealth will depend upon the character of
the nationalism in question. Nationalist solidarity may not extend to
willingness to redistribute wealth. As socialists from Marx onward
have observed, the privileged minority has often been quite adept at
appealing to nationalism to counteract the redistributive impulse.
Second, even in cases where nationalist sentiment facilitates
redistribution, one must ask: what else does it facilitate? Miller
appears to argue from the fact that a morally pristine, highly
idealized nationalism would facilitate distributive justice (or
democracy) to the conclusion that nations as such are entitled to
their own states or at least to a presumption thereof. But there are
many historical instances in which the national unity that Miller
assumes will be harnessed for the pursuit of distributive justice has
been ferociously directed toward conquest and against non-nationals
and dissenting members of the nation itself.

The foregoing comparative evaluation of the main types of theories of
the unilateral (claim-)right to secede suggests that the Remedial
Right Only approach is superior. However, at present it is fair to say
that none of the rival types of theories is sufficiently worked out
for a definitive comparative evaluation to be possible. For each type
of theory there are unanswered questions and potential objections. For
example, Remedial Right Only Theories that include unjust annexations
of territory among the injustices that ground a unilateral
(claim-)right to secede must provide a satisfactory solution to what
has elsewhere been called the moral statute of limitations problem
(Buchanan 1991: 88): how durable are claims to independence based on
past unjust takings—how far back in history may a group go in
making the case that they are entitled to their own state because they
previously had one?

More importantly, a Remedial Right Only Theory of the unilateral right
to secede will only be defensible in the end if it rests upon a
plausible account of what entitles a state to control over a territory
in the first place. Without such an account the Remedial Right Only
view appears arbitrarily to privilege the status quo by requiring
secessionists to bear the burden of showing that they have suffered
serious and persistent injustices in order to establish their claim to
territory. To answer this objection, the Remedial Right Only theorist
would have to provide a justice-based theory of legitimacy, arguing
that what grounds the state’s claim to territory is its provision of
justice, and that it is for this reason that only serious injustices
can void that claim (such an account of legitimacy is in Buchanan
2013). 

All three types of theories must address satisfactorily what may be
called the problem of authentic voice. For Ascriptivist and Remedial
Right Only Theories this means providing a reasoned answer to the
question “what counts as an authentic decision to attempt to
secede?” (Is there some nonarbitrary way of specifying what sort
of majority is required in favor of secession before it can be said
that the group in question has chosen to exercise its right to
secede?). Similarly, Plebiscitary Right theorists must provide a
principled account of how large a majority in favor of secession must
exist, before it can be said that the right to secede exists.

In addition, all three types of theories must articulate a plausible
account of the rights of those within the seceding territory who
oppose secession. For example, are there circumstances in which the
anti-secessionists should be granted dual citizenship, so that they
can preserve their citizenship in the state from which the secession
is occurring? Are there circumstances in which they deserve
compensation for losses they incur when a new state, perhaps with
different property laws, is created?

Finally, as suggested earlier, the implications of each type of theory
for international law regarding secession should be explained. In the
next section, we explore briefly the relationship between views about
the moral (claim-)right to unilateral secession and the question of
what position international law should take on unilateral
secession.
2.5 Situating theories of secession within theories of Territorial Justice

The discussion thus far indicates that all three types of theories
suffer a serious incompleteness: They do not situate their position on
secession within the context of a comprehensive theory of territorial
justice. A theory of territorial justice would provide a coherent
account of valid moral claims to territory of various types, from
claims to full sovereign jurisdiction, to claims to the more limited
jurisdictional control needed for various forms of intrastate autonomy
(modes of self-determination short of full independence), to claims to
participation in various forms of joint jurisdiction, to claims to
permanent occupancy. Ascriptivist theories need such a theory in order
to explain why nations (as opposed to other types of groups) have the
most robust claim to territory, the jurisdiction over territory that
constitutes sovereignty. Plebiscitary Theories, as we have already
seen, need such a theory to explain why the fact that a group is a
majority in a particular territory gives it a claim to sovereignty
over that territory—and why the fact that those residing in the
same territory who do not support secession have no special claim to
that territory, not even one that falls short of the claim the
majority has. Remedial Right Only Theories need an account of what
forms of control over territory, short of full sovereignty, are
appropriate for which groups, given the nature of the injustices they
have suffered at the hands of the state. All existing theories of
secession include accounts of what gives a group a claim to
sovereignty over territory, but to make these accounts fully
plausible, they also need to explain what grounds less robust claims
to territory, and that requires integrating a theory of secession into
a comprehensive theory of territorial justice. The first efforts at
developing systematic views on territorial justice have appeared only
recently, and their significance for philosophical controversies about
the right to secede is not yet clear (Kolers 2009; Meisels 2009; Nine
2012).
2.6. Narrowly versus Widely Institutional Theories

There is another way of sorting theories of secession that is also
illuminating. As noted in
 subsection 2.3,
 some theories assume that only facts about the institutional
resources of the remainder state and the new state created by
secession are relevant to determining the contours of the moral right
to secede and others recognize that facts about other institutions,
whether regional or international can be relevant. The Plebiscitary
Theory developed by Altman and Wellman (2009), is an instance of the
former type of theory; Buchanan’s Remedial Right Only theory is an
instance of the latter. 

According to Altman and Wellman, whether a group has the right to
secede depends only on its preference for independent statehood and on
whether the new state it creates and the remainder state will be able
adequately to perform the basic functions of government. On this view,
the effects this group seceding or of other parties agreeing that it
has the right to secede on future secessionist attempts or on the
well-functioning of the international order are completely irrelevant
to determining whether this group has the right to secede. In effect,
this theory treats secession as strictly a two-party affair, so far as
the interest relevant to determining whether a group has the right to
secede is concerned. Buchanan’s theory, in contrast, recognizes that
other parties can have legitimate interests that are relevant to
determining what the rights of the primary parties are. 

Altman and Wellman might reply that their State Viability Proviso does
take the interests of third parties into account. More specifically,
the fulfillment of the Proviso serves the interests of third parties
in having viable states and in the provision of justice that comes
with the discharging of basic state functions.

The problem with this reply is that, while acknowledging that
third-party interests can be relevant to determining whether a group
has the right to secede, it offers no reason as to why legitimate
third-party interests should be thus restricted. Why are not the
interests that other states and their populations have in a stable
order of states and in avoiding security crises of the sort that
irredentist secessions can create (as sketched above) also relevant to
determining the contours of the right to secede? After all, whether a
group has the (claim-)right to secede depends on whether other parties
have sufficient reason to refraining from trying to prevent the
secession and that in turn can depend on whether the secession is
likely to have a negative impact on various legitimate interests,
including, but not limited to the interest in the remainder state and
the new state being viable.

Suppose that a group within a legitimate, reasonably just state, is a
majority in a portion of the state’s territory and prefers to have its
own state. Whether they have the right to secede depends on whether
there are sufficient reasons for other states to refrain from
interfering with their attempt at secession (because the right in
question is a claim-right). But whether other states ought to refrain
from interfering with a secession or not interfere with the state’s
attempt to prevent a secession can depend on whether behaving in this
way is likely to help establish a new norm of customary international
law that permits territorially-concentrated majorities unilaterally to
form their own states without interference. In the absence of
impartial institutions to determine when the conditions for justified
secession according to the Plebiscitary Theory are met, such a new,
much more permissive norm of customary international law would be
dangerous—it would encourage secessions that do not meet the
Plebiscitary Theories own criteria. So, as in the case of irredentist
secessions noted above, it appears that in these circumstances as
well, whether other states ought to interfere with an attempted
secession, and hence whether a group has the right to secede, can
depend on factors other than those the Plebiscitary Theory allows to
count.

If, as we have suggested, a range of legitimate interests is relevant
to determining the nature of the moral right to secede and if the
extent that these interests are impacted by secession depends on the
existing institutional resources, including not just those of the
remainder state and the new state, but also those of regional and
international organizations, then it follows that a theory of the
moral right to secede must take into account existing institutional
realities at all levels. And if that is so, then contrary to what
theorists like Altman and Wellman assume, probing our moral intuitions
about quite different phenomena in which the institutional context is
quite different will not be a reliable guide to understanding the
nature of the moral right to secede. For example, analogizing the
decision of a minority group to break away and form their own state to
the decision of two individuals to marry will not be very
illuminating, because the supposed analogy omits any reference to the
relevant institutional facts.
3. Secession and Just War Theory

A more serious lacuna in the philosophical literature on secession
than the failure to integrate it into a comprehensive theory of
territorial justice is the absence of a connection with just war
theory. In real-world conflicts in which a group asserts the right to
secede and the state denies the validity of the claim, either one or
both of the parties often resorts to force. But merely establishing
that a group has the right to secede does not settle whether it is
justified in using force to achieve its goal of independent statehood.
(In general, merely having a right to X does not entail being
justified in using force to secure X). Similarly, if the group
does not have the right to secede, it may still not be justifiable for
the state to use force to prevent it from seceding. Remarkably,
philosophical theories of secession have not distinguished between
having the right to secede and being justified in using force to
exercise the right. Nor have they discussed the conditions under which
states have the right to use force to resist secessions when the
secessionists have no moral right to secede. This is especially
surprising, given the resurgence of philosophical theorizing about
just war. 

The key point here is that mainstream just war theory does not endorse
the assertion that the violation of any right can justify force nor
the assertion that force is justified if it is required for the
successful exercise of any right. Instead, the dominant view is that
the list of just causes (legitimate ends to be served by going to war)
is more constrained than that and should reflect the conviction that
the use of force is only justified if it is required to remedy very
serious injustices or for the exercise of very important rights. 

It is far from obvious how just war theory and the theory of secession
should be connected. It appears, however, the use of force by
secessionists would be more problematic on some theories of secession
than on others. Suppose, for example, that a majority of the people in
a portion of a legitimate state’s territory decide that they want
their own state there, in spite of the fact that they are not victims
of any injustices at the hands of the state. On the Plebiscitary
Theory, they have the right to secede (so long as the new unit and the
remainder state will be able adequately to perform the basic functions
of government). If the state refuses to vacate its facilities in that
region, turn over control over that portion of the border to the
secessionists, etc., is it justifiable for the secessionists to use
force against the agents of the state? Does the mere preference for
their own state justify engaging in a course of action that is likely
to result in large-scale violence? The problem here is that the
purpose the secessionists can invoke to justify a course of action
seems not to fit well with the usual understandings of just cause. In
contrast, remedial Right Only Theories would seem to be consistent, at
least in principle, with mainstream just war theory, because the
latter recognizes redress of serious injustices (and not the mere
desire to have one’s own political unit) as a just cause. Nonetheless,
a fully-developed Remedial Right Only Theory would have to provide an
account of when injustices are sufficiently serious to warrant
secession under conditions in which there is a significant risk of
large-scale violence. Regardless of which type of theory one embraces,
one would also need an account of the conditions under which the state
would be justified in using force to block secession. For as we have
already noted, the mere fact that the group attempting to secede does
not have a right to secede does not imply that it is justifiable for
the state to use force to prevent them from seceding. A moral theory
of secession should not be limited, then, to articulating and
defending characterization of the moral right to secede. It should
also provide an account of the morality of using force in conflicts
over secession and one that is consistent with its view of the right
to secede.
4. Secession and the Philosophy of International Law

There is yet another desideratum for a theory of secession: As
suggested earlier, the implications of each type of theory for
international law regarding secession should be explained. In the next
section, we explore briefly the relationship between views about the
moral (claim-)right to unilateral secession and the question of what
position international law should take on unilateral secession.

The deficiencies of existing international law regarding secession
motivate the project of developing principled proposals for reform. At
present international law recognizes only a very narrow set of
circumstances under which the unilateral right to secede exists as an
international legal right, namely, when a group is subject to colonial
domination. The difficulty with this conception of the international
legal right to unilateral secession is that, while clearly embodying
the idea that serious and persistent injustices can generate a right
to unilateral secession, it arbitrarily restricts the injustices that
generate the right to the special case of classical colonialism, where
a metropolitan power dominates a racially and/or ethnically distinct
group in an overseas colony. Another difficulty is that while
international legal practice has confined the unilateral right to
secede to the so-called “saltwater decolonization” case,
several important international legal documents include reference to
an apparently much broader “right of self-determination of all
peoples” which is said to include the right to choose full
independence, and hence the right to
 secede.[9]
 One way to conceive of the chief task for a moral theory of
international law regarding secession is that it must provide a
reasoned basis for removing the arbitrary restriction from which the
current law suffers, while avoiding the dangerously expansive notion
that all “peoples” are entitled to their own states, in a
world in which virtually every existing state includes more than one
“people”, in which several “peoples” claim the
same territory, and in which there are no international institutional
principles or mechanisms for sorting out these conflicting claims.

An important choice for the moral theorist of international law
regarding secession regards the scope of the right itself. On one
view, international law should simply acknowledge, under certain
conditions to be specified by the theory, a group’s right to its own
state; on the other view, international law should distinguish between
(a) the conditions under which a group should be accorded the right to
repudiate the jurisdiction of the state over a portion of the state’s
territory and to attempt to establish its own control there and (b)
the conditions under which international law should recognize the
secessionist entity as a legitimate state, with all the rights,
immunities, privileges, and obligations this entails.

The difference between these two options can be appreciated if we take
the example of a Remedial Right Only approach to proposals for
reforming international law regarding secession. For simplicity,
suppose that the Remedial Right Only theory under consideration
recognizes only large-scale and persistent violations of basic human
rights as grounding the unilateral right to secede, and suppose that
group G has suffered such violations. On the first view, the
proposal is that international law should simply acknowledge that
G has the right to its own legitimate state if forming a new
state is the remedy of last resort for large-scale, persistent
violations of the basic human rights of members of G, where
this means that other states should recognize the new entity as having
all the rights, privileges, immunities, powers, and obligations this
status entails. On the second view, there are two distinct questions
the international law of secession should address: First, has G
suffered large-scale and persistent violations of basic human rights
and second, does G satisfy the conditions for recognitional
legitimacy, for being recognized as a legitimate state? The second
view would maintain that although the group’s having suffered
large-scale and persistent violations of basic human rights is
sufficient for acknowledging its right to repudiate the state’s
jurisdiction and attempt to set up its own state, something more is
required before international law should recognize the new entity as a
legitimate state; in particular, the new state should provide credible
assurances that it will respect the rights of minorities within its
territory.

Making recognition of legitimate statehood dependent in this way upon
satisfying basic requirements of justice obviously coheres with the
Remedial Right Only theory’s approach to secession, which involves
rewarding states that respect rights. But there is much to be said for
distinguishing, regardless of which theory of the right to secede is
adopted, between the right to secede (understood as the right to
repudiate the state’s authority over a portion of its territory and to
attempt to set up a new state there) and the right to recognition as a
legitimate state. New entities created through secession typically are
keen to receive recognition of their legitimacy because of the
benefits this confers, including access to favorable trade regimes,
loans and credits from international agencies such as the World Bank
and International Monetary Fund, and the ability to participate as an
equal with other states in the making of international law.
Distinguishing between whether a group has the right to secede (to
repudiate the state’s jurisdiction and attempt to establish its own
state) and whether it has the right to recognition as a legitimate
state enables the international legal system to impose normative
conditions on recognition in circumstances in which new states have
strong incentives to satisfy them.

A fully-developed philosophical theory of what the international law
of secession ought to be would be quite ambitious and complex. It
would have to include not only an account of the connection between
the right to secede and the right to recognition, but also a theory of
justified intervention in support of or against secession that would
cohere with a more general position on the legitimate use of force
across borders.
5. Conclusion

Philosophical work on secession falls into three main categories: (1)
attempts to develop an account of the moral right to secede
(understood either as a claim-right or as a mere liberty), (2)
investigations of the compatibility or incompatibility of secession
with constitutionalism, and (3) attempts to determine what posture
international law should adopt concerning secession. In each of these
areas of inquiry, as well as in the connections among them,
exploration of the moral issues of secession provides a powerful lens
through which to examine some of the most important issues of
moral-political theory, including perhaps the most fundamental issue
of all: what gives a state a valid claim to its territory?