In philosophy, “self-knowledge” standardly refers to
knowledge of one’s own sensations, thoughts, beliefs, and other
mental states. At least since Descartes, most philosophers have
believed that our knowledge of our own mental states differs markedly
from our knowledge of the external world (where this includes our
knowledge of others’ thoughts). But there is little agreement
about what precisely distinguishes self-knowledge from knowledge in
other realms. Partially because of this disagreement, philosophers
have endorsed competing accounts of how we acquire
self-knowledge. These accounts have important consequences for a broad
range of philosophical issues, especially issues in epistemology and
the philosophy of mind.
This entry focuses on knowledge of one’s own particular
mental states. A separate topic sometimes referred to as
“self-knowledge”, knowledge about a
persisting self, is addressed in a
supplement: Knowledge of the Self.
 
1. The Distinctiveness of Self-Knowledge
What is special about self-knowledge, compared to knowledge in
other domains? Self-knowledge is thought to differ from other sorts of
knowledge in one or more of the following ways.

Self-knowledge is especially secure,
epistemically.
Self-knowledge is (sometimes) acquired by use of an exclusively
first-personal method.
Self-knowledge is special because of the distinctive agential
relation one bears to one’s own mental
states.
One’s pronouncements about one’s own mental states
carry a special authority or presumption of truth.

The differences between these are subtle. Statement (1) identifies
the distinctive feature of self-knowledge as the epistemic status of a
certain class of beliefs, whereas statement (2) identifies it by the
method one uses in forming these beliefs. Statement (3) emphasizes the
subject’s cognitive agency. Statement (4) rejects purely
first-personal characterizations, focusing instead on the way
utterances like “I’m in pain” are treated by
others. Statements (1) and (2) are ways of cashing out the notion that
we enjoy “privileged access” to our own mental
states. Only these first two statements construe the distinctive
feature of self-knowledge as plainly epistemic; however, most who
endorse (3) also claim that this agential relation grounds a special
epistemic relation. A minority of philosophers denies that
self-knowledge is special at all.
1.1 Epistemic security
The strongest epistemic claims on behalf of self-knowledge are
infallibility and omniscience. One is infallible about one’s own
mental states if and only if (hereafter, “iff”)
one cannot have a false belief to the effect that one is in a certain
mental state. One is omniscient about one’s own
states iff being in a mental state suffices for knowing that
one is in that state.  (This omniscience thesis is sometimes expressed
by saying that mental states are self-intimating
or self-presenting.)  Contemporary philosophers generally
deny that we are infallible or omniscient about our mental
states. Here is a simple counter-example to the claim of
infallibility. Kate trusts her therapist’s insights into her own
psychology, and so she believes him when he tells her that she resents
her mother. But the therapist is mistaken—Kate does not resent
her mother. Hence, Kate has a false belief about her own
attitude. This case also undercuts the claim of omniscience, assuming
that Kate is unaware of her genuine (non-resentful) attitude towards
her mother.
In the case described, Kate’s belief about her attitude is
based on the testimony of another person. Relying on testimony is, of
course, a way of gaining knowledge about all sorts of things,
including knowledge of others’ mental states. As mentioned
above, some philosophers believe that one has a special way of knowing
about one’s own states, a way that others cannot use to
apprehend one’s own states. If we restrict the relevant domain
to beliefs formed by use of a method that is exclusively a method of
attaining self-knowledge—perhaps introspection—we
can formulate a more plausible infallibility thesis. We can generate
an even more plausible thesis by limiting this restricted
infallibility claim to pains and other sensations. Descartes endorsed
a limited infallibility thesis of this sort. He says:
There remains sensations, emotions and appetites. These may be
clearly perceived provided we take great care in our judgments
concerning them to include no more than what is strictly contained in
our perception—no more than that of which we have inner
awareness. But this is a very difficult rule to observe, at least
with regard to sensations. (Descartes 1644/1984: I.66,
p. 216)
This thesis is still quite controversial. A common objection to
even limited infallibility claims is the idea, often attributed to
Wittgenstein, that where one cannot be wrong, one cannot be right
either. For instance, Wright maintains that the possibility of error
is required for concept application, which is in turn required for
substantial self-knowledge.“[E]rror—if only second-order
error—has to be possible, if a genuine exercise of concepts is
involved” (Wright 1989: 634).
The omniscience thesis seems even less plausible than the
unqualified infallibility thesis. But consider the following passage
from Locke.

[It is] impossible for any one to perceive, without perceiving that
he does perceive. When we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or
will any thing, we know that we do so. (Locke 1689/1975
II.27.ix)
Is Locke really saying that all of our thoughts and sensations are
accompanied by (justified, true) beliefs about those thoughts and
sensations? It is more likely that Locke means that we are
always conscious of our thoughts and sensations. This
statement is plausible on the “higher-order” theory of
consciousness, according to which conscious states are states one is
conscious of.
In any case, the omniscience thesis may also be qualified. Some
modify the omniscience thesis by claiming that, for some states,
anyone who is in a state of that kind is justified in believing that
she is, even if the thinker doesn’t actually have this belief
(Peacocke 1999; Siewert 1998; Smithies 2012). Horgan and Kriegel
(2007) use a modified omniscience thesis, restricted to sensations (or
“phenomenal experiences”), to argue for a qualified
infallibility thesis:
The basic idea behind our approach to phenomenal
infallibility is that, because the occurrence of a phenomenal
experience already involves the subject’s awareness of it, for
the subject to acquire a belief about the experience may involve
little more than an act of shifting or redirecting attention. (2007:
135)
Claims of infallibility and omniscience concern
general relations between beliefs about mental states and those mental
states themselves. What is relevant to the most famous philosophical
argument involving self-knowledge is not these general relations but,
rather, the certainty of a particular instance of
belief. This is Descartes’ cogito argument (Descartes
1641/1895), which aims to demonstrate that, so long as you are
carefully attending to your own thoughts, nothing—not even a
supremely powerful evil genius who controls your thoughts and seeks to
deceive you—can render misleading your evidence that you are
thinking (and that, therefore, you exist).
Perhaps the most widely accepted view along these lines is that
self-knowledge, even if not absolutely certain, is especially secure,
in the following sense: self-knowledge is immune from some types of
error to which other kinds of empirical knowledge—most
obviously, perceptual knowledge—are vulnerable. Some theorists
who take this line maintain that there is a causal gap between a
perceptual state and its object, and this gap introduces sources of
error that are absent in direct introspective apprehension of a
sensation (Gertler 2012; Horgan 2012; Siewert 2012).
Those who maintain that beliefs about
one’s own mental states are especially secure, epistemically,
typically account for this fact by citing the distinctiveness of the
method used to determine our own mental states. We now turn to this
“special method” claim.
1.2 Special method
Most philosophers accept that there is some method of grasping
one’s own mental states that is special in the sense
that it is available exclusively to the subject. Traditionally, this
special method was construed as a kind of “inward” gaze,
directed at the mental state to be grasped.
1.2.1 Looking inward: Introspection
The term “introspection”’—literally,
“looking within”—captures a traditional way of
conceiving how we grasp our own mental states. This term uses a
spatial metaphor to express a divide between the “inner”
world of thought and the “external” world. The term
“introspection” is used in various ways in the
self-knowledge literature. Perhaps the most common usage is that
suggested by the term’s literal meaning: on this usage,
introspection is inner observation—or “inwardly directed
attention” (Goldman 2006: 246)—that, when successful,
yields awareness of a mental state. The notion that inner observation
is the special method by which we achieve self-knowledge is central to
the acquaintance and inner sense accounts
(see 3.1 and 3.2
below).
1.2.2 Looking outward: Transparency
While the term “introspection” connotes a looking
within, a view that has recently gained prominence envisions the
method unique to self-knowledge as requiring precisely the
opposite. On this view, we ascertain our own thoughts by looking
outward, to the states of the world they represent. This is known as
the transparency view, in that it takes self-knowledge to
involve looking “through” the (transparent) mental state,
directly to the state of the world it represents. This view is
associated with a famous passage from Evans.

[I]n making a self-ascription of belief, one’s eyes are, so
to speak, or occasionally literally, directed outward—upon the
world. If someone asks me “Do you think there is going to be a
third world war?”, I must attend, in answering him, to precisely
the same outward phenomena as I would attend to if I were answering
the question “Will there be a third world war?” (Evans
1982: 225)

The idea that the special method by which we achieve self-knowledge
involves transparency is central to empiricist transparency
accounts (see 3.5 below), as well as to some
rationalist and agentialist accounts (see 3.6
and 3.7).
1.3 Agency
Many of our mental states, such as itches and tickles, are states
we simply undergo. But arguably, some are more active: for instance,
we commit to beliefs and form intentions on the basis of reasons.
“Our rational beliefs and intentions are not mere mental
attitudes, but active states of normative commitment” (Korsgaard
2009: 39). According to agentialist views, the truly distinctive kind
of self-knowledge is knowledge of these “active states of
normative commitment”. And what is truly distinctive about this
kind of self-knowledge is that, when one believes or intends on the
basis of reasons, these attitudes are more profoundly one’s
own than states (like itches and tickles) that merely occur
within one. The agentialist contends that, whereas we know our itches
and tickles only by observation, we can know our beliefs and
intentions non-observationally, insofar as they are exercises of
rational agency.  Section 3.7 surveys leading
agentialist views.
1.4 First-person authority
The views just described take the subject to be in a special
epistemic position, vis-à-vis her own mental states. But a
competing approach, sometimes attributed to Wittgenstein (Wright
1989), maintains that the special authority of self-attributions is
primarily a matter of social-linguistic practices, which dictate that
we should treat subjects as authoritative about their own states. On
this view, one who responds to a self-attribution like “I
believe that it’s raining” with “no, you
don’t” (in ordinary circumstances) exhibits a
misunderstanding of social-linguistic norms.
The first-person authority view does not require that
self-attributions be epistemically grounded. But our social-linguistic
practice of treating others as authorities on their own states cries
out for explanation: what could justify this practice other than the
assumption that they are in an epistemically privileged position
relative to those states? Critics of the first-person authority view,
including Wright (1998), worry that in failing to explain the practice
of treating persons as default authorities, this view is “a mere
invitation to choose to treat as primitive something which we have run
into trouble trying to explain” (1998: 45).
The first-person authority view diagnoses the authority granted to
self-attributions in non-epistemic terms. Strictly speaking, then,
this position is not concerned with self-knowledge. However,
neo-expressivist accounts (see 3.8 below) regard
the phenomenon of first-person authority as centrally important to
understanding self-knowledge.
2. Doubts about the distinctiveness of self-knowledge
2.1 General doubts
The idea that self-knowledge is not profoundly special was
especially prevalent during the heyday of behaviorism. For instance,
Ryle (1949) suggests that the difference between self-knowledge and
other-knowledge is at most a matter of degree, and stems from the
mundane fact that each of us is always present to observe our own
behavior. He argues that if self-knowledge were epistemically direct,
then the higher-order mental state that constitutes immediate grasp of
one’s own mental state would have to be grasped as well. This
would quickly lead to a regress, which could be blocked only by
positing a state that somehow comprehends itself. But Ryle regarded
this sort of reflexivity as impossible. Interestingly, skepticism
about reflexive self-awareness was already present in James
(1884).
Self-consciousness, if the word is to be used at all, must not be
described on the hallowed paraoptical model, as a torch that
illuminates itself by beams of its own light reflected from a mirror
in its own insides. (Ryle 1949: 39)
 No subjective state, whilst present, is its own object; its
object is always something else. (James 1884: 2)
Doubts about self-knowledge are also fueled by more general
epistemological concerns, such as the familiar worry that the
observational process unavoidably alters the target of observation
(Hill 1991),[1]
and doubts about the possibility of theory-free observations (Dennett
1991). Others argue that while self-attributions may constitute
self-knowledge, they are not epistemically superior to other kinds of
beliefs.
 I suspect … [that our] judgments about
the world to a large extent drive our judgments about our
experience. Properly so, since the former are the more
secure. (Schwitzgebel 2008: 268)

In the same vein, some (including Stich 1983) deny that
self-knowledge is special, relative to knowledge of others’
states, by claiming that ordinary (“folk”) concepts of
psychological states are theoretical concepts. If psychological states
are theoretical entities, both self-attributions and
other-attributions will proceed by inference from observed
data—presumably, behavior. (See the entry on
 folk psychology as a theory.)
Skepticism of a different kind stems from a puzzle raised by
Boghossian (1989). According to some prominent accounts, mental
states—in particular, attitudes such as desires and
beliefs—are individuated in part by their relations to other
states and/or the environment. On standard views, desiring
that q partly consists in being disposed to A when
one believes “A-ing is an effective means of
achieving q”; believing “A-ing is an
effective means of achieving q” partly consists in
being disposed to A when one desires that q. Some
philosophers take attitudes to be relational in another way as well,
namely that attitude contents depend on relations to the environment:
e.g., one cannot desire water unless H2O is (or
was) present in one’s environment. Boghossian’s puzzle
concerns how we could have privileged access to our
relationally-defined mental states.  He notes that there seem to be
three ways we might know our mental states: (a) on the basis of inner
observation, (b) on the basis of inference, or (c) on the basis of
nothing. But, he argues, each of these options presents
difficulties. Regarding (a): inner observation seems to reveal only
intrinsic features of a desire or a belief, not relational
features. Regarding (b): that we must rely on inference, to know our
own mental states, seems to imply that we lack privileged access to
them. Regarding (c): knowledge on the basis of nothing is rare at
best.  For example, the self-attribution “I’m now thinking
that writing requires concentration” involves thinking
that writing requires concentration. It is thus self-verifying, and
hence may constitute knowledge on the basis of nothing beyond that
thought (Burge 1988).  But most cases of self-knowledge are not like
this. Boghossian concludes that we face a trilemma regarding
self-knowledge.
Philosophers have responded to Boghossian’s trilemma in a
variety of ways. Some deny the assumption that recognizing a
relationally defined state requires identifying the relational
properties that make it the state that it is (Burge 1988; Heil 1988).
Others argue that self-knowledge can be privileged even if it rests on
inference (Dretske 1994; Byrne 2005). And some maintain that we can
know our attitudes through introspective observation, and that this
weakens the case for relational construals of attitudes (Pitt
2004).
2.2 Doubts based on empirical results
Empirical work in psychology constitutes another source of doubt
about the epistemic status of self-attributions. In a widely cited
paper, Nisbett and Wilson (1977) present studies showing that subjects
routinely misidentify the factors that influenced their reasoning
processes. For instance, subjects in one study explained their
preference for a product by its apparent quality, when in fact the
product’s spatial position relative to its competitors seemed to
drive the preferences.
The accuracy of subject reports is so poor as to suggest that any
introspective access that may exist is not sufficient to produce
generally correct or reliable reports. (1977: 33)
While these studies are instructive, their results are limited in
that they apply only to the unconscious sources of decisions; they are
silent as to our privileged access to our current states. Wilson now
acknowledges this limitation.
[T]o the extent that people’s responses are caused by the
conscious self, they have privileged access to the actual causes of
these responses; in short, the Nisbett and Wilson argument was wrong
about such cases. (Wilson 2002: 106)
Schwitzgebel (2002) has marshalled other sorts of empirical
evidence to show that introspective reports are unreliable. But
Schwitzgebel has also suggested that our attitudes about introspection
may be particularly obstinate. This conclusion is borne out by his
collaboration with a psychologist (Hurlburt and Schwitzgebel
2007). The authors collect introspective reports from a single
individual, who carries a beeper that sounds at random moments; when
it sounds, she is to note what she is currently thinking and
feeling. The two authors sometimes differ as to the correct
interpretation of the test subject’s reports, and as to her
introspective accuracy.  Strikingly, their disagreement about the
reliability of introspection remains even after their lengthy
discussion of the results.  Schwitzgebel attributes this disagreement,
in part, to their respective prior attitudes about introspection
(Hurlburt is “optimistic” while Schwitzgebel is “a
skeptic”).
This outcome suggests that not only careful empirical work, but
also difficult conceptual work, is required for determining
introspection’s reliability—or, in Goldman’s terms,
“calibrating” it.
A crucial problem for the theory of introspection is to fix its
range of reliability. This is the problem of calibration, which
arises for any scientific instrument and cognitive capacity. I would
subdivide the problem into two parts. One would seek to specify the
operational conditions under which introspection is (sufficiently)
reliable. The second would seek to specify the propositional contents
for which it is reliable. (Goldman 2004: 14)
As Goldman notes, we can fix the range of introspective reliability
only by using introspection and evaluating its results for
internal coherence and for consistency with other sources. But since
there is no clear consensus as to how to evaluate the results of
introspection, or what weight to accord other sources of evidence
about mental states, such as external stimuli and behavior,
introspection faces an especially thorny and complex problem of
calibration.
2.3 The anti-luminosity argument
Williamson (2000) has argued against a particular, seemingly
plausible thesis regarding self-knowledge: that someone experiencing a
sensation can know that she is experiencing that sensation. (That is,
sensations are “luminous”.) Williamson imagines a subject
who feels cold at dawn, but gradually warms until she feels warm at
noon. At some point she feels barely cold, and truly believes that she
feels cold. At the next moment, she feels only very slightly warmer
than at the previous moment; but since she felt barely cold at the
previous moment, at this later moment she may not, in fact, feel
cold. The fact that the thought “I feel cold” at the later
moment would be false implies that the previous (true) thought is not
“safe” enough to qualify as knowledge.  Given that
sensations are usually regarded as especially accessible, the fact
that one is not always in a position to know whether one is
experiencing a given sensation suggests that one is not always in a
position to know whether one is in any given mental state.
I will briefly sketch two prominent responses to Williamson. The
first highlights the limits of Williamson’s argument. That
argument appears to show that one is not always in a position to know
all of one’s own sensations; in particular, one is not always
able to detect sensations that are marginal or near-marginal, like
being barely cold.  But the argument seems not to threaten knowledge
in less marginal cases: if one is now very cold, the belief
“I feel cold” would not be false, in a nearly identical
situation (DeRose 2002). So Williamson’s argument doesn’t
show that no sensations are luminous.
In another response, Weatherson (2004) argues that sensations may
be constituents of corresponding self-attributions: the subject may
think “I’m having this sensation”, where
that thought incorporates the sensation as part of its content. (This
response dovetails with acquaintance accounts.) 
If having a sensation generally allows the subject to
form a self-attributing belief that appropriately incorporates that
sensation, then feeling cold may be luminous after all. For even a
slight difference between feeling cold and feeling not-cold will make
a difference in the corresponding
self-attributions.[2]
3. Accounts of Self-Knowledge
3.1 Acquaintance Accounts
The idea that we know our mental states
through acquaintance with them is usually associated with
Russell (1917), but such accounts trace their lineage at least to
Descartes.  
 According to these
accounts, our awareness of our mental states is sometimes
peculiarly direct, in both an epistemic sense and a
metaphysical sense. It is epistemically direct in that I am not aware
of my mental state by being aware of something else. It is
metaphysically direct in that no event or process mediates between my
awareness and the mental state itself. By contrast, I may be aware
that it rained last night only by being aware of the wet pavement;
and, more controversially, my visual experience may mediate between my
awareness of the pavement and the pavement itself.
The claim that introspective access is both epistemically and
metaphysically direct is most plausible for phenomenal states like
pain. This is because how a phenomenal state appears (epistemically)
and how it actually is (its ontology or nature) are, according to many
philosophers, one and the same.
Pain … is not picked out by one of its accidental
properties; rather it is picked out by the property of being pain
itself, by its immediate phenomenological quality. (Kripke 1980:
152–3)
[T]here is no appearance/reality distinction in the case of
sensations. (Hill 1991: 127)
Limiting acquaintance accounts to self-knowledge of phenomenal
states—or, more strictly, self-knowledge of mental states
individuated by phenomenology—does not entirely fix their scope,
as philosophers disagree as to which kinds of mental states are
individuated by phenomenology. Recently, the idea
that thoughts have a distinctive phenomenology has received
renewed attention (Bayne and Montague 2011; Kriegel 2013; see
the entry on 
 consciousness and intentionality).
 Pitt (2004) uses the fact that we seem able
to know what we’re thinking in a direct, highly secure
way—one that is best explained by an acquaintance model of
introspection—to argue that thoughts have distinctive
phenomenological properties with which we are acquainted. Some
philosophers also argue that conscious attitudes, such as judgments,
have distinctive phenomenologies.
The purported epistemic and metaphysical directness of
introspection does not imply that we are either infallible or
omniscient about our own states, since it is an open question whether
we routinely engage in introspection. But if introspection
involves epistemically and metaphysically direct access to one’s
phenomenal states, then its proper use may allow the relevant
self-attributions to achieve a high degree of certainty.
Acquaintance accounts hold special appeal for epistemic
foundationalists, who claim that all of our knowledge rests on a
foundation of beliefs that are justified, but not justified by other
beliefs.
 Acquaintance accounts provide for highly secure beliefs that are
justified by experiences rather than by other beliefs. For
example, Fumerton (2005) argues that an experience can directly
justify the belief that one is having that experience. In this
context, the truth-maker for a belief is the mental state that makes
it true: e.g., the truth-maker for “I’m in pain” is
the pain itself. (Terms in square brackets are mine).
One wants the truth-maker ‘before’ consciousness
[metaphysical directness] in a way that provides complete
intellectual assurance [epistemic directness] concerning the truth of
what one believes. (Fumerton 2005: 122)
One approach to explaining how experiences can directly justify
beliefs about them draws on the phenomenon of demonstrative reference
(Gertler 2001; Chalmers 2003). Demonstrative reference often involves
literal pointing: by pointing to my desk, I can demonstratively refer
to it as “that (desk)”. Of course, we don’t
literally point to our experiences. But as Sosa aptly observes,
“Selective attention is the index finger of the mind”
(2003: 279). By attending to how an experience feels (or appears),
one can use this appearance—e.g., the itchiness of an
itch—to refer to the feature demonstratively, as
“this quality”. One can then register the
presence of the itch by thinking “I’m now
experiencing this quality” Since reference is secured
by attending to the itchiness, one grasps the feature in
question, as itchiness. Chalmers, who has an especially
well-developed theory of phenomenal concepts along these lines, refers
to this grasp of phenomenal features as a “direct phenomenal
concept”.
The clearest cases of direct phenomenal concepts arise when a
subject attends to the quality of an experience, and forms a concept
wholly based on the attention to the quality, “taking up”
the quality into the concept. (Chalmers 2003: 235)
Some critics charge that acquaintance accounts construe
introspective beliefs as too close to their objects to qualify as
genuine, substantial knowledge. In effect, this objection denies that
introspective attention to an instance of a phenomenal quality can
provide for an understanding of that quality adequate for genuine
factual knowledge.
Another worry about acquaintance accounts stems from the
observation that we sometimes err about our experiences. In a famous
example, a fraternity pledge is blindfolded and told that his hand
will be burned with a cigarette. An icicle is then applied to his
hand, and the pledge responds by screaming as if in pain. On the
relevant interpretation of this case, the pledge mistakes coldness for
pain: it epistemically seems to him that his phenomenology is
that of pain. This kind of error is the basis for Schwitzgebel’s
objection to acquaintance accounts.
Philosophers who speak of “appearances” or
“seemings” in discussing consciousness invite conflation
of the epistemic and phenomenal senses of these terms. …
“It appears that it appears that such-and-such” may have
the look of redundancy, but on disambiguation the redundancy
vanishes: “it epistemically seems to me that my phenomenology
is such-and-such”. No easy argument renders this statement
self-verifying. (Schwitzgebel 2008: 263)
To answer this objection, acquaintance theorists will concede that
we can be wrong about our own phenomenal states. These accounts
require only that, under certain conditions, the phenomenal reality of
an experience constitutes its epistemic appearance (Horgan and Kriegel
2007; Gertler 2012).
The idea that we know (even some of) our sensations by acquaintance
remains highly controversial; the idea that we know our thoughts, or
our beliefs or other attitudes, by acquaintance is even more
controversial. As James (1884) observed, self-knowledge requires more
than mere contact with a mental state: it requires that one properly
conceptualize the state, classifying it as a state of a particular
kind (e.g., as pain or coldness). The most difficult hurdle for
acquaintance accounts is to explain how this conceptualization
occurs. In particular, the difficulty is to explain how awareness of a
mental state can be direct and immediate, yet epistemically
substantial—a genuine grasp of the state as a state of
a certain kind.
3.2 Inner Sense Accounts
While acquaintance accounts construe self-knowledge as strikingly
distinctive in its directness and epistemic security, inner sense
accounts take the opposite tack: they construe introspection as
similar to perception in crucial respects.
Locke, an early inner sense theorist, described the introspective
faculty as follows.
This Source of Ideas, every Man has wholly in himself …
And though it be not Sense, as having nothing to do with external
Objects; yet it is very like it, and might properly enough be
call’d internal Sense. (Locke 1689/1975:
II.1.iv.)
Inner sense accounts construe introspection as similar to
perception in that it involves a monitoring mechanism or
“self-scanning process” (Armstrong 1993: 324) that takes
mental states as input and yields representations of those states as
output. On such accounts, and in contrast to acquaintance accounts,
the connection between the introspected state (the input) and the
introspective state (the output) is causal and contingent. But inner
sense accounts allow that introspection also differs from perception
in significant ways.  Perception is achieved through dedicated organs
such as eyes and ears, whereas there is no (literal) organ of
introspection. “The ‘organ’ of introspection is
attention, the orientation of which puts a subject in an appropriate
relation to a targeted state” (Goldman 2006: 244). Perception
ordinarily involves sensory experiences, whereas “No one thinks
that one is aware of beliefs and thoughts by having sensations or
quasi-sense-experiences of them” (Shoemaker 1994: 255).
The monitoring mechanism involved in inner sense must form
representations of the mental states it takes as input. But how does
this process ensure that the output (the representation of the scanned
mental state) matches the input (the scanned state itself)? On some
inner sense accounts, the output representation
“redeploys” the content of the input state (Nichols and
Stich 2003; Goldman 2006).  But as Goldman points out, the
redeployment of content—even when “content” is used
broadly, to include sensory-experiential contents—cannot fully
explain the transition from the scanned mental state to the
representation thereof. A complete account must also explain how the
introspective process correctly classifies the type of mental
state at issue: as, e.g., a visual experience, belief, or
desire. Goldman proposes that the introspective process uses the
neural properties of states to type-identify them (Goldman 2006:
ch. 9).
Inner sense accounts’ construal of introspection as a causal
process makes them particularly well-suited to reliabilist (or, more
broadly, epistemically externalist) approaches to self-knowledge.
 For example, Armstrong
characterizes the introspective process as “a mere flow of
information or beliefs” (Armstrong 1993: 326). The causal
connections involved in self-monitoring need not be known by the
subject in order to deliver self-knowledge, and inner sense accounts
generally regard knowledge based in introspection as
non-inferential. Since the relevant scanners or monitoring mechanisms
are directed only towards one’s own states, introspection is an
exclusively first-personal method. But at least some inner sense
theorists note that the asymmetry of access is merely contingent, as
it is possible, in principle, for one’s “inner
sense” mechanism to be linked to someone else’s mental
states. Armstrong finds it “perfectly conceivable that we should
have direct [read: non-inferential] awareness of the mental states of
others”, through a kind of telepathic scanning (1993: 124).
Perhaps the chief benefit of inner sense accounts is that they are
especially conducive to a broadly naturalistic picture of mentality,
according to which mentality is part of nature broadly continuous with
the nonmental realm. By assimilating introspection to perception,
inner sense accounts construe mentality as epistemically continuous
with the nonmental, and thus allow a single overarching epistemology
to apply to both self-knowledge and knowledge of external
things. Since most of the leading arguments for mind-body dualism
depend on the claim that our epistemic relations to mental states
diverge in crucial ways from our epistemic relations to physical
objects, the claim that the mental is epistemically continuous with
the nonmental paves the way for assimilating mentality to the
nonmental realm ontologically as 
well.[3]
Shoemaker (1994) offers a sustained critique of inner sense
accounts. His main objection centers on the charge that, if we knew
our own mental states through a perception-like mechanism, then the
following scenario would be possible. A rational creature with
ordinary mental states like pains and beliefs, and possessing concepts
of pain and belief, might be “self-blind”: that is, unable
to recognize its own thoughts and sensations. But, he says,
self-blindness in a rational creature is impossible. Inner sense
accounts imply that self-blindness is possible, Shoemaker thinks,
because they regard the capacity for self-knowledge as on a par with
sensory capacities like vision, and hence as a capacity that a
rational person might lack. Shoemaker’s discussion has been as
influential for its positive suggestion—that our capacity for
self-knowledge is closely tied to rationality
(see 3.6 and 3.7)—as
for its critical treatment of inner sense accounts.
Shoemaker presents three main arguments to show that self-blindness
is impossible in a rational creature. First, mental states
like pains are defined, in part, by the behaviors they
rationalize, such as taking aspirin; such behaviors aren’t
rational unless the subject is aware of the pain. Second, one is not a
rational subject unless one can recognize, in certain circumstances,
that one’s beliefs (or other attitudes) should be modified; and
this recognition requires awareness of one’s attitudes. Third,
rational subjects will, necessarily, generally behave as if they are
aware of their beliefs: e.g., they will not assert “snow is
white” unless they are also disposed to assert “I believe
that snow is white”. And this suggests that, necessarily,
rational subjects are generally aware of their beliefs.

 I am tempted to say that if everything is as
if a creature has knowledge of its beliefs and desires, then
it does have knowledge of them. (Shoemaker 1988:
192)
Kind (2003) contends that these arguments do not directly threaten
inner sense accounts. At most, she thinks, Shoemaker has shown that
rational creatures will generally be capable of self-awareness. But
since this conclusion is silent as to how such awareness
occurs, it does not rule out the possibility that it is achieved
through inner sense. Gertler (2011a: ch. 5) contends that the inner
sense theorist can block Shoemaker’s objection by stipulating
that no creature qualifies as rational unless it has the
characteristics Shoemaker sees as “essential to being a rational
being”: this may mean that having a well-functioning inner sense
(or something equivalent) is required for being rational.
Shoemaker’s challenge to inner sense views requires a stronger
thesis, namely that rational beings must be capable of self-knowledge
in order to exist at all.
Another objection to inner sense accounts targets their epistemic
externalism. Peacocke notes that while these accounts postulate
“a genuine explanation [of one’s self-ascription] at the
sub-personal level”, this explanation does not explain why we
have any reason to endorse the self-attributions it generates
(Peacocke 1999: 224). Inner sense accounts are not likely to appeal to
those who take self-knowledge to rest on internal or
accessible reasons for belief.
3.3 The Interpretive-Sensory Account
Like inner sense accounts, Carruthers’ interpretive-sensory
access (or ISA) account takes self-knowledge to arise through a
subpersonal cognitive system that is reliable yet fallible (Carruthers
2011). But the ISA account denies a key assumption of inner sense
accounts, namely, that there is a cognitive faculty dedicated
specifically to self-knowledge. It proposes that a single
“mindreading” system detects both one’s own mental
states and the mental states of others. This “mindreading”
system takes sensory data as input; interprets these data by
drawing on situational facts and background information; and yields
representations of mental states as output.
One striking feature of the ISA account is its claim that nearly
all self-knowledge requires self-interpretation. This fits with the
idea that a single mindreading system provides both self-knowledge and
other-knowledge, since it is plausible that we
understand others’ attitudes by interpretation (of
their speech and other behavior). Carruthers argues that the frequency
with which we err about our own attitudes, through confabulation or
other sorts of processes, supports the claim that in
identifying our own attitudes we are forced to engage—often
unsuccessfully—in self-interpretation. He hypothesizes that the
mindreading system “evolved for outward-looking social
purposes” and was only later co-opted for self-knowledge (2011:
69).
The ISA account converges with Ryle’s (1949) view about
self-knowledge at some crucial points. (I’m indebted here to
Byrne 2012a.) One of these is the claim that inner speech contributes
significantly to self-knowledge, in a way that roughly parallels outer
speech’s contribution to other-knowledge. Ryle suggests that the
experience of inner speech is a maximally effective type of
“eavesdropping”.
We eavesdrop on our own voiced utterances and our own silent
monologues. In noticing these we are preparing ourselves to do
something new, namely to describe the frames of mind which these
utterances disclose. But there is nothing intrinsically proprietary
about this activity. I can pay heed to what I overhear you saying as
well as to what I overhear myself saying, though I cannot overhear
your silent colloquies with yourself. (Ryle 1949:
184)
Drawing on Ryle’s remark about hearing our own silent
colloquies, Cassam (2011) sketches a proposal about how we know our
“passing thoughts”, where having the passing thought
that p does not involve taking any particular attitude
towards p. Cassam proposes that “I know that I am
having the thought that P by being conscious of saying to
myself that P in my internal monologue” (2011:
3). Carruthers endorses a broadly similar proposal, arguing that
passing thoughts expressed in inner speech can be known without
interpretation (Carruthers 2011: 107–8). On the ISA view,
interpretation is not required for such knowledge, or for knowledge of
any state that can be recognized solely on the basis of raw sensory
data, since sensory data are the inputs to the mindreading system.
Carruthers argues that because judgments, decisions, and other
attitudes are defined by their causal roles, these cannot be known
purely on the basis of an experience of inner speech or other sensory
data.
 [T]he experience of [a sentence in inner speech]
surely isn’t, itself, a judgment, or a decision, or any other
occurrent attitude. (2011: 68)

 This point echoes the first horn of
Boghossian’s trilemma; the ISA
theorist’s response to that trilemma is to take self-knowledge
(of the relevant states) to be inferential. Some will balk at the idea
that self-interpretation is required for determining that I’m
now judging that p, or deciding to q. However, this
issue may have more to do with disputes about whether occurrent
attitudes have distinctive phenomenologies than with accounts of
self-knowledge.
Some critics will target the ISA account’s claim that a
single mindreading system, one that developed to provide for
other-knowledge, also subserves self-knowledge. This claim is closely
linked to the idea that our basic conception of mental
states—“folk psychology”—derives from
theorizing.  Those who reject that idea will maintain that the ISA
account reverses the proper explanatory order, since our basic
conception of mental states derives not from theory but from our
awareness of such states in ourselves, achieved by use of an
exclusively first-personal faculty of introspection.
3.4 The Reasons Account
The accounts discussed in 3.1–3.3 exemplify two starkly
different epistemological approaches to self-knowledge. Acquaintance
theorists maintain that self-knowledge can sometimes satisfy strongly
internalist conditions, conditions that require, for knowledge
that p, that one’s belief that p be based in
reasons or evidence that are accessible to the subject. A pain or itch
that is known by acquaintance is grasped through accessible evidence:
the painfulness or itchiness itself. Inner sense accounts and the ISA
account construe (most) self-knowledge in epistemically externalist
terms. Beliefs qualify as knowledge by virtue of some feature not
directly accessible to the thinking subject, such as the fact that
they appropriately result from the exercise of a reliable (inner sense
or mindreading) mechanism.
The reasons account of self-knowledge, first advanced by
Peacocke (1999), combines elements of internalism and elements of
externalism. Peacocke rejects pure externalism, maintaining that when
I self-attribute the belief that (say) in Australia July is a winter
month, this self-attribution seems to me rational, in that I have an
accessible, “personal-level” reason for it. He attempts to
carve out a fourth option for self-knowledge, beyond the three options
expressed in Boghossian’s trilemma,
arguing that we can know some of our mental states without observing
them, or by inference; yet this knowledge is still on the basis of
something, namely a reason.
According to the reasons account, a conscious state can serve as a
reason for belief or action, even if the thinker is not
conscious of the state. The following analogy may illuminate
the basic idea here. An itch can serve as a reason for scratching,
even if there is no further conscious state (distinct from the itch)
that constitutes an awareness of the itch. Peacocke argues
that, in a broadly similar way, a conscious judgment that p
can serve as a direct reason for my self-attributing the belief
that p, without my having any distinct awareness of
that judgment. (Compare Silins 2012.)
The transition from judging that p (a conscious, occurrent
state) to believing that one believes that p (that is, to
self-attributing a dispositional belief) is a rational one, on this
view, because judging is conceptually linked with believing: making a
judgment “is the fundamental way to form a belief”
(Peacocke 1999: 238). Similarly, since remembering that p is
conceptually linked with (dispositionally) believing that p,
a conscious memory that p can justify the belief that one
believes that p. And anyone in a position to self-attribute
a belief will possess the concept of belief, and so will
grasp—or at least, manifest cognitive dispositions
appropriately reflecting—these conceptual
truths.[4]
Drawing on Peacocke, Paul (2012) develops a reasons account of how
we know our intentions. On this account, the transition from deciding
to do something (or remembering that one has so decided) to believing
that one intends to do that thing is rational, since it is a
conceptual truth that deciding normally suffices for intending.
Coliva (2008) objects that judgments cannot rationalize
self-attributions of belief in the way the reasons theorist contends,
because they are not suitably accessible. Her argument rests, in part,
on the claim that the phenomenology of a conscious thought—such
as “things will look up”—does not indicate whether
this is the content of a judgment or, instead, of a wish. McHugh
(2012) responds on behalf of the reasons account, arguing that there
is a “phenomenology characteristic of judging
that p” that is present in cases where ordinary
self-knowledge is possible (2012: 148). The prospects for the reasons
account, as an account of self-knowledge of the attitudes, may depend
on whether attitudes have “proprietary phenomenology”
(Pitt 2004). (For more on that question, see Bayne and Montague
2011.)
3.5 Transparency Accounts 
Transparency accounts are inspired by the idea discussed above, in
connection with Gareth Evans’ famous remark: that if asked
whether you believe that there will be a third world war, you answer
by directly considering the likelihood of a third world war. The
metaphor of transparency expresses the notion that one “looks
through” the (transparent) mental state to directly consider
what it represents.
Evans’ remark concerns beliefs specifically. Most
transparency theorists develop their accounts as explanations of how
we know our beliefs, and later expand these accounts to cover some
other kinds of states. Within the class of transparency accounts,
there are profoundly differing views about how self-knowledge is
achieved and its epistemic status. Some transparency theorists hold
that the self-attributions generated by following Evans’
procedure qualify as knowledge only because of our rational
agency relative to our attitudes—roughly, the fact that
believing, intending (etc.) are things we do, on the basis of
reasons. These agentialist accounts will be discussed
in subsection 3.7 below.
The current subsection focuses on transparency accounts that see
Evans’ procedure as generating empirical justification or
warrant for self-attributions, justification or warrant that does not
rest on our rational agency relative to our attitudes. According to
these accounts, the transparency of mental states provides for an
exclusively first-personal method of knowing them, and explains the
special security of self-attributions. I will briefly survey the three
leading empiricist transparency accounts—developed by Dretske
(1994), Fernández (2003, 2013), and Byrne (2005, 2011a).
Dretske describes self-knowledge as “a form of perceptual
knowledge that is obtained—indeed, can only be obtained—by
awareness of non-mental objects” (Dretske 1994: 264). E.g., I
can know that I’m thinking it’s snowing only by
inference from my awareness of a non-mental object, such as the
falling snow. This account secures first-person authority, since my
awareness of the snow would not similarly support an inference about
anyone else’s mental state. The account requires that we rely on
background beliefs to justify the inference from seeing snow
to I’m thinking that it’s snowing. Aydede (2003)
has questioned whether these background beliefs will themselves be
available (or justified).
Fernández’s version of the transparency account avoids
this worry about background beliefs, by taking self-knowledge to be
non-inferential. He argues that a mental state, and a self-attribution
of that state, can share a single basis. For example, seeing snow
falling will ordinarily result in the belief that it’s snowing;
this visual experience may also form the basis for the
self-attribution I believe that it’s snowing, according
to Fernández. So a single state can serve as the basis for both
the belief that p and the belief that I believe
that p.
Fernández (2013) labels this “the bypass model”, to
indicate that the self-attribution is based directly on the basis for
the first-order belief, “bypassing” the first-order belief
itself. The self-attribution is justified in a way that is
“partly internalist, and partly externalist” (ibid.:
44).  If I reflect on
why I believe that I believe that it’s snowing, I will realize
that I (seem to) see falling snow; so I have access to the basis for
my self-attribution. And my seeming to see falling snow provides
externalist warrant for my self-attribution because that perceptual
state tends to correlate with my believing that it’s
snowing.
The bypass method is exclusively first-personal, since only I can
base a belief directly on my perceptual state. And it is more
secure than others’ means of knowing my mental states. Others
know my states only by inference—from my behavior, and/or their
observations of the evidence available to me. But
self-knowledge that satisfies the bypass model is non-inferential,
since the self-attribution (e.g., the belief that I believe that
it’s snowing) is not inferred from its basis (e.g., seeing
falling snow).
By contrast, Byrne’s (2005, 2011a) transparency account is
explicitly inferentialist. He claims that we know our beliefs by
reasoning according to the “doxastic schema” described by
Gallois (1996).
pI believe that ppI believe that p\frac{p}{\mbox{I believe that } p}
Byrne argues that reasoning in accord with the doxastic schema is
in a certain sense self-verifying. To reason in accord with the
doxastic schema is to infer I believe that p from the
premise p; one does not infer from a premise unless one
believes the premise; so such reasoning will yield only true
self-attributions. The doxastic schema is thus
self-verifying.[5]
 And it is self-verifying regardless of
whether the premise is justified, or even whether the thinker regards
it as justified. 
Byrne’s main thesis, that self-knowledge is achieved through
use of the doxastic schema, rests on two basic claims. The first is
that it’s independently plausible that we actually use the
doxastic schema (as Evans’ remarks suggest). The second basic
claim anchoring Byrne’s view is that the hypothesis that we use
the doxastic schema best explains the special security and asymmetry
of self-knowledge. On his proposal, the special epistemic security of
self-knowledge is a matter of externalist warrant: the doxastic
schema is not only self-verifying but also yields self-attributions
that are “safe” in that they could not easily have been
false.[6] 
  Byrne’s proposal also captures the
asymmetry of self-knowledge: reasoning from “p”
to “s/he believes that p” will not reliably
yield true other-attributions, since one’s own recognition
that p is not appropriately connected
to others’ beliefs about whether p.
How plausible are these transparency accounts? These accounts
endorse Evans’ idea that directly considering whether p
can enable us to answer the question “Do you believe
that p?”. But as Shah and Velleman (2005) observe, this
procedure may generate a new belief.
[O]ne can answer the question whether I now believe that p by
forming a conscious belief with respect to p, whereupon one’s
consciousness of that belief will provide the answer; but one cannot
answer the question whether I already believe that p in a way that
begins with forming the belief. (2005: 506)
For example, Evans’ suggestion seems to be that to answer the
question “Do you believe that there will be a third world
war?” one should consider geopolitical matters. But
such consideration may produce a new belief rather than revealing a
pre-existing belief. The transparency theorist cannot respond to this
worry by stipulating that, when considering whether p, one
should not draw any new conclusions. Avoiding new
conclusions would require already knowing one’s beliefs, that
is, which conclusions one had already
drawn.[7]
Transparency theorists will respond by noting that these accounts
do not recommend strategies for determining what one believes. They
simply aim to explain the provenance of privileged self-attributions,
by identifying processes that could generate self-attributions with
the epistemic features characteristic of self-knowledge. IF my belief
that I believe that p is appropriately inferred from my
awareness of p (Dretske), or based on my basis for believing
that p (Fernández), or inferred from the premise
that p (Byrne), THEN this belief is especially secure
self-knowledge, achieved through an exclusively first-personal method.
These ways of arriving at self-attributions may not be conscious, and
need not be triggered by the thinker’s wondering about her
beliefs. Even if they are so triggered, and the process
creates a new belief, the self-attributions may nonetheless qualify as
knowledge (about what one believes at the time of the
self-attribution).
Still, the objection exposes a limit to transparency accounts: they
cannot distinguish newly-formed judgments from previous dispositional
beliefs, and so cannot account for our apparent ability to know what
we believe at the time the question “Do you believe
that p?” is posed (Gertler 2011b). Byrne responds
that
 the transparency proposal … is not
that one can determine that one believes that p
at t1 by examining the evidence at a later time t2 and
concluding that p. (Byrne 2011a: 208)

 The significance of this limitation depends on a
larger question, as to whether privileged access attaches to
knowledge of one’s own dispositional beliefs—which on
many views are the central type of belief—or only to conscious
or occurrent judgments.
A different objection concerns these accounts’ presumption
that self-knowledge need not meet epistemically internalist conditions
on knowledge. Boyle (2011) targets Byrne’s view on this point,
arguing that even if the inference from p to I believe
that p reliably yields true (and safe) self-attributions, this
inference cannot explain self-knowledge since it will not appear
reasonable to the thinker: after all, in general the fact
that p doesn’t imply that I believe that p.
(Fernández addresses this worry, in arguing that beliefs formed
through the bypass method will seem reasonable to the subject.)
Valaris (2011) argues that the transition from p to I
believe that p is not a genuine inference, since it cannot be
used in hypothetical contexts—e.g., when one reasons from a
premise one doesn’t believe, merely to see what follows from
it.
Some transparency theorists extend the account to cover attitudes
other than belief, such as desires and intentions (Byrne 2011a,
Fernández 2013; for worries about these extensions of
the transparency account, see Ashwell 2013a,b). Byrne also extends the
account to knowing what one thinks and what one perceives (Byrne 2011b,
2012b). Other objections to the more general transparency approach to
desires and intentions are discussed in 3.7, as
they also apply to agentialist versions of transparency. 
3.6 Rationalist Accounts 
The accounts of self-knowledge outlined thus far share a common
feature: they all construe self-knowledge as a form of empirical
knowledge. This is not to say that our capacity for reasoning plays no
role in these theories; after all, these are intended to explain how
self-knowledge is achieved by thinkers like us, who can engage in
ordinary reasoning (such as making inferences and recognizing plain
conceptual truths). But these theories attach no special importance to
our rationality per se.
Rationalist accounts of self-knowledge maintain that our status as
rational thinkers contributes substantially to self-knowledge.
Agentialist accounts (discussed in the next section) also take our
status as rational thinkers to contribute substantially to
self-knowledge, but on agentialist views this contribution is linked
with the agency exercised in rational deliberation. I reserve the term
“rationalist” for accounts that emphasize the
rationality’s significance for self-knowledge, independent of
claims about our cognitive agency. The two leading rationalist views
are Gallois’ (1996) and Shoemaker’s (1994).
Here again is Gallois’ “doxastic schema” (Gallois
1996):
pI believe that ppI believe that p\frac{p}{\mbox{I believe that } p}
Like Byrne, Gallois maintains that
reasoning according to the doxastic schema generates
self-knowledge. But unlike Byrne, Gallois takes the resulting
self-knowledge to meet epistemically internalist conditions for
knowledge. Gallois’ claim is that whenever a rational thinker
consciously believes that p, she is justified in
self-attributing that belief. He argues as follows. No rational
thinker will have a conscious belief unless she regards that belief
as justified—that is, unless it is subjectively
justified.  And subjective justification for a belief must be
available to the thinker, and recognizable as her subjective
justification.[8]
Finally, a rational person who regards herself as justified in
believing that p is justified in self-attributing the belief
that p.
Gallois’ view is a transparency account, since it denies that
the self-attribution of a belief is based on observing or scanning the
belief. But the central role played by rationality, in his picture,
sharply distinguishes it from the empiricist transparency accounts
described in the previous subsection. This difference enables
Gallois’ account to allow for strong internalist justification
for self-attributions. But it also limits that account, to beliefs
that the thinker regards as justified.
Shoemaker defends a thesis about the extent of self-knowledge known as
 “constitutivism”,[9]
 namely: for rational thinkers, being in
certain mental states constitutes knowledge that one is in
them.
  [A]ll you have to add to the available first-order
belief, in order to get the second-order belief is the appropriate
degree of intelligence, etc. It is not that adding this pushes the
creature into a new state, distinct from any it was in before…
(Shoemaker 1994: 288–9)
Shoemaker limits the constitutivist thesis to rational thinkers who
have the appropriate repertoire of mental state concepts (the concepts
of belief, desire, pain, etc.). His argument that such thinkers must
be capable of self-knowledge rests on his objections to perceptual
models of introspection, outlined in  3.2 above: 
namely, that no such thinker could be incapable of
self-knowledge (“self-blind”). For a self-blind person
would (i) fall into certain conceptual errors, such as asserting
transparency-violating sentences (“It’s raining but I
don’t believe that it is”); (ii) be unable to communicate
his beliefs, and hence to engage in cooperative endeavors; (iii) be
devoid of true agency, since agency involves higher-order deliberation
regarding lower-order states; and (iv) regard himself “as a
stranger”, e.g., in observing himself taking aspirin without
grasping that he was in pain.
Importantly, Shoemaker sees the capacity for self-knowledge as an
essential part of our rational nature. In effect, he is proposing that
what it is for a rational creature to have a belief is, in part, for
that creature to be aware of that belief; what it is for a rational
creature to be in pain is, in part, for it to be aware of that pain;
etc. He tentatively proposes a functionalist analysis of these
constitution relations (ibid.: 287–9).
Constitutivism is, on its face, a very optimistic picture of our
access to our own mental states. An obvious worry concerns mundane
cases of ignorance or self-deception. The constitutivist may regard
such phenomena as involving failures of rationality and, therefore,
as falling outside the scope of the constitutivist thesis. Peacocke
(1999) worries that, if a mental state partly constitutes the belief
that one is in it, then from the thinker’s perspective, the
latter belief may seem 
baseless.[10]
Rationalist accounts must strike a delicate balance. The idea that
our rationality guarantees that we grasp, or are capable of grasping,
our own mental states is plausible only on a fairly demanding
conception of what it is to be rational. For example, Gallois’
account requires that rational thinkers have access to (what they
regard as) justification for every conscious belief they possess.
Insofar as rationalist accounts invoke highly demanding conceptions of
rationality, one may reasonably wonder whether they truly describes
the situation of cognitively flawed creatures like us.
3.7 Agentialist Accounts
The accounts of self-knowledge canvassed thus far treat
self-knowledge as a largely epistemic phenomenon, concerning the
thinker’s access to her mental states. But as noted
in Section 1, some philosophers deny that the
special character of self-attributions is primarily epistemic. One
version of this denial charges that by focusing on our access
to our mental states, standard accounts of self-knowledge portray the
thinker engaged in self-reflection as passive, a mere spectator (or
detector) of a cognitive show.  Agentialists contend that some of our
mental life expresses our agency—e.g., believing and intending
are things we do.  Moreover, recognizing an attitude as
one’s own involves seeing it as a commitment for which one is
responsible (Burge 1996; Moran 2001; Bilgrami 2006; Boyle 2009; Coliva
2012a).
Here, Moran expresses the agentialist outlook.
The phenomena of self-knowledge … are themselves based as
much in asymmetries of responsibility and commitment as they are in
difference in capacities or in cognitive access. (Moran 2001:
64)
Agentialism is inspired by a broadly Kantian approach to reason and
agency, according to which a thinker’s most basic
self-conception is agential: to regard oneself as “I” is
to see oneself as an author of thoughts, rather than as
something in which thoughts merely
occur. This self-conception is also a conception of oneself
as rational, as a thing that believes and intends (etc.) on
the basis of reasons.
Agentialists maintain that our rational agency guarantees that we
are capable of—or even that we possess—self-knowledge. But
particular versions of agentialism differ as to the precise link
between agency and self-knowledge.
I begin with Burge, who maintains that our responsibility for our
beliefs entitles us to self-attributions. To establish this
point, Burge uses the following (seemingly transcendental)
reasoning. Our rational agency confers on us certain
obligations vis-à-vis our beliefs. In particular, we
are obligated to (try to) satisfy certain rational norms: that
one’s beliefs should conform to one’s evidence; that a
belief set should be internally consistent; etc. In order to satisfy
these rational norms—e.g., to assess our beliefs for conformance
with our evidence, or for consistency with other beliefs—we must
rely on judgments as to which beliefs we have. So our responsibility
to satisfy rational norms epistemically entitles us to those judgments
about our attitudes that are crucial for satisfying those norms.
[I]f one lacked entitlement to judgments about one’s
attitudes, one could not be subject to rational norms governing how
one ought to alter those attitudes given that one had reflected on
them.  (Burge 1996: 101)
The distinctively agentialist dimension of our entitlement to
self-knowledge is that the relevant judgments about our own attitudes
are permissible, since they are required for the kind of critical
reasoning about our attitudes that we are obligated to undertake, in
our effort to satisfy rational 
norms.[11]
Burge does not describe how we arrive at judgments about our
attitudes to which we are entitled. What is crucial is that we are
capable of the kind of self-knowledge that is needed for critical
reasoning. When engaged in critical reflection on one’s own
beliefs, those beliefs will be directly sensitive to one’s
reasons: e.g., there will be an “immediate rationally necessary
connection” (1996: 109) between the discovery that a particular
belief is unjustified and the suspension of that belief.
Moran, in contrast, does outline a procedure for achieving
self-knowledge, namely, the transparency method. He argues that facts
about our rational agency justify our use of this method.

 [A]s I conceive of myself as a rational agent,
… I can report on my belief about X by considering
(nothing but) X itself. (Moran 2001: 84)

 Moran’s account of how the transparency
method yields knowledge differs markedly from empiricist transparency
accounts (3.5 above). First, on Moran’s
view considering X itself involves marshaling reasons
bearing on X. Returning to Evans’ example: in response
to the question “Do you believe there will be a third world
war?”, I directly consider evidence bearing on that question,
e.g., concerning geopolitics. Second, whereas empiricist transparency
accounts are entirely compatible with our being passive, relative to
our attitudes, Moran argues that the transparency procedure provides
knowledge of one’s own beliefs only insofar as those beliefs
express our rational agency. On his view, the transparency method
justifies a self-attribution such as “I believe that there will
be a third world war” only because reflection on evidence
enables one to commit to the self-attributed belief. That
self-attribution is then an avowal: it does not simply
register the belief’s presence but expresses commitment to
it.
O’Brien worries that Moran’s account is too
demanding. She argues that I am not justified in self-attributing the
belief that there will be a third world war, on the basis of
considering geopolitics, unless I recognize that my reasons for
expecting a third world war constitute evidence that I believe it will
occur. But this recognition in turn requires a reflective grasp of the
nature of deliberation that seems unnecessary for ordinary
self-attributions (O’Brien 2003: 379–81).
Moran accepts that the link between evidence bearing on
whether p, and the belief that p, should be
accessible to ordinary thinkers. His explanation of this link
illustrates the central significance of rational agency in his larger
epistemic picture. He reasons as follows. We could not engage in
rational thought unless we had the epistemic right to “something
like a Transcendental assumption of Rational Thought”: the
assumption that we are rational, in that our attitudes are shaped by
our reasons. So we do have the epistemic right to that assumption. And
our right to that assumption gives us the epistemic right to use the
transparency method, that is, to answer to the question “do you
believe that p?” by directly marshaling reasons bearing
on p. (Boyle (2009) provides a different argument for a
Moran-style view.)
Bilgrami (2006) also develops an agentialist view of
self-knowledge.  Like Burge and Moran, Bilgrami regards self-knowledge
as intimately tied to the phenomenon of rational agency. But his view
is not merely that, as thinkers responsible for our attitudes, we must
be capable of coming to know them (Moran would add: by use of a particular
method). Rather, he argues that we could not exercise the agency
involved in believing unless, in believing, we already knew what we
believed. Beliefs are necessarily known by the thinker because they
are commitments.
[I]t is the nature of commitments that they are [known by the
thinker]. … [C]ommitments … are states that, were we
not to live up to them, we should be prepared to criticize ourselves
and be prepared also to try and do better, by way of living up to
them… We cannot therefore have commitments without believing
that we have them. … Thus the very condition for having a
commitment presupposes that one has a second-order belief that one
has that commitment. (2006: 287)
On similar grounds, Bilgrami argues that our agency, relative to
our commitments, ensures that we will not err in self-ascribing a
commitment.
This latter claim is also advanced by Coliva (2012a), who develops
a version of agentialism she calls constructivism. Coliva
argues that self-ascriptions of commitments—which for her
include not only beliefs and intentions but also rationally held
conative attitudes, such as desires—will always be true
(provided that the thinker in question is rational and has the
relevant concepts), because these self-ascriptions
will create the attitudes ascribed.
When understood in the way proposed, a judgement (or a sincere
assertion) such as  “I believe/desire/intend/wish/hope
that P” is like a performative, namely like “I
promise to buy you an ice-cream”… : it makes a certain
thing happen, for it does create the first-order
propositional attitude as a commitment. … [This] is possible
precisely because judging “I believe/desire/intend/wish/hope
that P” becomes just an alternative way of undertaking the same
commitments one would make by judging that P (is worth
pursuing or having)… (2012a: 235–6)
We now consider the prospects for agentialism generally. Some
critics will deny that agentialism can explain the epistemic dimension
of self-knowledge. Although agentialists generally downplay the
significance of the epistemic, agentialists must explain why certain
self-attributions qualify as knowledge; otherwise, agentialism is not
a genuine competitor to the accounts of self-knowledge described
above.  Because the various versions of agentialism differ as to the
justification or warrant attaching to judgments about one’s
attitudes, their responses to this challenge will differ.
A possible drawback of agentialism is its limited application.
It applies only to attitudes that express our rational agency, and
hence only to attitudes that are sensitive to reasons. But many of
our attitudes are insensitive to
 reasons.[12]
 Beliefs that are deeply entrenched (such as superstitions) or
comforting (as in wishful thinking) sometimes persevere in the face
of counter-evidence. Intentions that run counter to one’s
goals sometimes withstand practical deliberation.  Desires sometimes
clash with deeper values. Agentialists generally allow that we may
have privileged access to such attitudes, through some observational
process. But they maintain that the need for observation signals
that the attitude is problematic. If I can know about my own
attitude only through observation, then I am “alienated”
(Moran 2001) from that attitude; my relation to it, qua agent, is
“brute, contingent, non-rational” (Burge 1996); and I
can view it only from a “third-person perspective”
(Bilgrami 2006) and not “as my own” (Boyle
 2009).[13]
Critics of agentialism maintain that knowing an attitude through an
observational process does not preclude a thinker from regarding it
as her own in the relevant sense. Reed (2010) argues that
empirical investigation is sometimes required to determine what one
believes on a certain issue: in his example, an economist must
consult her previous work to determine her position on a complex
question about taxation, but she nonetheless fully endorses that
belief as her own.  Similarly, Lawlor (2009) argues that reflection
on reasons (e.g., on larger goals or values) is sometimes
insufficient to grasp our desires.  In such cases, she claims, we
grasp a desire only through inference from introspected cues: e.g.,
imagining the situation in question; noticing that this exercise is
associated with a certain phenomenology, say of eager anticipation;
and inferring that we desire that that situation come
about.[14]
3.8 Expressivist Accounts 
Expressivist views highlight similarities between utterances like
“I’m in pain” and direct expressions of one’s
mental states, such as “ouch!” The most radical version of
expressivism—what Bar-On (2004) calls Simple Expressivism,
sometimes attributed to Wittgenstein—denies that utterances like
“I’m in pain” are even truth-apt, let alone reflect
knowledge of one’s mental states. On this view, an utterance
like “I’m in pain” expresses only pain, and not the
belief or knowledge that one is in pain. This utterance does not
express anything true or false, any more than wincing expresses
something true or false. So while simple expressivism aims to explain
how utterances like “I’m in pain” function, it is
not an account of self-knowledge.
However, the idea that utterances like “I’m in
pain”—avowals—directly express the mental
states they ascribe has inspired recent accounts of self-knowledge
(Finkelstein 2003; Bar-On 2004). These more recent accounts differ
from expressivism in allowing that avowals are true (or false). They
are aptly characterized as neo-expressivist (borrowing
Bar-On’s label for her own view).
Neo-expressivists emphasize the directness with which a mental
state can issue in an avowal. In particular, they maintain that no
judgment to the effect that I’m in pain or desire water
intervenes between my pain or desire and my utterance “I’m
in pain” or “I want water”. Just as a wince flows
from my pain directly, and is not based on a judgment to the effect
that I’m in pain, a spontaneous avowal like “I want
water” flows from my desire directly, unmediated by any
judgment; but it may be true nonetheless.
The central phenomenon that neo-expressivism seeks to explain is
first-person authority: that we ordinarily accept avowals without
hesitation, and we don’t expect the subject to be in a position
to cite evidence that she is in pain or wants water.
(Neo-expressivists allow that these practices, while standard, admit
of exceptions.[15]) 
 The special role of avowals is not
limited to public statements; one can avow “in thought”
with the same authority involved in spontaneous verbal expressions
(Bar-On 2004: 9; Finkelstein 2003: 103).  First-person authority
stems from the fact that it is only the subject herself who can
directly express her states through an avowal.
Neo-expressivists differ in how they understand first-person
authority and, relatedly, in how the distinctive features of avowals
relate to self-knowledge.
Finkelstein allows that my avowal “I’m so happy!”
may be caused by my happiness. But he denies that this is a matter of
brute causation, as hitting someone’s knee with a hammer brutely
causes his leg to kick out. Rather, what differentiates these cases is
that my happiness and my spontaneous avowal
have, we might say, a particular kind of
intelligibility.  We might speak here of a distinctive logical space
in which we locate mental items and their expressions along with the
circumstances against whose background they have the significances
that they do.  (2003: 126)
Finkelstein emphasizes that, by “logical space”, he
does not mean that my happiness rationalizes the avowal. (A relevant
contrast here is with the reasons account.) Instead, he says, my avowal,
 like my smiling, makes sense
together with my happiness in something like the way that a
dog’s pain and its moaning make sense together, in “the
logical space of animate life”. The dog’s moaning is not
rationalized by its pain, according to Finkelstein; but nor is it
merely an effect of the pain.
Since dogs are not usually thought to possess self-knowledge, this
analogy raises the question: Does my avowal “I’m
happy” represent (or indicate) knowledge that I’m
happy? The answer is complex, on Finkelstein’s view. He denies
that my happiness constitutes epistemic justification for my avowal;
in fact, he denies that avowals are the sort of things that are
justified.  Whether the avowing subject is to be credited with
self-knowledge depends, he thinks, on how one understands
“knowledge”: in particular, on whether one takes knowledge
to require justification.
For both Finkelstein and Bar-on, the explanation of avowals’
authority—the fact that we ordinarily accept avowals at face
value, and don’t expect an avowing subject to have evidence in
support of her avowal—is non-epistemic. Avowals are
authoritative, not because the avowing subject has
special epistemic access to the states they ascribe, but
simply because avowals express mental states directly.
But for Bar-On, unlike Finkelstein, explaining first-person
authority is a separate project from explaining the epistemic
dimension of self-knowledge. Bar-On maintains that the avowal
“I’m so happy!” can represent “genuine and
privileged self-knowledge” (Bar-On 2004: 405), although the
avowing subject typically has not “formed the active judgment
[that he is happy] on some basis”, and cannot offer evidence
bearing on his happiness (2004: 363). She is not committed to a
particular account of how avowals constitute knowledge, but
she presents a number of approaches compatible with her
neo-expressivism.
To give a sense of the epistemic resources available to the
neo-expressivist, I’ll briefly describe one approach that Bar-On
presents. On this approach, my happiness confers a positive epistemic
status on my avowal “I’m so happy!” by being the
reason for that avowal. This approach exploits an idea central to the
reasons account, viz. that a
conscious state can justify a self-ascription directly, without
mediation by a judgment to the effect that one is in that state. (The
neo-expressivist might balk at Peacocke’s requirement that the
reason must be accessible to the knowing subject.) A subject who avows
that p “would accept p upon considering
it”. Insofar as my happiness is the reason for my
avowal, I am warranted in the belief expressed by “I’m so
happy!”. 
[A]vowing subjects enjoy a special epistemic warrant,
since their pronouncements, when true, are epistemically grounded in
the very states they ascribe to themselves, which states also serve
as the reasons for their acts of avowing. This special warrant
accrues to subjects only when issuing present-tense self-ascriptions
of occurrent mental states, and only when they do so in the avowing
mode—that is, only when they exercise their first-person
privilege. (Bar-On 2004: 405)
This “first-person privilege” stems from the fact that
only the subject can directly express her states.
Doubts about neo-expressivism center on the question whether it
truly explains knowledge of our mental states. One might question
whether avowals, which issue from the states they
ascribe directly, can represent the kind of epistemic
achievement ordinarily associated with robust
self-knowledge. (Epistemic internalists will be particularly likely to
harbor doubts on this score.) But as we saw above, accounting for
knowledge is not a primary goal of Finkelstein’s account. And
even for a neo-expressivist like Bar-On, who is concerned to identify
possible sources of epistemic warrant for avowals, explaining why
subjects’ attitudes towards the mental states they self-ascribe
epistemically qualifies as knowledge is, at most, a peripheral
goal. The core of neo-expressivism is its non-epistemic account of
phenomena often associated with self-knowledge, namely, first-person
authority.