Consider the following statements:

People should not be allowed to starve in the streets. 
No one should be denied access to a decent minimum of
health-care. 
Every citizen should be able to meet his or her basic needs. 

These statements all express a widespread view that a political
community should seek to ensure that its members are all able to enjoy
at least a minimally decent standard of living. They assert the
importance of what is often called the social
minimum. However, the exact nature of the social minimum, the
considerations that support it, and, indeed, its basic justifiability,
are all matters of intense philosophical controversy.  The aim here is
to provide a guide through the terrain of these controversies. This is
done in three stages. 
 Firstly, in section 1, we look more
closely at the question, “What is a social minimum?” This
section introduces a number of basic distinctions that will serve to
clarify the discussion. We define a “social minimum” as
that bundle of resources which suffices in the circumstances of a
given society to enable someone to lead a minimally decent life. We
define a “social minimum policy regime” as a set of
policies and institutions that serve to secure reasonable access to
this social minimum for all members of the society. As part of the
task of clarification in this section, we review some of the main
philosophical issues posed by these definitions. In particular, how
are we to understand the notion of a “minimally decent
life”? 
 In section 2, we then consider the
question, “Why a social minimum?” Specifically, we outline
a range of influential theories of social justice, and we consider in
each case whether and how the theory in question might lend support to
the enactment of a social minimum (that is, to the establishment of a
social minimum policy regime). The theories considered include
utilitarianism, libertarianism, left-libertarianism, egalitarian
liberalism, and what we shall term democratic theories of social
justice. 
 In section 3, we then turn
specifically to the critics of enactment, posing the question
“What can be said against enactment of a social minimum?”
We consider three sets of objections that appeal respectively to the
values of individual freedom, fairness, and legitimacy. The objections
are helpful in thinking about the form the social minimum should take
and about the political procedures surrounding its enactment.  We
investigate whether any of these objections offers a convincing reason
against enactment of a social minimum.  Section 4
offers a brief conclusion to our discussion.
 
1. What is a social minimum?
 Our first task, then, is to clarify what a social minimum is. When
we speak of a “social minimum” we mean to refer to the
bundle of resources that a person needs in order to lead a minimally
decent life in their society. Now the members of a given society
might decide to introduce a set of institutions and policies that
secures every member reasonable access to a social minimum in
this sense. We shall refer to this set of institutions and policies as
a “social minimum policy regime”. In the discussion that
follows we shall often speak of “enacting a social
minimum”.  Enactment is a somewhat legalistic word, but we
intend the term to be understood broadly here; “enacting a
social minimum” means putting in place a social minimum policy
regime. (Strictly speaking, we should perhaps speak of “enacting
a social minimum policy regime”; but “enacting a social
minimum” is a less clumsy phrase, and these comments should
suffice to make clear what we mean by it.) These concepts—of the
social minimum and of a social minimum policy regime—are
intended to be quite abstract, and they clearly raise further
questions. In particular: 

(1) How do we
specify the level and kind of resources that people need “to
lead a minimally decent life in their society”?
(2) What do we
mean by speaking of “reasonable access” to a social
minimum?

 We shall now explore question (1) in sections
1.1–1.3, turning to question (2) in
section 1.4.
1.1 Welfare, capabilities, and resources
 In contemporary political philosophy there is a lot of discussion
surrounding what has come to known as the “Equality of
what?” debate: If we assume that it is desirable for there to be
equality between individuals, what should we
be fundamentally concerned to equalize? Since the positions
taken up in this debate have direct relevance to our concern with the
nature of the social minimum, in this section we shall briefly review
these positions before returning explicitly to the question of how we
might define and specify the resources a person needs to lead “a
minimally decent life in their society”.
 The first position is known as welfarism.
“Welfare” here is understood in one of two ways. In
classical utilitarian thinking, pioneered by Jeremy Bentham, welfare
refers to happiness which, in turn, is understood as the net balance
of pleasure over pain that the individual experiences (Bentham
1789). On this view, in assessing how well off someone is in life, we
should look at how happy he or she is, that is, at the net balance of
pleasure over pain in her life. In more recent economic writings,
welfare is identified with desire-satisfaction; people have more or
less welfare, and so have better or worse lives in a fundamental
sense, depending on how far they satisfy their desires. 
 Welfarism has been subject to compelling criticism in recent
years.  While we do not have the space here to review the critique of
welfarism in depth, two apparent problems may be noted. One is the
problem of adaptive preferences. If people are born into deprived
circumstances, then they might adjust their expectations so that they
are satisfied with their lot. Even though they are poor, they are
happy, or don’t suffer from much frustration of desire, because
they have adapted to life in which they have few resources at their
command. But, as Amartya Sen asks of a person in this situation,
Can we possibly believe that he is doing well
just because he is happy and satisfied?  Can the living standard of a
person be high if the life that he or she leads is full of
deprivation? (Sen 1987a: 8)
Another problem, according to the critics, is
that it is wrong to think that all that has fundamental value in a
human life is how much happiness or desire-satisfaction this life
contains. Being happy is a valuable achievement, to be sure; but
critics argue that it is hardly the only thing that matters, in a
fundamental way, for how well our lives are going (Sen 1987b, 1992,
1999, 2009: chapters 11–14). 
 These two thoughts have inspired a second position within the
“Equality of what?” debate. Pioneered by the economist,
Amartya Sen, this is known as the capability approach. Sen's
analysis starts with a definition of a person's well-being as
constituted by the “functionings” that he or she
achieves: 
 … beings and doings [which]…can vary
from such elementary things as being adequately nourished, being in
good health, avoiding escapable morbidity and premature mortality,
etc., to more complex achievements such as being happy, having
self-respect, taking part in the life of the community, and so
on. (Sen 1992: 39)
 Note that “functionings” here include welfarist
concerns, such as “being happy”, but are not confined to
such concerns. A person's capability is then defined by Sen
as his or her power to achieve functionings: “a set of vectors
of functionings, reflecting the person's freedom to lead one type of
life or another” (Sen 1992: 40). On Sen's view, then, we should
assess how well off a person is by looking at how far he or she
possesses a range of important capabilities. These might include a
capability for welfare in either or both senses defined above, but
will not be restricted to this one capability.
 The challenge for advocates of the capabilities approach, however,
is then to explain which functionings and capabilities matter
in a fundamental way. What capabilities ought to feature on our list
when we come to make assessments of how well off people are relative
to one another? The worry is that any list we draw up will reflect one
rather specific, perhaps sectarian understanding of what gives value
and meaning to life, an understanding that other people might
reasonably reject. In short, the worry is that the capabilities
approach will either be too abstract to be of any use, or else will be
insufficiently neutral as between different reasonable
ethical conceptions (conceptions, that is, of what gives value and
meaning to life). 
 This concern, combined with the aforementioned concerns about
welfarism, motivates the third position in the “Equality of
what?” debate, known as resourcism. Resourcism reflects
the concern to try to find an appropriately neutral way of assessing
the respective advantage in life enjoyed by different people. The idea
is that although reasonable people disagree about what gives life
fundamental value and meaning, they can nevertheless agree that it is
important to hold certain “all-purpose means” for the
pursuit of whatever plans of life they have (see, for example, Rawls
1993: 187–190). 
 In the simplest imaginable version of resourcism, we might focus
solely on the level of income and/or wealth someone has in making a
judgment about how well off he or she is, in a fundamental sense,
compared to others. However, this position is vulnerable to the
obvious objection that two people with the same income and wealth can
in fact have very unequal opportunities in life because of differences
in their personal capacities. For example, a person with a physical
disability (e.g., which limits their mobility) will tend to be able to
do and be less, in terms of functionings, with a given amount of
income than someone without this disability. Health conditions and
disabilities tend to raise living expenses, so that sick and disabled
people need more income to achieve a way of life similar to that of
others. For this reason, resourcists such as Ronald Dworkin argue that
we need to include personal capacities in our account of resources
(Dworkin 2000: chapters 1–2). According to Dworkin, a disabled
person with the same income/wealth as a non-disabled person actually
has fewer resources because the disability counts as a kind of
resource deficit. 
 However, if the resourcist takes this step, he/she then must
explain how we decide what counts as a disability, and how we assess
the relative significance of disabilities for the purpose of making
overall judgments about how well off one person is relative to
another. Now our intuitive judgments about what counts as a
disability, and of how significant various disabilities are, do seem
to be guided by views we have about the central importance to a decent
human life of specific functionings and capabilities. For example, why
do so many of us consider blindness to be a significant disability? Is
it not because we have a clear sense of how being blind can impair a
range of capabilities that we consider important, such as the
capability to engage fully in the political life of the community, to
engage with artistic endeavors, to keep on top of major cultural
events, and so on? The question mark hanging over the resourcist
position is whether, at the end of the day, it can really dispense
with judgments about the kind of “beings” and
“doings” that make for a decent human life. If it does
make use of such judgments, then it is not as different to the
capabilities approach as it appears at first sight. 
1.2 An ecumenical-capabilities conception of the social minimum?
 The problem with resourcism is that it looks
potentially fetishistic (Sen 1992): it asks us, in its
simplest form, to focus on resource
holdings—income/wealth—without considering what different
people can do or be in virtue of these holdings. The problem with the
capabilities approach is that it looks potentially sectarian:
to avoid the problem of resource-fetishism, it asks us to consider
whether or not people have certain specific capabilities that are
allegedly central to the good life, but there is then a danger of
specifying a list that some regard as too biased towards one ethical
doctrine or societal culture than another. One response to this
apparent dilemma is to try to develop a self-consciously
“ecumenical” version of the capabilities approach.  Aware
of the danger of sectarianism, the capabilities theorist seeks to
identify capabilities that seem genuinely important to people across a
wide range of reasonable ethical doctrines and societal cultures; and
he/she seeks to find ways to make the application of the approach
sensitive to ethical and cultural diversity. Such an approach offers
one way of elaborating what we mean by a social minimum: the resources
necessary for a person to lead a “minimally decent life in their
society” can be understood as the resources necessary to hold a
specified range of ecumenically significant capabilities,
taking due account of the society's understanding of how these
capabilities are typically realized. 
 An approach of this kind has been developed in a number of recent
papers by Martha Nussbaum (see especially Nussbaum 1990, 1992, 1999,
2000, 2007). Nussbaum believes we can identify a set of vitally
important capabilities by posing the question:
What activities characteristically performed by
human beings are so central that they seem constitutive of a life that
is truly human? (Nussbaum 1999: 39)
More concretely: What activities and related
capabilities seem important to us when we consider whether someone
who has undergone a major change in their capacities is still capable
of a human life? What activities and related capabilities are
important to people when they differentiate between the human and the
non-human (sub-human or superhuman) in, say, constructing stories?
Proceeding inductively through reflection on these questions,
Nussbaum claims to identify a range of “central human
functional capabilities”, capabilities people must have if they
are to be able to live a truly human life. These include (for more
details, see Nussbaum 1999: 40–41): 

the capability for physical survival;
the capability for bodily health;
the capability for bodily integrity;
the capability for the exercise of imagination;
the capability for emotional response and exploration;
the capability for practical reason;
the capability for love and friendship;
the capability for connection with nature and other species;
the capability for play;
 the capability for the exercise of control over 
environment, including political control. 

 Adopting this approach, then, we would elaborate the concept of
the social minimum by agreeing on a specific list of capabilities as
necessary to a “minimally decent life”, and by working out
the kinds and levels of resources that people need, in the context of
their society, to have these capabilities to an adequate extent.  The
above list is clearly pitched at a high level of generality, and so it
will make sense in applying this approach to consider how the various
capabilities are typically manifested in the society in question. At
the same time, such a list arguably provides a safeguard against
excessive cultural relativism in thinking about the social minimum. If
we can see no way in which a given capability on the list is
adequately satisfied for a given group in a society, then we must
conclude that the society is denying these people the opportunity to
lead a “minimally decent life”. The idea of the social
minimum can in this way have some critical bite in evaluating existing
social arrangements. 
One important complicating factor must be noted here. Consider item
(2) on Nussbaum's list, the capability for bodily health. What does it
mean for people to have this capability to an adequate
extent? There is, after all, probably no limit to how far a
society could go in increasing this capability for its members by
devoting more and more of its resources to this end. At what point can
we say that it is doing enough? This is the problem of
limit-setting: the problem of determining in a fair way, and in a way
that has legitimacy for those concerned, just what level of coverage
for a given capability is satisfactory, given the commitment to ensure
that everyone has reasonable access to the resources necessary for a
minimally decent life. We shall not consider this problem further
here, but rather return to it in section 3.3
below; and, as we shall see, it may be that certain ideas developed by
resourcist philosophers can help us in getting a handle on the
problem. (I am thinking in particular here of Ronald Dworkin's
thought-experiment of the hypothetical insurance market which we shall
discuss below in sections 2.4.2
and 3.3.)
Nussbaum's attempt to define a determinate list of key or basic
capabilities like the above is, however, controversial. Critics object
that the approach is too rooted in a theorist's specific vision of
what is valuable in a human life, and that it may therefore be not
sensitive enough to reasonable differences of view (for discussion,
see Robeyns 2005, 2006). Similar approaches to Nussbaum's, which
employ the notion of “human needs”, have similarly
controversial elements (see especially Doyal and Gough
1991).[1] But
some disagreement of this kind seems unavoidable when we try to
specify a standard for judging whether people enjoy a “minimally
decent life”. Along with the problem of limit-setting, this
creates a potential problem of political legitimacy in the
specification and enactment of the social minimum to which we shall
return below (see section 3.3). An important
challenge in practice is to steer a course between an overly
prescriptive listing of desirable capabilities by, say, academic
philosophers and an overly subjective listing that might be prone to
problems such as adaptive preferences (for helpful discussions, see
Robeyns 2005, 2006, and Wolff and De-Shalit 2007).
1.3 Is the social minimum higher in richer societies?
 We have said that a social minimum is the bundle of resources
necessary for someone to live a minimally decent life in their
society. This raises the question of how far the resources we
need to live a minimally decent life are affected by the general level
of opulence of the society in which we live.  Is the social minimum
higher in societies that are wealthier on average than others? This
question is closely related to a question that has long exercised
students of income and wealth distribution: Is poverty a matter of
absolute income/wealth, or of relative income/wealth? Many studies of
poverty assume that poverty has a relative dimension (for example,
Townsend 1979). So, for example, in the UK estimates of the number of
households in poverty often take as the poverty line a level of income
that is some fraction (say 50%) of average household income, adjusted
for differences in household size (see, for example, Oppenheim
1997). Thus, if the incomes of the poor at time t2
are the same as they were at time t1, and in this
time average income has increased, then on this approach we would have
to conclude that the people who were poor at t1
have become even poorer at t2 even though
their absolute income level has not changed. This clearly makes
sense only if one thinks that poverty is a matter of how well off
people are in income/wealth terms relative to others in their
society. However, this way of thinking about poverty invites the
accusation that the researcher is confusing poverty with
inequality. Critics argue that if one group has become worse off in
income/wealth terms relative to others then inequality has increased,
but this does not mean that poverty has, especially if the group in
question remains just as well off as before in terms of its absolute
level of income and/or wealth. 
 The ecumenical-capabilities approach outlined above offers
reasonable support for the claim that the social minimum does vary
with a society's average level of income/wealth, and in turn, for the
claim that poverty can increase when a group falls further behind the
rest of society in terms of its relative income.  Following Sen,
capabilities theorists argue that even if the capabilities that define
a minimally decent life remain basically the same across societies of
varying degrees of wealth, the resources needed to have a given
capability will be greater, in the case of some capabilities, the
richer one's society is. In other words, the resource cost of a given
capability will tend to increase with average income. According to
Sen:
To lead a life without shame, to be able to visit
and entertain one's friends, to keep track of what is going on and
what others are talking about…requires a more expensive bundle
of goods and services in a society that is generally richer, and in
which most people have, say, means of transport, affluent clothing,
radios or television sets, etc.. (Sen 1987a: 18)
For this reason at least, the level and content
of the social minimum in a given society will to some extent be
relative to the productivity of this society; and, accordingly, it
will make sense to define the poverty line in relation to (as some
fraction of) average income.
 One idea that plays a particularly important role in discussions
of this issue is that of self-respect. People have an interest in
(capability for) self-respect (on which, see Rawls 1971 [1999]:
386–391). But, so the argument runs, our self-respect depends on
our being able to maintain a style of life that is sufficiently
similar to that of our fellow citizens. We will perhaps look inferior,
and start to feel inferior, if we do not wear the sort of clothes that
our fellow citizens wear, go on the kind of holidays they do, and so
on.  If self-respect depends on relative consumption in this way, and
“a minimally decent life” is one that includes our being
able to enjoy self-respect, then the social minimum is properly seen
as being relative to average income and the levels of consumption that
can be sustained on this level of income. 
On the other hand, there is almost certainly a lower limit to this
relativity. If the average income level in a society is very low
indeed, then even people with high income in relation to this average
might well lack the resources needed to lead a minimally decent
life. For example, if people in a given society cannot eat well enough
to avoid malnutrition on an income that is twice the societal average,
then even some people who are relatively rich in this society will
still be living below the level of the social minimum. 
1.4 Reasonable access to the social minimum
 Let us imagine that we have settled on an acceptable definition of
what is necessary for a person to enjoy a “minimally decent life
in their society”. We now wish to enact a social minimum to
ensure that all members of our society have reasonable access to the
resources necessary to lead such a life. A key term here is
“reasonable access”. What is meant by this term? Why not
say simply that society should ensure that its members have the
resources they need to lead a minimally decent life? Why take this
apparently roundabout way of expressing things by saying that they
ought to have reasonable access to such resources, rather than the
resources themselves?
 We use this formulation so as to keep open at this stage some
important questions as to the terms on which people may/ought to
receive these resources.  It is tempting to think of enacting a social
minimum as introducing institutions and policies that
will give people the resources necessary to lead a minimally
decent life in their society. However, this is surely too restrictive
an understanding of what it can mean to enact a social minimum. To see
why, consider the following case. There is an individual, called Alf,
who is unemployed and hence unable to buy food and shelter. As things
stand, Alf lacks the resources necessary to lead a minimally decent
life; he is living, as we might say, below the social
minimum. However, the government responds to his plight by offering
him a job with a wage equal to the level of the social minimum. Now,
provided that Alf is able to work, and the work in question is not
demeaning or punitive, or the terms of employment otherwise unfair, we
could reasonably say that if the government does this for all those in
Alf's position then it has enacted a social minimum.  But clearly it
has not given Alf and others like him a social minimum.
Rather, it has intervened in a way that provides Alf and others like
him with reasonable access to the social minimum. 
Now it might be that in some cases—perhaps, in the majority
of cases—the most appropriate way to ensure reasonable access to
the social minimum is precisely to give people the resources in
question. If, say, Alf is simply unable to work, then offering him the
job will not provide reasonable access to the social minimum. It will
be appropriate just to give him the social minimum. And, as we shall
see below (see section 3.2), some philosophers
argue that the ethically most defensible policy is to give everybody a
social minimum, rather than conditioning the social minimum on work or
some other kind of behavior. However, this is just one view of the
form that the social minimum policy regime should take, and it would
be inappropriate to build this very specific view into our very
definition of what a social minimum policy regime is, and thus, of
what it means to enact a social minimum. The substantive ethical
debate about the desirability of
“conditionality”—making resources conditional on
behaviour, such as work-related activity—is one we shall return
to below (see section 3.2).
2. Why a social minimum?
 Hopefully, we have now clarified what a social minimum is and what
it means to enact a social minimum. These clarificatory concerns met,
we can now consider why we might want to enact a social
minimum. As noted in the introduction, we shall review a number of
influential theories of social justice asking, with respect to each
theory, what support (if any) it can give to the case for
enactment. The five theories to be reviewed are: utilitarianism;
libertarianism; left-libertarianism; egalitarian liberalism; and
democratic theories of social justice.
2.1 Utilitarianism
 Utilitarianism is the view that actions and institutions should be
judged on how far they produce welfare (or “utility”) for
people (or for all beings capable of experiencing welfare). In its
classical form, utilitarianism demands that social institutions be
arranged so as to maximize the sum total of happiness, understood as
pleasure net of pain, while in its more contemporary version it calls
for these institutions to maximize the sum total of
desire-satisfaction.  In calculating this total, utilitarianism
insists on a principle of equality: each person's utility counts
equally with that of every other person (Mill 1861).
 In states such as the UK, utilitarianism has been a major
inspiration for reformers concerned to establish a welfare state so as
to enact a social minimum. It is not hard to see why. Imagine a
society that leaves the distribution of income to the market so that
incomes are distributed very unequally. Let's say we think that there
is some level of income, Y, which people typically need to lead a
minimally decent life. The inequality in this society is such that
some people have income levels below Y. However, it is possible for
the government to introduce tax-transfer schemes that will guarantee
that the poorest members of a society have reasonable access to Y. Now
if the marginal utility of income diminishes as people get more
income, then it seems quite likely that the shift from the free-market
economic system to the system with the social minimum policy regime
will produce a net gain in society's overall utility. Quite simply,
the income that the poor gain as a result of the shift to the social
minimum system is likely to be greater than the utility lost by the
rich in moving to this system (given the assumption of
the diminishing marginal utility of income).  Clearly, given
that the utilitarian focus is on welfare as the good in human life, a
utilitarian conception of the social minimum will be welfarist in
kind: the social minimum will be seen as the bundle of resources
necessary to ensure a life with a minimally acceptable level of
happiness or desire-satisfaction.  However, as a matter of policy, a
utilitarian might readily support enactment of a social minimum
inspired by some version of the capabilities approach because, for the
reason given above, he/she judges the social minimum policy package in
question as promoting an increase in aggregate welfare. (For a
discussion of the utilitarian rationale for enactment of a social
minimum, see Brandt 1981.)
 From a utilitarian point of view, however, the foregoing argument
for the enactment of some form of social minimum is not
conclusive. There are arguments that can be made from within the
utilitarian framework that would tell against enactment of a social
minimum (whether conceived in capabilities or welfarist terms). 
 The main utilitarian argument against enactment of a social
minimum appeals to the idea of incentives. The argument
begins with the claim that if we make a shift from a free-market
economic system to a system with a social minimum policy regime, we
will reduce incentives to work, save and be entrepreneurial.  The rich
will allegedly work less hard, save less and be less entrepreneurial,
because they are being more heavily taxed to pay for the social
minimum policy regime. The poor will allegedly work less hard, save
less, and so on, because they have a welfare safety-net to fall back
on. As a result of this dampening of incentives, it is possible that
economic growth will be slower under the economic system with the
social minimum policy regime than under the free-market system. In the
long-run, slower economic growth might well result in lower aggregate
welfare in the system with the social minimum policy regime than in
the free-market system. If so, then as utilitarians, we
must not enact a social minimum. The incentives concern
explains why Nineteenth century utilitarian reformers in Britain, such
as Edwin Chadwick, had grave reservations about enacting a social
minimum. While conceding the necessity of some kind of safety-net for
the very poor, Chadwick proposed that state assistance to the poor be
set at a very low level and provided on deliberately punitive
terms. These principles lay behind the New Poor Law of 1834 which
required many recipients of assistance to live and work in
gender-segregated special workhouses, rather like prisons, in return
for a meager subsistence income (see Roberts 1960: 36–45, on
Edwin Chadwick's role in designing the New Poor Law; and see Hamburger
1965, for a discussion of Chadwick's intellectual context). 
 In view of the plausible assumption that there is diminishing
marginal utility of income, utilitarianism can be said to offer strong
support for the enactment of some form of a social minimum. However,
in view of the possible impact of an enacted social minimum on
incentives, it also can be said only to offer contingent support for
enactment: in some societies, at some times, maximization of aggregate
welfare will demand that we do not enact a social minimum.
2.2 Libertarianism
 If utilitarianism's criterion of justice is aggregate welfare,
libertarianism's is individual rights. Individuals are
“inviolable”: they have rights, and these rights may not
be violated even for the sake of increasing aggregate
welfare—indeed, even for the sake of preventing the wider
violation of rights (Nozick 1974: 28–35). 
 If we ask exactly what rights the individual has, on the
libertarian view, then a large part of the answer is that he or she is
endowed with the rights of self-ownership. Someone enjoys
self-ownership, in the relevant sense, when he or she has full private
ownership of his or her own body and abilities; that is, he or she
has, in relation to his or her own body and abilities, all those
rights which a slave-holder has in relation to the body and abilities
of a slave (Cohen 1995: 68). A corollary of the idea of self-ownership
is the idea that individuals do not have any non-contractual
obligations to use their labor for the benefit of others. In
exercising their rights of self-ownership, people may contract with
others to offer them specified services and benefits. But if the state
forces people to provide such services and benefits without the
consent of the individuals concerned, it violates their rights of
self-ownership.  It would, so the argument runs, treat the individuals
concerned as if they are state-owned assets, to be pressed
into service for the good of others at the state's discretion. Now, in
order to enact a social minimum, it seems likely that the state will
have to impose a non-contractual obligation on more talented citizens
to share the fruits of their labors with the less fortunate who are
otherwise at risk of falling below the level of the social
minimum. But this violates the self-ownership rights of the
talented. For this reason, libertarianism looks like an unpromising
basis on which to defend enactment of a social minimum.
However, things are not quite so clear-cut. Return to the question
of exactly what rights individuals have on the libertarian view. The
concept of self-ownership provides a large part of, but cannot provide
the whole, answer to this question. For the world does not only
contain people, but a wide variety of external resources, such as
land. What kind of rights do we have in relation to these other
resources? If we believe that individuals can come to have private
property rights in these resources, no less inviolable than those they
have in relation to their own bodies and abilities, we need to know
how the individuals concerned acquire these property rights. Part of
the answer is that if we acquire a resource through voluntary exchange
with someone who already owns it (legitimately), then we come to own
the resource (an aspect of what Nozick calls “justice in
transfer”; Nozick 1974: 150–153). But if we trace the
history of such trades back there will be a point at which the
resource in question did not have an owner; someone, somehow, made an
unowned resource—a piece of land, say—their private
property. But how can this happen? In Robert Nozick's terms, the
libertarian must given an account of “justice in
acquisition” (Nozick 1974: 151, 174–182).
 The nature of justice in acquisition is a source of controversy
amongst libertarians. Assuming that the external resources we have in
mind are initially unowned, one might argue that specific individuals
can appropriate resources as private property by “mixing”
their self-owned powers with the resources concerned. This thought,
which we find in the work of John Locke (Locke 1689: Book 2, chapter
5), is that individuals annex something they already own (their labor)
to something initially unowned (say, a piece of land), and, thereby,
come to own what they initially did not own. However, some
libertarians, such as Nozick, follow Locke in arguing that
appropriation through the exercise of self-owned powers is
just only if it does not harm those who, following
appropriation, lose access to the resource. This condition (often
referred to as the Lockean Proviso) can be elaborated in
various ways. In Nozick's influential statement of the libertarian
view, the condition is apparently elaborated as follows (see Nozick
1974: 174–182; and, for helpful interpretation, Wolff 1991:
107–115): an act of appropriation of a previously unowned
resource is just only if no person is thereby made worse off than he
or she would be in a world where all external resources remain
unowned.  In a world in which all external resources remain unowned,
each person would be able to reach a certain level of welfare by using
the resources that lie about unowned. For any given
individual, i, let us denote this welfare level simply
as Wi. A given act of appropriation is just, then,
provided that, post-appropriation, each individual remains able to
reach Wi. (Note that Wi may
differ between particular individuals because of their unequal
abilities to succeed in the “state of nature” in which all
external resources remain unowned.)
 The implication of this account of justice in acquisition is that
any regime of private property rights is just only provided that every
person living under said regime is able to
achieve Wi—the welfare level that he or she
would have been able to achieve in a world in which all external
resources remain unowned. Many libertarians, including Nozick, express
optimism that a private property regime will be able to provide people
with the opportunity to achieve this welfare level. But it is
conceivable that in the normal operation of the economy, a private
property regime might at some times, for some people, fail to provide
access to this level of welfare. If so, then justice—as the
libertarian understands it—demands that the state act to correct
the distribution of welfare generated by the spontaneous play of
market forces. Specifically, the state must compensate anyone who, due
to the existing allocation of private property rights in external
resources, cannot otherwise achieve Wi. According
to at least one influential libertarian philosopher, Robert Nozick,
our basic rights include not only our rights of self-ownership, but
this right to welfare as well.
 In order to satisfy this right, a libertarian system might have to
run some assistance programs for the very poor. To some extent, then,
even a libertarian state might have some government programs that
resemble those we associate with a social minimum policy regime. It
is in this very limited sense that even a libertarian theory of
justice might lend support to the enactment of at least a partial
social minimum (see also the discussion in Brock 1998a and Sterba
1998).[2]

 That said, it is highly unlikely that this argument can be used to
support the enactment of anything like a full social minimum. This is
so for at least two reasons. Firstly, for most, if not all,
people Wi is likely to be very low, precisely
because it is the welfare level we could get in a world with no
property rights regime to stabilize expectations about the use of
resources and, therefore, a world without the huge productivity gains
that come from stabilizing such expectations. Hence, the level of
assistance entailed by the libertarian right to welfare is likely in
general to fall well short of what is needed to ensure people the
capabilities for a “minimally decent life” in their
society. Secondly, it is important to recall
that Wi will almost certainly vary across people
according to the nature of their personal, self-owned capacities.
Those who are born with a good endowment of productively applicable
talents will obviously fare better in the state of nature, in which
all external resources remain unowned, than, for example, those who
are born with severe disabilities that make it impossible for them to
engage in production. In the case of some of the
latter, Wi may be close to zero—zero
denoting the outcome of starving to death in the state of
nature. Thus, if these people happen to be unfortunate enough to be
starving to death in a real-world private property rights regime, they
may well have no claim to assistance under the libertarian right to
welfare: this right does not demand that they be prevented from
starving if this is what would have happened to them in the baseline
world in which all external resources remain unowned. 
 We may conclude that libertarianism gives only contingent and very
weak support for the enactment of a social minimum. Indeed, except in
some very rare instances, libertarianism implies that enactment of a
full social minimum is unjust.
2.3 Left-libertarianism
 However, not all libertarians—those who endorse the
principle of self-ownership—agree with the theory of acquisition
that we find in writers like Nozick.  According to some philosophers,
sometimes referred to as left-libertarians, the principle of
self-ownership should be combined with a more egalitarian principle of
division of initially unowned external resources. Thus, if we imagine
a group of people who find themselves transported to a previously
uninhabited planet, the left-libertarian holds that each of these
people has the rights of self-ownership plus a right to an
equal, per capita share of this planet's initially unowned external
resources (see, for example, Steiner 1994, and Vallentyne and Steiner
2000a,b). 
 There is a lively debate amongst left-libertarians as to which
goods count as external resources for purposes of equal division, but
virtually all would agree that these resources must include society's
inheritance of land. Some would argue that the pool of resources for
equal division should also include the capital stock that one
generation inherits from past generations. More recently, it has been
suggested that “job assets” and the value of the genetic
information that we carry as individuals should also be included in
the pool for equal division (see, respectively, Van Parijs
1992, 1995, and
Steiner, 1994).[3]

 Now, for those anxious about the lot of the poor in a market
society, left-libertarianism seems to hold more promise than
conventional libertarianism. To be sure, a left-libertarian regime
will not permit the redistribution of labor incomes by the state as
this violates the core libertarian commitment to respect the rights of
self-ownership. But the parallel commitment to equal division of
initially unowned external resources will ensure that every person
starts life with at least some external resources, or a monetary
equivalent. To see how this may transform the prospects of the
unfortunate, it may help to go back for a moment to the people whom we
just imagined being transported to a new planet. On arrival, the
people find that on the planet there is a single external resource,
uncultivated land, all units of which are of homogeneous
quality. Their own population is divided into two groups, a majority
who are productively capable and a minority who suffer disabilities
that make them unable to engage in production (here we follow Cohen
1995: chapter 4). Now we saw in our discussion of libertarianism above
how, under a Nozick-style regime, members of the minority might well
have no justice-based claim to assistance against the productively
capable, and, in consequence, could starve. Under a left-libertarian
regime, however, the government is obliged to give each person an
equal share of the planet's land. Those unable to engage in productive
activity would be able to sell or lease their share to members of the
productively capable group, and would derive an income from this
source.  They will thus be at less risk of starvation than under the
Nozick-style regime. 
 In practice, left-libertarians do not propose that we actually
divide land and other resources up in this literal way. Instead,
following the argument of agrarian radicals such as Thomas Spence and
Tom Paine, they argue that the individual should receive a monetary
grant reflecting his or her fair share of society's external
resources, such as land (on Spence and Paine, see Vallentyne and
Steiner 2000b). The level of this grant will depend on a host of
factors, but it is possible that it will be equivalent—or even
higher—in value to the bundle of resources needed to enjoy a
minimally decent life in the society in question. Thus, depending on
the circumstances of the society in question, left-libertarian
principles of justice might support a policy that is more or less
equivalent to the enactment of a full social minimum.
Nevertheless, it is clearly important to emphasize the word
“might” in the previous sentence. There is no reason why
the basic grant we have imagined must be of equivalent value
to a full social minimum. Indeed, if the relevant external assets are
abundant, so that their market price is low, then the level of the
grant might not come anywhere near this level. In such a situation,
respect for self-ownership will rule out taking labor incomes to top
up the grant. It is possible, therefore, that some people will be left
with a level of resources below that necessary to lead a minimally
decent life (see Cohen 1995: chapter 4, especially
pp. 102–105). Thus, while left-libertarianism offers stronger
support for enactment of a social minimum than conventional
libertarianism does, this support is still highly contingent, and in
many situations left-libertarianism will probably rule out as unjust
the course of action needed to enact a full social minimum (taxation
of labor incomes).  Moreover, even if the resource grant is high
enough to provide a full social minimum, some left-libertarians would
argue that individuals should receive their basic grant as a capital
lump-sum at the start of their adult life rather than as a periodic
income payment and/or as freely available bundle of
services.[4]
This raises the possibility that some people might “blow”
their grants early in their adult lives and might then lack ready
access to a social minimum.
2.4 Egalitarian liberal perspectives
 Within contemporary political philosophy, egalitarian liberalism
seeks to present an alternative both to utilitarianism and to the two
versions of libertarianism discussed above. Egalitarian liberals agree
with libertarians that utilitarianism fails to take seriously the
inviolability of the person. Unlike libertarians, however, egalitarian
liberals do not think that respect for the inviolability of the person
commits us to the principle of self-ownership (for more on this issue,
see section 3.1.2 below). Consequently, they
feel much less compunction in advocating tax-transfer schemes, which
the libertarian finds objectionable, so as to secure a full social
minimum. Indeed, they argue that justice demands that we do introduce
such schemes. Let us take a brief look at two particularly influential
egalitarian liberal theories of justice, and their implications for
the justifiability of enacting a social minimum.
2.4.1 Rawls, the veil of ignorance, and the strains of commitment
 John Rawls's A Theory of Justice, first published in 1971
(with a revised edition in 1999) poses an intriguing question: What
principles would you accept to govern your society if you did not know
your actual or likely position in this society? In practice, we are
all aware of the religion we have, we have some sense of the natural
abilities we have been born with, and the advantages or disadvantages
we have gained from our social background. But, for a moment, envisage
that we did not know such things and possessed only very general
information about the kind of society we are going to live in. Behind
this “veil of ignorance”, not knowing our religion,
natural ability, or social background, what principles would we choose
to govern the institutions that affect the distribution of
“primary goods” like income and wealth? 
 Famously, Rawls argues that in an “original position”
of this kind, people would choose to arrange social and economic
inequalities so that
they are both (a) to the greatest benefit of the
least advantaged and (b) attached to offices and positions open to all
under conditions of fair equality of opportunity. (Rawls 1971 [1999]:
72)
Simplifying somewhat, part (a) of this
formulation tells us that inequality in goods like income and wealth
is just only if, as a result of the inequality, the social group that
is worst-off in terms of these goods is better off than it would
otherwise be; Rawls calls this the difference
principle.[5]

 Many critics have found Rawls's argument for the difference
principle unconvincing (see, for example, Kymlicka 2001:
60–70). They ask why people behind the veil of ignorance would
not choose to gamble, selecting an alternative principle that is less
favorable to the disadvantaged in society than the difference
principle but which would give higher rewards than this principle
should one turn out in fact to belong to one of the more favored
social classes. However, even if this is valid as a criticism of
Rawls's argument for the difference principle, it can be argued that
Rawls's thought experiment nevertheless provides strong intuitive
support for those who believe that justice requires at least the
enactment of a social minimum. For while most people placed behind the
veil of ignorance might not be so risk averse as to choose the
difference principle to govern their society, it is reasonable to
suppose that most would at least be concerned to insure themselves
against the danger of desperate poverty and would hence desire
principles of justice that ensure everyone reasonable access to a
social minimum. Interestingly, efforts by psychologists to model
decision-making in situations akin to the original position show that
people in practice tend to choose a principle that calls for the
maximization of average well-being subject to the constraint that
nobody falls below a specified floor (see Frolich and Oppenheimer
1992). 
 Further support for the enactment of a social minimum from within
Rawls's theory comes from his discussion of the importance of the
“strains of commitment” in determining what is just (Rawls
1971 [1999]: 153–160). The parties behind the veil of ignorance
must recognize that they are selecting principles of justice that,
having been chosen, they must stick with in social life for
good. Thus, before they make their decision, they must honestly ask
whether, should they turn out to be the most disadvantaged by a chosen
set of principles, they could really bear the strains of commitment
entailed by living under these principles.  Again, it is debatable as
to whether this consideration points unequivocally to the difference
principle as the appropriate principle to govern the distribution of
income and wealth. However, it seems plausible that this consideration
would rule out any principles that would not ensure everyone
reasonable access to the resources needed for a minimally decent
life. How could one honestly commit to the strains of living in a
society that did not guarantee you this? This consideration reinforces
the argument that the parties behind the veil of ignorance would
choose principles of justice that assure everyone of reasonable access
to a social minimum. 
 Moreover, it might be argued that even if one rejects the veil of
ignorance thought experiment as a way of exploring what justice
consists in, the strains of commitment idea still has force as a
consideration favoring the enactment of a social minimum. Even if one
has full knowledge of one's own and others’ position in society,
one can put oneself in the place of others and consider the kind of
strains of commitment that they are likely to be suffering under the
present system. If one does this, can one really give assent to a
social system that, by failing to guarantee reasonable access to a
social minimum for some people, puts some of your fellow citizens
under what must be intolerable strains of commitment? Since one would
surely find such strains intolerable oneself, how can one reasonably
expect others to put up with them? (For more discussion of the strains
of commitment, see Barry 1995: 61–67, and, with specific
connection to case for the social minimum, see Waldron 1993a). 
2.4.2 Dworkin and the hypothetical insurance market
 Ronald Dworkin's theory of “equality of resources”
(see especially Dworkin 1985, 2000) starts from a simple intuition: ideally, no person
should have a smaller share of resources than another except as a
result of the life-style choices that he or she makes. 
 As a first step in elaborating this conception of justice, Dworkin
asks us to imagine a group of people who find themselves shipwrecked
on a previously uninhabited island. The island contains various
external resources—trees, streams, land, and so on. How should
these external resources be divided up amongst the newly arrived
islanders? Here Dworkin introduces the idea of an initial
auction (Dworkin 2000: 65–71). We imagine that each
islander is given an equal share of money (“clamshells”
serve as currency) and is then allowed to bid for the island's
resources in an auction. The auction ends only when every participant,
possessed of equal purchasing power, is satisfied with the resources
that he or she has bought at the prices offered. Each islander is then
entitled to the specific bundle of resources that he or she has
purchased. The resulting distribution does not reflect any inequality
of endowments because each islander had the same allocation of money
with which to buy resources. At the same time, the distribution is
sensitive to individuals’ life-style choices because the
specific resources that people have in their bundles will reflect the
choices they have made about how to spend their (equal) endowments of
money. Up to this point, Dworkin's theory is strikingly similar to
that of the left-libertarians we discussed above: he is, in effect,
asserting the right of each person to an equal, marketable share of
society's stock of inherited resources. 
However, Dworkin does not stop at this point. People who share
equally in society's inheritance of external resources can
nevertheless be very unequal in terms of the productive talents and
'handicaps' they have. But how are we to determine the appropriate
level of transfers for these kinds of personal disadvantage?  Here
Dworkin introduces the original idea of a hypothetical insurance
market (Dworkin 2000: 76–83, 92–99). In real life,
many of us are able to anticipate potential bad luck by taking out
insurance against eventualities like theft or damage to our
property. What if we could also take out insurance against having
limited marketable talent or a serious health condition or
disability? 
In practice, of course, we can’t do this. But imagine that
the islanders we have been considering do not yet know their
marketable talent or health status, though they do know the
distribution of earnings power and health conditions and disabilities
across the population. In this situation (which embodies something
akin to Rawls's veil of ignorance), an insurance market would be
feasible. Insurance companies could offer the islanders insurance
against low earnings power, for example, and, using their equal
initial shares of wealth, the individual islanders could buy the
insurance policies they want.  Each will have to decide whether they
want to spend a large portion of their initial wealth on an expensive
insurance policy that will provide very generous transfers should they
turn out to have low earning power or a severe health condition, or
whether they prefer to risk taking out a cheap insurance policy that
will provide minimal transfers in these situations, but which will
also leave them with a lot more of their initial wealth to spend on
other things.  According to Dworkin, the just level of transfers is
the level determined by the insurance policy that each of us would
choose in an insurance market of this kind. Dworkin acknowledges that,
in practice, we cannot possibly know exactly what level each
individual would choose to insure themselves at. But he claims that we
should be able to make a realistic assessment of the insurance package
that “the average member of the community [would]
purchase” (Dworkin 2000: 78–79). He suggests that we then
use this as the standard for designing tax-benefit policies that
address problems such as low earnings power, unemployment, sickness
and disability. The average person is likely, Dworkin argues, to
insure themselves to a level that will assure them of a reasonable
standard of living should they turn out to be in one of these
situations.  Thus, to simulate the outcome of this fair, hypothetical
insurance market, our own society ought to enact tax-transfer schemes
that offer protection against these eventualities.
 Now the idea of a social minimum does not play any role as such in
Dworkin's theory (and, as a self-proclaimed “resourcist”
he would have objections to the capabilities approach to specifying
the social minimum that we explored in
section 1). Nevertheless, the
thought-experiment of the hypothetical insurance market provides us
with a strong argument for why we ought to enact something like a
full social minimum. The fact that, in the fair circumstances of the
hypothetical insurance market, we would typically take out insurance
against contingencies such as low earnings power, unemployment,
sickness and disability, suggests that fairness requires our society
to enact policies that provide protection against these
contingencies; and this set of policies will look very much like a
social minimum policy regime geared to securing key
capabilities.[6]
 The common thought at work in Rawls's and Dworkin's theories is
that in circumstances that appropriately reflect the equal standing of
each person, people will agree to policies that effectively enact a
social minimum (Dworkin), or to principles that call for such policies
(Rawls). Thus, both theories seem to offer what we may term principled
support for the enactment of a social minimum. According to
egalitarian liberalism, the enactment of a social minimum is not a
contingent, but pretty much an essential, demand of justice.
2.5 Democratic perspectives
 We use the term democratic here to refer to perspectives in social
philosophy that give self-conscious priority to the promotion of
equality in power and status relations (understood, let us assume, as
a demand of justice; see Anderson 1999). One focus of concern is with
ensuring the fair value and effectiveness of citizens’
political liberties. In a political democracy, all citizens have
rights to vote, to campaign, and to stand for political office in
competitive elections (Dahl 1998). It seems clear that poverty can
significantly diminish the effectiveness with which individuals can
exercise these rights. Someone who is wrapped up in the struggle for
basic material well-being may simply lack the time and energy needed
to focus on political issues. In addition, he or she will be less
able to afford the monetary costs associated with political
participation, e.g., paying party membership fees, making campaign
contributions, and so on. This is bad for political democracy. It
means that certain viewpoints and interests are not heard, so that
policy becomes unfairly skewed against these viewpoints and
interests. Or it may increase the danger that some people vote
without taking the time to be well informed about the issues, which
will also reduce the quality of policy decisions. Hence it can be
argued that it is straightforwardly good for a political democracy to
enact a social minimum. By relieving the pressure of poverty, an
enacted social minimum will enable all citizens to participate
effectively in the democratic process, thereby ensuring that this
process is indeed genuinely
democratic.[7]
Power is not only exercised within and through the formal political
process, however, but within and through a wide range of other social
relationships. For example, employers can exercise power over their
employees. Historically, husbands have often wielded great power over
their wives. These power relations need not be expressly established
and defined in law. Very often, they arise because of inequalities in
the economic positions between the parties (for very helpful
discussions, to which we are here indebted, see Goodin
1986, 1988; Okin 1989:
chapter 7). One party—the employer, the husband—may be
able to do perfectly well economically without the other party. By
contrast, the second party—an individual worker, the
wife—may be economically reliant on the first party.  Were the
first party to exit from the relationship, this party would suffer
little harm, but the second party would suffer a severe, possibly
catastrophic, fall in living standards. Precisely because of this
inequality in the costs of exiting from the relationship, the first
party has the power to shape the relationship on their terms. The
worker/wife is not in a position to argue with the
employer's/husband's commands because the employer's/husband's threat
to leave the relationship unless obedience is forthcoming will be at
once credible (since they stand to lose little economically from
exiting it) and compelling (because the worker/wife stand to lose so
much if the employer/husband do go ahead and exit). Power inequalities
of this kind are worrying for a number of reasons.  It can be argued
that they directly reduce the freedom of the weaker parties (Pettit
1997). They also put the weaker parties at risk of exploitation and
abuse by the stronger party (Goodin 1986, 1988; Okin 1989). 
 One important argument for the enactment of a social minimum is
that this can help to reduce the exit costs from such relationships
for the parties that are otherwise vulnerable, and so reduce these
worrying inequalities of power. For example, if a worker knows that
the community will guarantee him a decent income even if he quits his
current job, then this makes it much easier for him to stand up to the
boss and refuse unreasonable demands. If a wife knows that the
community will assist her financially if she leaves her husband, then
the prospect of leaving him because he abuses her becomes more
feasible. This can change the whole dynamic of these
relationships. Instead of one side dictating to the other, the
relationships become much more about dialogue and negotiation between
equals—more democratic. 
For these reasons, then, democratic perspectives on social justice
offer strong support for the enactment of a social minimum (see also
Pateman 2005). Indeed, since it is hard to see how any society could
retain democratic power relations for long in the absence of people
having reasonable access to a social minimum, democratic perspectives
might also be said to offer what we referred to above as principled
support for the enactment of a social minimum: a society must enact
such a minimum to remain genuinely democratic, and in this respect,
tolerably just. 
3. What can be said against the enactment of a social minimum?
 Having reviewed the main arguments for the enactment of a social
minimum, let us now consider some of the more important objections to
enactment. We shall here consider three objections appealing
respectively to the values of freedom, fairness, and legitimacy.
3.1 The freedom objection
 One important objection to enactment of a social minimum is that
such enactment conflicts with respect for individual freedom. To enact
a social minimum, a government must coercively tax and transfer income
and, in the view of some thinkers, this coercion is inherently
objectionable. We shall consider two versions of this objection
here. The first appeals to freedom understood as the absence of
intentional coercion. The second appeals to the libertarian principle
of self-ownership that we discussed above (see
sections 2.2 and 2.3).
3.1.1 The crude freedom objection
 According to writers in the so-called “classical
liberal” tradition such as Friedrich Hayek, freedom consists in
the absence of intentional coercion (see Hayek 1960). If the
government requires one citizen, Betty, to pay taxes that will in turn
be used to assist a less fortunate citizen, Alf, as part of the
process of enacting a social minimum, then the government
intentionally coerces Betty and, therefore, reduces her freedom. This
is regrettable and, if we regard freedom as the most important
political value, we should perhaps refrain from using governmental
power to assist people like Alf in this way. The welfare of
people like Alf might suffer; but freedom will be
preserved. 
 The foregoing paragraph summarizes a common objection to
government taxation for welfare programs in liberal societies such as
the UK and the United States, or what one might call the crude freedom
objection to the enactment of a social minimum (see also Plant 1998:
67). How might a supporter of enacting a social minimum reply to this
objection?
 One type of reply is to argue that while taxation to establish a
social minimum policy regime might reduce one kind of liberty, it will
promote another, more valuable kind of liberty. According to this
view, true or real liberty does not consist in the mere absence of
intentional coercion, but in the positive capability or power to act
in pursuit of significant goals, such as self-development. Poverty, so
the argument runs, diminishes this true, “positive
liberty”; by abolishing or alleviating poverty, welfare
programs, financed through coercive taxation, increase the true,
positive liberty of society's more unfortunate members. The loss to
the taxpayer in terms of “negative liberty” (liberty
understood as the mere absence of intentional coercion) is, so the
reply continues, morally outweighed by this gain in terms of
“positive liberty”. This type of reply to the freedom
objection has a long history. It features prominently, for example, in
late Nineteenth and early Twentieth century attempts by so-called
“social liberals” to defend state welfare provision from
criticism on liberty-related grounds (for overviews, see Freeden 1978,
Vincent and Plant 1983, Parker 
1998).[8]
 Despite its historical pedigree, however, this type of reply can
be faulted both as inconclusive and as too concessionary to the
classical liberal critic of taxation for welfare programs. It is
inconclusive because, faced with the reply, the classical liberal
critic can always simply counter-assert that “negative
liberty” (again, liberty understood as the absence of
intentional coercion) is actually the kind of liberty we should be
primarily concerned with. We are then apparently at an impasse with
each side in the debate asserting the greater value of one kind of
liberty over another, or else merely trading competing definitions of
what freedom “really” is. The reply is too concessionary
in that it too readily surrenders the value of “negative
liberty” to the classical liberal critic of taxation for welfare
spending. The argument for taxation and welfare spending can in fact
be made using the very notion of freedom to which the classical
liberal critic appeals. This argument is likely to offer a more
telling reply to the critic than one that appeals to some other
(alleged) kind of liberty (on this point, see Cohen 1988: chapter 14:
291–292).
 The essential point here is that poverty usually entails a
limitation of the kind of liberty that the classical liberal
professes to be concerned with.  The reason why poverty typically
“bites” into one's quality of life is that it reduces the
range of actions that one can perform without being subject to
intentional coercion by others (see Waldron 1993b, Cohen
1997, Swift 2001:
70–71). Imagine, for example, that you are poor and that (living
in the UK) you wish to get a train from London to Liverpool. Because
you are poor, you cannot buy a ticket for the journey. Because you get
on the train without a ticket, the train guard makes you leave the
train at Slough, long before you reach Liverpool. Your ability to act
as you wish has here been limited by the intentional coercion of
others. Or imagine that you are homeless and unable to afford to rent
a place to sleep. You locate a field in which to sleep. But the field
belongs to someone else, and when the landowner discovers your
presence by means of her closed-circuit television camera system she
calls the police who wake you up and drag you off her land. Once
again, your ability to act as you wish is quashed by the intentional
coercion of others. By the same token, if the government were to
provide you with the money to buy a train ticket or to rent a space to
sleep in, then you would become able to perform these actions without
being subject to the intentional coercion that you are subject to when
you lack this money. 
 Thus, taxation for welfare spending cannot be said simply to
reduce “liberty”, understood as the absence of intentional
coercion, in the name of some other value, such as welfare. Rather, it
will tend to produce a different distribution of this
kind of liberty. It will expose some to intentional coercion that
they would otherwise not be exposed to; but, if it genuinely reduces
poverty, it should also reduce the extent to which some people are
exposed to intentional coercion. For this reason, it simply will not
do to object that the enactment of a social minimum is undesirable
because it will reduce individual liberty. For the
decision not to enact a social minimum will also reduce the
liberty of some individuals. If the freedom objection is to have any
force, it must take a subtler form than that we have thus far
considered. 
3.1.2 The self-ownership objection
 A second, subtler version of the freedom objection comes from
libertarian philosophers committed to the principle of
self-ownership. As we have seen, libertarians do not object to
transfers of income and wealth which aim to make sure that each person
receives his/her fair share of external resources (or fair
compensation for others’ appropriation of their share). However,
these transfers might not be enough to ensure that all enjoy a full
social minimum.  This insight has led some political philosophers to
conclude that commitment to the enactment of a social minimum is
ultimately incompatible with the libertarian commitment to respect the
self-ownership of persons: we must be prepared to override certain
claims of self-ownership, and forcibly transfer a portion of labor
incomes from higher earners to the disadvantaged, if a social minimum
is to be enacted. But is this justifiable? After all, on the face of
it, self-ownership seems like an attractive value, capturing some
basic commitments we have to the freedom and inviolability of the
individual (see Cohen 1995: chapter 3).
Imagine someone, call her Betty, who has very productive
talents. In order to ensure that everyone has reasonable access to a
social minimum, the state announces that it will tax 50% of whatever
income people like Betty earn from the use of their talents, and use
the funds to raise the incomes of those low earnings power. The
libertarian, including the left-libertarian, will object that this
violates Betty's rights of self-ownership. Should she choose to work,
half of her earnings will be funneled to others, and thus, if she
chooses to work, she has no choice under this tax regime but to assist
others.  In this way, the tax system may be said to
“harness” her talents and energies for the good of
others. This effort-harnessing, alleges the libertarian, is
inherently wrong; it puts her in a position that is akin to that of a
slave, forced to work for the good of others (Nozick 1974: 169). 
 In reply, egalitarian philosophers stress the kinds of freedoms
that someone in Betty's position retains under the imagined tax
regime, freedoms which make it absurd, in the view of these
philosophers, to compare her position to that of a slave. The tax
regime we have described leaves the decision about how much to work to
Betty; a slave does not have this freedom. It leaves the decision
about what kind of job to do to Betty; a slave, again, does not have
this freedom. In short, taxation of labor incomes does not necessarily
deny the worker who is taxed basic control over whether and how she
deploys her talents (see especially Christman 1991); and so surely,
egalitarians argue, there is nothing really objectionable about using
such taxation to enact a social minimum. 
 This is a forceful reply, but it is important to note its
limitations. The reply in effect concedes that taxation of labor
incomes involves effort-harnessing, but points out that an individual
worker can be free in certain significant respects even if he/she is
subject to effort-harnessing. This seems correct, but if one thinks
that effort-harnessing is wrong even if it is compatible with certain
significant freedoms, then the self-ownership objection to the
enactment of a social minimum stands. At this point, a supporter of
taxing labor incomes might reply in one of two ways. Firstly, he or
she might simply and straightforwardly reject the claim that there is
anything inherently wrong with effort-harnessing. In other words, he
or she might say that there is nothing necessarily objectionable about
putting the talented in a position such that, if they choose to work,
they will have no choice but to assist the less talented. 
 Secondly, he or she might concede that there is something
inherently wrong about effort-harnessing, but argue that the threats
to individual freedom or dignity from poverty are a greater evil
still, justifying some degree of effort-harnessing in order to enact a
social minimum. This position might be defended using a theory of
“rights-based consequentialism” (e.g., of the kind set out
by Sen 1982). The rights-based consequentialist believes that social
policy should be guided by the principle: act so as to minimize the
overall amount of rights violation in society. In applying this
principle, different rights might be given different weights based on
an assessment of their relative importance to human well-being. For
example, in the case we have been considering, it might be argued that
the right to have reasonable access to a social minimum should have
more weight than the right to be free of effort-harnessing, and that
it is therefore justifiable to infringe the latter right in the case
of more talented workers in order to ensure that the former right is
enjoyed by all. 
3.2 The fairness objection
A different objection focuses on the alleged risk of unfairness in
enacting a social minimum. Specifically, the unfairness
objection is that public provision of a social minimum might lead
some people to make inadequate effort to help themselves and that this
is unfair to those whose efforts ultimately make the necessary
resources available. Note that the behavior allegedly caused by social
minimum programs might also or alternatively be considered a bad thing
because of its effect on the welfare recipient, rather than (just)
because of any unfairness to others. This thought motivates what one
might call the dependency objection to enactment of a social
minimum, in view of the alleged passivity or “dependency”
induced by reliance on welfare benefits (see, for example, Tocqueville
1835, Murray 1984; see also Humboldt 1852). However, a good deal of
what can be said in reply to the fairness objection also applies to
this dependency objection, and so we will not lose much by focusing on
the fairness objection for present purposes.
The extent to which welfare programs do generate behavioral change
is, of course, a subject of considerable debate amongst scholars of
social policy (for a helpful review of the debate, see Deacon 2002:
chapters 2–5). But assume, for the sake of argument, that public
provision of a social minimum does lead to some behavioral
change. What are the implications of this for the justice of enacting
a social minimum?
 One response to the unfairness objection is to argue that some
sort of work condition should be built into the social minimum policy
regime. People who claim the resources constitutive of the social
minimum should be willing to work; if they refuse, then they lose
their entitlement to the social minimum in full; exceptions must be
made for those who are unable to work. We might call this,
the principle of work-conditionality (for apparent
endorsements of this principle, subject to widely varying degrees of
qualification, see Anderson 1999: 321; Gutmann and Thompson 1996:
chapter 8; Kaus 1992; Mead 1986, 1992, 1997; Rawls 2001: 179; White
2000, 2003, 2005). To be clear, by work-conditionality we mean
conditions that link elements of the social minimum policy regime to
some kind of work-related activity, such as active job search or
retraining, not necessarily to immediate work. In recent years, the
debate over social policy in countries like the UK and the United
States has also featured calls for other kinds of behavioral
conditions, such as proposals to condition welfare benefits on school
attendance, on staying off drugs, and on avoiding anti-social behavior
(again, see Deacon 2002, particularly chapter 3, for a helpful
overview; see also Mead 1997). The focus below is specifically on
work-conditionality, though many of the arguments against
work-conditionality also apply to proposals such as these. 
 Should the social minimum be enacted in a way that respects the
principle of work-conditionality? Space permits us here to consider
just two of the more important arguments against the principle of
work-conditionality.
3.2.1 Vulnerability, equity and conditionality
 A first important set of arguments against work-conditionality
appeals to problems of vulnerability and equity in the
application of work conditions in a social minimum policy regime. 
 One possible problem concerns vulnerability in the labor
market. As we saw above in section 2.5, one
rationale for having a welfare state to enact a social minimum is
that, by providing access to urgently needed goods independently of
the sale of labor-power, it can reduce the pressure on disadvantaged
workers to scramble into poor quality (exploitative or abusive)
jobs. There is a danger that work-conditionality rules undermine this
desirable effect. If, for example, the government tells an unemployed
person that she must look for a job and take any job offered by an
employer on whatever terms this employer states, or else lose all
welfare benefits, then this person will be under severe pressure to
find and take a job. She will clearly have much less ability to refuse
jobs that she perceives (perhaps correctly) to involve exploitative or
abusive treatment than if she received her welfare benefits
unconditionally. According to some radical critics of
work-conditionality, this is the whole point of work-conditionality:
to weaken the bargaining position of labor in the interests of
business and the property-owning classes (see Piven and Cloward
1993). A distinct but related objection is that work-conditionality
might place a burden of “shameful revelation” on those
claiming transfers: to qualify for transfers, they have to show that
they have looked for a job, but failed to get one, which is
potentially damaging to self-respect (Wolff 1998). 
 A second problem concerns the vulnerability of
dependents. If someone is denied the full social minimum because
he/she chooses not to satisfy a work-conditionality rule then this
will not only hurt him/her, but is likely also to hurt his/her
dependents—for the most part, children. Since these dependents
are in no way responsible for their parents’ decision to ignore
a work-conditionality rule, this hurt is surely unfair (and, if
sustained, may undermine other social goals, such as achieving
equality of opportunity for children from different social
backgrounds). 
 A third problem is that work-conditionality rules may in practice
lead to inequity between welfare recipients and other
citizens.  It is easy to see how a work-condition can be applied
to citizens who need welfare benefits provided by the state to enjoy
the social minimum: the government can make it a condition of getting
the benefits that people look for a job or retrain. But what about
those who inherit large amounts of wealth? These people can probably
afford to forego many of the state's welfare benefits, and their
wealth will enable them to live comfortably without any need to
work. What can be done to get these wealthier citizens to meet their
supposed responsibility to work? If nothing is done, then there is
apparently a failure to enforce a given social duty equitably:
citizens who need welfare benefits will be forced to meet their
putative duty to work, but citizens who receive large inheritances
will not be forced to meet this duty. 
 All of these points relate to a basic, underlying question of how
just are the society's background economic structures. If society's
economic structures are just in other respects, then it may seem
reasonable to expect each citizen who is able to work to do so. In a
context of otherwise just social arrangements, then this seems part
and parcel of fair social cooperation. But what if the background
structures of the economy are actually unjust in other respects? For
example, perhaps society's educational institutions fail to secure
sufficient equality of opportunity, unfairly leaving some citizens
with limited job opportunities. Or perhaps the reward structure is
unequal to an unfair extent, leaving some workers with unfairly low
pay for the work they do. In this context, it can be argued that the
underlying obligation to work, as an expression of fairness in social
cooperation, does not in fact hold for those citizens who suffer
unfair disadvantage (Shelby 2007, develops this argument in a
discussion of the obligations and duties of the ghetto poor in the
United States).
 In response, a supporter of work-conditionality might argue that
the problems that the critics point to can be effectively addressed
without abandoning the basic principle of work-conditionality. Perhaps
these problems are not necessary but contingent products of
work-conditionality rules, problems that can be substantially reduced,
possibly even eliminated, by careful design of work-conditionality
rules and/or by combining such rules with other policies that address
the underlying sources of market vulnerability and inequity in the
enforcement of putative social duties.
 Arguing along these lines, some of those who have endorsed the
basic principle of work-conditionality have also cautioned against
applying the principle in a way that is insensitive to the background
distribution of wealth and opportunity in society (see, for example,
Gutmann and Thompson 1996: chapter 8; White 2003, 2005; see also
Daniels 1981: 160–162). They argue that the principle of
work-conditionality should be suspended, or at least moderated, if the
background distribution of wealth and opportunity is not sufficiently
egalitarian. 
3.2.2 The inheritance argument against conditionality
 A further objection to making the social minimum work-conditional
comes from philosophers influenced by the left-libertarian tradition
reviewed above (see section 2.3). As we saw
above, left-libertarians believe that, ideally speaking, individuals
have a right to an equal share of resources that are an inheritance
from nature or from past generations. Thus, imagine that ten people
arrive on an island and find that it contains a factory containing ten
machines. The machines can be used to produce the food, clothing and
shelter that the islanders need to survive. The left-libertarian will
argue that in principle each islander should receive one
machine—that is, an equal share of the machines in the inherited
factory. Now suppose that one of the ten islanders, call him Roger,
decides not to work his machine but to rent it out to other islanders
who are prepared to work it for a price. Roger does no work, but
simply lives off the rent that other islanders pay him for the use of
the machine that he has been allocated. Now, depending on how high the
rent is, Roger could conceivably be receiving an income close to his
society's social minimum, and he will be doing no work in return for
this income. But the left-libertarian will argue that this is not
unjust because Roger is only here making use of his rightful share of
his society's inherited goods. As we noted above, it is difficult in
practice to divide inherited resources up literally in this way. But
we can perhaps identify these resources, assess their market value,
and give everyone a grant of income or wealth equivalent to a per
capita share of the market value of these resources. Some people might
choose to live off this grant without doing any work (or doing as
little work as possible).  But, according to the left-libertarian,
this is no different to Roger deciding to do no work and to live off
the rent he can get from charging others to work on his machine: it is
a legitimate use of one's rightful share of society's inherited
resources. Subject to important nuances and variations, a number of
philosophers have employed this type of argument in recent years to
defend the payment to each citizen of an unconditional income or a
universal capital grant (see Steiner 1994; Van Parijs
1992, 1995; Ackerman and
Alstott 1999; Birnbaum 2012; Widerquist 2013). 
 There are, however, some difficulties with the argument,
understood as an attempt to defend the enactment of a full social
minimum without any work condition. 
 The first difficulty, already flagged up in our discussion of
left-libertarianism in section 2.3, is that the
grant which represents one's rightful share of society's inherited
wealth might fall somewhat short of the value of the full social
minimum.[9]
However, a second question is whether people do in fact have a
right to an equal share of their society's inherited
resources regardless of work effort. The basic issue is
whether it is fair to use an inheritance, as Roger does in the example
above, to extract a share of what other citizens produce while
choosing not to make a productive contribution of one's own in
return. 
 It might be said that people like Roger do contribute to
production by supplying their share of inherited resources for others
to use for productive purposes.  But a distinction can be made between
the contribution that the inherited resources putatively credited to
Roger make to production, and Roger's own contribution.  If Roger were
not on the island we imagined, the other islanders could still use the
inherited resources that we have supposed are otherwise credited to
him. They could work just as hard, and produce just as much, as they
do when Roger is there and is credited with an equal share of these
resources. But they would be better off because they would not have to
give a portion of this product to Roger in return for using some of
the island's inherited wealth.  This, so the argument runs, shows that
Roger himself is not in any real sense contributing economically to
the society. So is it fair for him to get an income without working
(assuming that he could if he so chooses)? Some argue that Roger has
much right to a share of the machines as anyone else and it is up to
him what benefit he gets from this (Van Parijs 1995, Birnbaum
2012). Others argue that cases like this shows that a just
distribution of assets should be more sensitive to individuals' own
interest in making direct use of them (see van Donselaar 2009; see
also Van der Veen 1998, White 2007).  
 To conclude, the concern for economic fairness (as reciprocity)
does not offer grounds for rejecting enactment of a social minimum. At
most, it supports making elements of a social minimum policy package
work-conditional. However, there are strong arguments for limiting
work-conditionality. One set of arguments appeals to the ways in which
work-conditionality can enhance the vulnerability of citizens to
exploitation or other forms of injustice and/or generate or exacerbate
other inequities between citizens. This set of arguments—of
which we have mentioned only a selection here—has additional
force in societies where the background economic structures are
otherwise significantly unjust (Shelby 2007). Another kind of argument
appeals to the idea that citizens have a right to a share of inherited
assets that is not conditional with respect to willingness to work,
though the scope and precise nature of this right remains
disputed.
3.3 The legitimacy objection
 A third objection to the enactment of a social minimum appeals to
the value of legitimacy. A law or policy lacks legitimacy when the law
or policy is arbitrary in the eyes of those bound by the law or
policy—that is, they are unable to identify a sufficiently good
reason to justify their subjection to this law or policy. The absence
of legitimacy signals a kind of alienation from the law or policy, so
that people are quite unable to identify with it as an expression of
what they value and believe. Critics might argue that the
establishment of a social minimum policy regime creates distinctive
problems of legitimacy for a society; and they might further argue
that these problems make it undesirable, all things considered, to
enact a social minimum. How might enactment of a social minimum
generate problems of legitimacy? How can these problems be tackled? Do
the problems really discredit the case for enactment?
One potential legitimacy problem is the capability-list
problem that we noted above in
section 1.2. To say what kind and level
of resources are necessary for people to be able to lead “a
minimally decent life in one's society”, we must take a view
about the functionings and capabilities that are constitutive of a
decent human life, and any such view is bound to be somewhat
controversial. Some people might not accept the capability-list used
to determine the social minimum as the right list. We shall return
briefly to this problem towards the end of this section, but only
after first give some consideration to a second potential legitimacy
problem which we also briefly noted in
section 1.1: the limit-setting
problem. To recall the problem, consider once again item (2) on
Nussbaum's list of “central human functional
capabilities”, as set out in
section 1.2, the capability for bodily
health. What kind and level of access to health-care resources must a
society secure for its members for us to say that this capability is
satisfied to an extent that allows everyone to lead “a minimally
decent life”? If we hold that society must ensure access to
whatever health-care resources have, say, a life-sustaining impact,
then we may well be committing ourselves to spending the vast bulk of
the society's resources just on health-care. At some point limits must
be set, or else the health-care sector will devour the whole social
product (making it impossible, of course, to provide for other key
capabilities). But, on the other hand, how can limits be set in a way
that is fair and has legitimacy in the eyes of the people who will
have to live with the consequences of these limit-setting decisions?
How is it possible for communities to decide whether or not a new,
expensive health-care treatment is in or out of the social minimum,
and for this decision to have legitimacy in the eyes of the
citizens? 
In response to this question, political philosophers have developed
two, complementary responses. A first response is to consider whether
the theories of social justice that support enactment of a social
minimum also provide reasons that we can use to set non-arbitrary
limits on the content of the social minimum. One example is Ronald
Dworkin's hypothetical insurance argument for the social minimum (see
section 2.4.2 above). Dworkin has himself
explained how this approach might be used to inform limit-setting
decisions in health-care (see Dworkin 2000: 307–319). We begin
by imagining that each person holds a fair share of their society's
wealth (let's say, roughly speaking, a per capita share of this
wealth). We then imagine that each person is fully knowledgeable of
the value, costs and side-effects of available medical
procedures. People know the population-wide probabilities of getting
specific health conditions, but we imagine that there is a veil of
ignorance such that no person is aware of his or her own individual
risk of any condition. We then ask what treatments a typical young
person in this hypothetical insurance market would choose to insure
themselves for, over their whole life, out of their fair share of
society's wealth. According to Dworkin, while we cannot know what such
a person would choose to insure themselves for with “any
precision”, we can make some reasonable guesses as to some of
the treatments he would not insure himself for, and we can
then use this information to address the problem of limit-setting in
publicly-financed health-care systems.  Consider, for example, very
expensive treatments that marginally extend the lives of terminally
ill old-aged patients. Dworkin claims that most young people
on reflection would not think it prudent to buy
insurance that could keep them alive, by expensive medical
intervention, for four or five months at the most if they had already
lived into old age. They would think it wiser to spend what that
insurance would cost on better health care earlier, or on education or
training or investment that would provide greater benefit or more
important security. (Dworkin 2000: 314)
Precisely because we would not choose to insure
ourselves for such treatments, in the circumstances of a fair,
hypothetical insurance market, Dworkin argues that we should not
include them in the package of treatments that citizens are entitled
to as part of the social minimum. 
 Nevertheless, since it is impossible to track the choices of a
prudent youth in the hypothetical insurance market with any precision,
Dworkin's hypothetical insurance approach is likely to leave us with a
good deal of reasonable disagreement about what kind of health-care
treatments should or should not be included in the health-care package
provided by the social minimum policy regime. This large residuum of
reasonable disagreement leads on to the second response to the
limit-setting problem. This response invites us to consider explicitly
the political processes through which limit-setting decisions
are made. It considers what features these processes must have if they
are to treat all those bound by the decisions fairly, and in a way
that all those concerned can regard as legitimate.
 In the health-care context, this issue is explored in an important
paper by Norman Daniels and James Sabin (Daniels and Sabin
1997). Daniels and Sabin
argue that for limit-setting decisions in this context to have
legitimacy, the decision-making process must satisfy four conditions
(see Daniels and Sabin 1997: 322–325; also Ham and Robert 2003: 2):

Publicity. The rationales for limit-setting decisions
must be made public.
Reasonableness. The rationales for limit-setting
decisions should be reasonable; that is, they should appeal to reasons
and principles that can be accepted as relevant by people who are
disposed to look for reasons and principles agreeable to all.
Contestability. There should be a mechanism through which
decisions can be challenged, with adequate opportunity to present new
arguments and evidence.
Enforcement. There should be a mechanism for forcing the
limit-setting body to respect the first three conditions. 

The idea is not that the people who are affected by a given
limit-setting decision will necessarily agree with this decision if
these conditions are met, e.g., agree with a decision to exclude a
specific medical treatment from the health-care package provided under
the social minimum policy regime. Rather, the idea is that all parties
will be able to regard the decision as legitimate, even if they
disagree with it and some of them continue to oppose it. The
conditions of publicity and reasonableness work to ensure that a given
decision is grounded in reasons of a kind that affected parties can
see at least see as relevant. The contestability condition helps to
ensure that the reasonableness of the decision is robust, that all
relevant reasons and evidence have indeed been weighed by the
decision-making body in coming to its decision. In these
circumstances, even the person who “loses” in such a case
can feel assured that her interests and point of view have not been
overruled arbitrarily. In this sense, she is fairly treated and the
decision ought to have, even in her eyes, legitimacy, even if she
continues to think it mistaken and opposes it. Participants in such
procedures might be encouraged to use thought-experiments like
Dworkin's so as to help correct biases and so contribute to the
reasonableness of the decisions made; even if such thought-experiments
can't always identify a specific policy as clearly the just one, they
can help to keep decision-makers from choosing policies that are
clearly unreasonable.
 The implication of the foregoing analysis is that those who wish
to enact a social minimum need to give some thought to the
institutional structures through which limit-setting decisions are
made, with an eye to seeing that the conditions of publicity,
reasonableness, and contestability are met. This applies not only in
relation to health-care, but in relation to all the programs that
governments must typically have as part of enacting a social minimum,
such as cash transfer programs, educational services, and so
on. Moreover, this concern for appropriate procedure should arguably
inform not only our response to the limit-setting problem, but to the
capability-list problem that we noted above.  In a society where
there is broad, but not perfect, consensus in support of a
Nussbaum-style list of “central human functional
capabilities”, the legitimacy of the final capability-list used
to help specify the social minimum can be enhanced by subjecting the
formulation of the list to a process that has the characteristics of
publicity, reasonableness, and contestability noted above (see Sen
1999: 110; Nussbaum 1999: 47–49, for comments along these
lines).[10] A
similar focus on the importance of fair procedure in the
specification of the social minimum policy package can be found in
Nancy Fraser's work on the “politics of need
interpretation” (Fraser 1989, 1997), and in Amy Gutmann's and
Dennis Thompson's account of welfare state policy-making in a
“deliberative democracy” (Gutmann and Thompson 1996). The
use of conditionality, discussed in the previous section, is perhaps
a particularly important area in which to make sure that
policy-making procedures have these qualities of publicity,
reasonableness, and contestability.
A further and key question for consideration here is whether the
standard processes of representative democracy are adequate to meet
the demands of publicity, reasonableness, and contestability, or
whether, to achieve decisions that have legitimacy, these processes
need to be supplemented by other kinds of institutions that are more
deliberative and inclusive of the people who stand to be bound by
limit-setting and capability-listing decisions. One interesting
development in this respect is the recent growth of interest in the
use of various kinds of “minipublic” such
as citizens’ juries and deliberative opinion
polls to assist with decision-making in health-care and other
public services (on which, see Fishkin 1995, Coote and Lenaghan 1998,
Smith and Wales 2000, Fung 2003, Smith 2009). Another 'democratic
innovation' which is important in this respect is participatory
budgeting which originated in Brazil in the 1990s and has since been
taken up (in various forms) around the world (de Sousa Santos 2007,
Wampler 2007, Baiocchi, Heller and Silva 2011, Fung 2011).
 In view of the legitimacy problems discussed in this section,
those who support enactment of a social minimum arguably need to give
more thought to the role of such institutions in the specification and
operation of social minimum policy regimes.
4. Conclusion
 Instead of summarizing the arguments of the previous sections
here, we close by noting three further points which put our discussion
into perspective. 
 Firstly, we should note that as we move to enact the social
minimum there are a number of important policy design questions that
arise that our discussion thus far leaves unresolved. We have
considered one design issue: the issue of how far access to the
social minimum should be work-conditional. But there is a huge range
of other design issues that we have not directly considered. For
example, if we accept that the government has a responsibility to its
citizens to secure access to certain basic goods and services, to
what extent should the government itself directly produce these goods
and services, e.g., health-care? If we accept that the government
must introduce tax-transfer schemes to enact the social minimum, what
form should these take? Should the government use
“means-testing” to target transfers exclusively to the
most needy, or should it seek to enact the social minimum through
so-called “social insurance” programs to which all (or
virtually all) citizens contribute, and from which all receive
benefits?[11]
If the government provides citizens with assistance in meeting a
specific need, should it provide assistance in the form of
“in-kind” benefits or in the form of
cash?[12]
These are all major design questions that arise in thinking about how
to enact the social minimum. One cannot settle them merely by appeal
to the basic principle of the social minimum. Although many of the
ideas and considerations discussed here will be relevant in
addressing these questions, settling them requires further
philosophical reflection and, indeed, a lot of empirical
research. 
 Secondly, it is important to note that throughout the discussion
our focus has implicitly been on the morality of enacting a social
minimum within a given country. But this restriction of
focus obviously leaves unconsidered what many people rightly consider
to be an urgent question: What kind of obligations (if any) do we, as
citizens of one country, have to secure the enactment of a social
minimum in other countries? Again, this question demands further
philosophical reflection, reflection that would need to draw on the
growing body of literature on cosmopolitan or global
justice.[13]

Thirdly, even when considering economic and social arrangements
within a given country, we need to keep distinct the specific question
of whether and why a social minimum is justified from the broader
question of what social justice consists in and demands of
us. Enacting a social minimum may well be a demand of social
justice. Indeed, it may well be one of the most urgent demands of
social justice. But, challenging as this demand may be, social justice
may require even more of us than this.