Constantin Brancusi. Socrates

 Image © The Museum of Modern Art;
 
 Licensed by Scala/Art  Resource, NY 
 
 ©2005 Artists Rights Society (ARS), 
 
 New York/ADAGP, Paris
 
 reproduced with permission
 
 of the Brancusi Estate



The philosopher Socrates remains, as he was in his
lifetime (469–399
 B.C.E.),[1]
 an enigma, an inscrutable individual who, despite having written
nothing, is considered one of the handful of philosophers who forever
changed how philosophy itself was to be conceived. All our information
about him is second-hand and most of it vigorously disputed, but his
trial and death at the hands of the Athenian democracy is nevertheless
the founding myth of the academic discipline of philosophy, and his
influence has been felt far beyond philosophy itself, and in every
age. Because his life is widely considered paradigmatic for the
philosophic life and, more generally, for how anyone ought to
live, Socrates has been encumbered with the admiration and emulation
normally reserved for founders of religious sects—Jesus or
Buddha—strange for someone who tried so hard to make others do
their own thinking, and for someone convicted and executed on the
charge of irreverence toward the gods. Certainly he was impressive, so
impressive that many others were moved to write about him, all of whom
found him strange by the conventions of fifth-century Athens: in his
appearance, personality, and behavior, as well as in his views and
methods.  


So thorny is the difficulty of distinguishing the historical Socrates
from the Socrateses of the authors of the texts in which he appears
and, moreover, from the Socrateses of scores of later interpreters,
that the whole contested issue is generally referred to as the
Socratic problem. Each age, each intellectual turn, produces a
Socrates of its own. It is no less true now that, “The
‘real’ Socrates we have not: what we have is a set of
interpretations each of which represents a ‘theoretically
possible’ Socrates,” as Cornelia de Vogel (1955, 28) put
it. In fact, de Vogel was writing as a new analytic paradigm for
interpreting Socrates was about to become standard—Gregory
Vlastos’s model (§2.2), which would hold sway until the mid
1990s. Who Socrates really was is fundamental to virtually any 
interpretation of the philosophical dialogues of Plato because Socrates is the dominant figure
in most of Plato’s dialogues.
 
1.  Socrates’s strangeness


Standards of beauty are different in different eras, and in
Socrates’s time beauty could easily be measured by the standard of the
gods, stately, proportionate sculptures of whom had been adorning the
Athenian acropolis since about the time Socrates reached the age of
thirty. Good looks and proper bearing were important to a man’s
political prospects, for beauty and goodness were linked in the popular
imagination. The extant sources agree that Socrates was profoundly
ugly, resembling a satyr more than a man—and resembling not at all
the statues that turned up later in ancient times and now grace
Internet sites and the covers of books. He had wide-set, bulging eyes
that darted sideways and enabled him, like a crab, to see not only what
was straight ahead, but what was beside him as well; a flat, upturned
nose with flaring nostrils; and large fleshy lips like an ass. Socrates let
his hair grow long, Spartan-style (even while Athens and Sparta were at
war), and went about barefoot and unwashed, carrying a stick and
looking arrogant. He didn’t change his clothes but efficiently wore in
the daytime what he covered himself with at night. Something was
peculiar about his gait as well, sometimes described as a swagger so
intimidating that enemy soldiers kept their distance. He was
impervious to the effects of alcohol and cold weather, but this made him an
object of suspicion to his fellow soldiers on campaign. We can safely
assume an average height (since no one mentions it at all), and a
strong build, given the active life he appears to have led. Against the
iconic tradition of a pot-belly, Socrates and his companions are
described as going hungry (Aristophanes, Birds 1280–83). On
his appearance, see Plato’s Theaetetus 143e, and
Symposium 215a–c, 216c–d, 221d–e; Xenophon’s
Symposium 4.19, 5.5–7; and Aristophanes’s Clouds 362.
Brancusi’s oak sculpture, standing 51.25 inches including its base,
captures Socrates’s appearance and strangeness in the sense that it
looks different from every angle, including a second “eye”
that cannot be seen if the first is in view. (See the Museum of Modern Art’s
 page on Brancusi’s Socrates
 which offers additional views.) Also true to Socrates’s reputation for
ugliness, but less available, are the drawings of the contemporary Swiss artist, Hans Erni.


In the late fifth century B.C.E., it was more or less taken for
granted that any self-respecting Athenian male would prefer fame,
wealth, honors, and political power to a life of labor.  Although many
citizens lived by their labor in a wide variety of occupations, they
were expected to spend much of their leisure time, if they had any,
busying themselves with the affairs of the city. Men regularly
participated in the governing Assembly and in the city’s many courts;
and those who could afford it prepared themselves for success at
public life by studying with rhetoricians and sophists from abroad who
could themselves become wealthy and famous by teaching the young men
of Athens to use words to their advantage. Other forms of higher
education were also known in Athens: mathematics, astronomy, geometry,
music, ancient history, and linguistics. One of the things that seemed strange about
Socrates is that he neither labored to earn a living, nor participated
voluntarily in affairs of state. Rather, he embraced poverty and,
although youths of the city kept company with him and imitated him,
Socrates adamantly insisted he was not a teacher
(Plato, Apology 33a–b) and refused all his life to take money
for what he did. The strangeness of this behavior is mitigated by the
image then current of teachers and students: teachers were viewed as
pitchers pouring their contents into the empty cups that were the
students. Because Socrates was no transmitter of information that
others were passively to receive, he resists the comparison to
teachers. Rather, he helped others recognize on their own what is
real, true, and good (Plato, Meno,
Theaetetus)—a new, and thus suspect, approach to
education. He was known for confusing, stinging and stunning his
conversation partners into the unpleasant experience of realizing
their own ignorance, a state sometimes superseded by genuine
intellectual curiosity.


It did not help matters that Socrates seemed to have a higher opinion
of women than most of his companions had, speaking of “men and
women,” “priests and priestesses,” and naming
foreign women as his teachers: Socrates claimed to have learned
rhetoric from Aspasia of Miletus, the de facto spouse of Pericles (Plato,
Menexenus); and to have learned erotics from the priestess
Diotima of Mantinea (Plato, Symposium). Socrates was
unconventional in a related respect. Athenian citizen males of the
upper social classes did not marry until they were at least thirty,
and Athenian females were poorly educated and kept sequestered until
puberty, when they were given in marriage by their fathers. Thus the
socialization and education of males often involved a relationship for
which the English word ‘pederasty’ (though often used) is
misleading, in which a youth approaching manhood, fifteen to
seventeen, became the beloved of a male lover a few years older, under
whose tutelage and through whose influence and gifts, the younger man
would be guided and improved. It was assumed among Athenians that
mature men would find youths sexually attractive, and such
relationships were conventionally viewed as beneficial to both parties
by family and friends alike. A degree of hypocrisy (or denial),
however, was implied by the arrangement: “officially” it
did not involve sexual relations between the lovers and, if it did,
then the beloved was not supposed to derive pleasure from the
act—but ancient evidence (comedies, vase
paintings, et al.) shows that both restrictions were often violated
(Dover 1989, 204). What was odd about Socrates is that, although he
was no exception to the rule of finding youths attractive (Plato,
Charmides 155d, Protagoras 309a–b; Xenophon,
Symposium 4.27–28), he refused the physical advances of even
his favorite (Plato, Symposium 219b–d) and kept his eye on
the improvement of their, and all the Athenians’, souls (Plato,
Apology 30a–b), a mission he said he had been assigned by the
oracle of Apollo at Delphi, if he was interpreting his friend
Chaerephon’s report correctly (Plato, Apology 20e–23b), a
preposterous claim in the eyes of his fellow citizens. Socrates also
acknowledged a rather strange personal phenomenon, a
daimonion or internal voice that prohibited his doing certain
things, some trivial and some important, often unrelated to matters
of right and wrong (thus not to be confused with the popular notions
of a superego or a conscience). The implication that he was guided by
something he regarded as divine or semi-divine was all the more reason for other
Athenians to be suspicious of Socrates.


Socrates was usually to be found in the marketplace and other public
areas, conversing with a variety of different people—young and
old, male and female, slave and free, rich and poor—that is,
with virtually anyone he could persuade to join with him in his
question-and-answer mode of probing serious matters. Socrates’s
lifework consisted in the examination of people’s lives, his own and
others’, because “the unexamined life is not worth living for a
human being,” as he says at his trial (Plato, Apology
38a).  Socrates pursued this task single-mindedly, questioning people
about what matters most, e.g., courage, love, reverence, moderation,
and the state of their souls generally. He did this regardless of
whether his respondents wanted to be questioned or resisted him.
Athenian youths imitated Socrates’s questioning style, much to the
annoyance of some of their elders. He had a reputation for irony,
though what that means exactly is controversial; at a minimum,
Socrates’s irony consisted in his saying that he knew nothing of
importance and wanted to listen to others, yet keeping the upper hand
in every discussion. One further aspect of Socrates’s much-touted
strangeness should be mentioned: his dogged failure to align himself
politically with oligarchs or democrats; rather, he had friends and
enemies among both, and he supported and opposed actions of both (see
§3).  
2. The Socratic problem: Who was Socrates really?


The Socratic problem is a rat’s nest of complexities arising from the
fact that various people wrote about Socrates whose accounts
differ in crucial respects, leaving us to wonder which, if any, are
accurate representations of the historical Socrates.  “There is,
and always will be, a ‘Socratic problem’. This is
inevitable,” said Guthrie (1969, 6), looking back on a gnarled
history between ancient and contemporary times that is narrated in
detail by Press (1996), but barely touched on below. The difficulties
are increased because all those who knew and wrote about Socrates
lived before any standardization of modern categories of, or
sensibilities about, what constitutes historical accuracy or poetic
license. All authors present their own interpretations of the
personalities and lives of their characters, whether they mean to or
not, whether they write fiction or biography or philosophy (if the
philosophy they write has characters), so other criteria must be
introduced for deciding among the contending views of who Socrates
really was. A look at the three primary ancient sources of information
about Socrates (§2.1) will provide a foundation for appreciating
how contemporary interpretations differ (§2.2) and why the
differences matter (§2.3).


One thing is certain about the historical Socrates: even among those
who knew him in life, there was profound disagreement about what his
actual views and methods were. Apart from the three primary sources
below, there were those called ‘minor Socratics’, not for
the quality of their work but because so little or none of it is
extant, about whose view of Socrates we shall probably never know
 much.[2]
 After Socrates’s death, the tradition became even more disparate. As
Nehamas (1999, 99) puts it, “with the exception of the
Epicureans, every philosophical school in antiquity, whatever its
orientation, saw in him either its actual founder or the type of
person to whom its adherents were to aspire.”
2.1 Three primary sources: Aristophanes, Xenophon, and Plato
Aristophanes (±450–±386)

 Our earliest extant source—and the only one who can claim to
have known Socrates in his early years—is the playwright
Aristophanes.  His comedy, Clouds, was produced in 423 when
the other two writers of our extant sources, Xenophon and Plato, were infants. In the
play, the character Socrates heads a Think-o-Rama in which young men
study the natural world, from insects to stars, and study slick
argumentative techniques as well, lacking all respect for the Athenian
sense of propriety. The actor wearing the mask of Socrates makes fun
of the traditional gods of Athens (lines 247–48, 367, 423–24),
mimicked later by the young protagonist, and gives naturalistic
explanations of phenomena Athenians viewed as divinely directed (lines
227–33; cf.  Theaetetus 152e, 153c–d, 173e–174a;
Phaedo 96a–100a).  Worst of all, he teaches dishonest
techniques for avoiding repayment of debt (lines 1214–1302) and
encourages young men to beat their parents into submission (lines
1408–46).


In favor of Aristophanes as a source is that Xenophon and Plato were
some forty-five years younger than Socrates, so their acquaintance
could only have been in Socrates’s later years. One may reasonably
doubt that the life and personality of Socrates was so consistent that
Plato’s characterization of a man in his fifties and sixties should
utterly undo the lampooning account of the younger Socrates found in
Clouds and other comic poets. More to the point, the years
between Clouds and Socrates’s trial were years of war and
upheaval, so the Athenian intellectual freedom of which Pericles
boasted at the beginning of the war (Thucydides 2.37–39) had been
eroded completely by the end (see §3). Thus, what had seemed
comical a quarter century earlier, Socrates hanging in a basket
on-stage, talking nonsense, was ominous in memory by then.


Comedy by its very nature is a tricky source for information about
anyone. A good reason to believe that the representation of Socrates
is not merely comic exaggeration but systematically misleading is that
Clouds amalgamates in one character, Socrates, features now
well known to be unique to other particular fifth-century
intellectuals (Dover 1968, xxxii-lvii). Perhaps Aristophanes chose
Socrates to represent garden-variety intellectuals because Socrates’s
physiognomy was strange enough to be comic by itself. Aristophanes
genuinely objected to what he saw as social instability brought on by
the freedom Athenian youths enjoyed to study with professional
rhetoricians, sophists (see §1), and natural philosophers, e.g.,
those who, like the presocratics, studied the cosmos or nature. That
Socrates eschewed any earning potential in philosophy does not seem to
have been significant to the great writer of comedies. Aristophanes’s
depiction is important because Plato’s Socrates says at his trial
(Apology 18a–b, 19c) that most of his jurors have grown up
believing the falsehoods spread about him in the play. Socrates calls
Aristophanes more dangerous than the three men who brought charges
against him in 399 because Aristophanes had poisoned the jurors’ minds
while they were young. Aristophanes did not stop accusing Socrates in
423 when Clouds placed third behind another play in which
Socrates was mentioned as barefoot; rather, he soon began writing a
revision, which he published but never produced. Aristophanes appears
to have given up on reviving
Clouds in about 416, but his attacks on Socrates
continued. Again in 414 with Birds, and in 405 with
Frogs, Aristophanes complained of Socrates’s deleterious
effect on the youths of the city, including Socrates’s neglect of the
 poets.[3]
Xenophon (±425–±386)

 Another source for the historical Socrates is the soldier-historian,
Xenophon. Xenophon says explicitly of Socrates, “I was never
acquainted with anyone who took greater care to find out what each of
his companions knew” (Memorabilia 4.7.1); and Plato
corroborates Xenophon’s statement by illustrating throughout his
dialogues Socrates’s adjustment of the level and type of his questions
to the particular individuals with whom he talked. If it is true that
Socrates succeeded in pitching his conversation at the right level for
each of his companions, the striking differences between Xenophon’s
Socrates and Plato’s is largely explained by the differences between
their two personalities. Xenophon was a practical man whose ability to
recognize philosophical issues is almost imperceptible, so it is
plausible that his Socrates appears as such a practical and helpful
advisor because that is the side of Socrates Xenophon witnessed.
Xenophon’s Socrates differs additionally from Plato’s in offering
advice about subjects in which Xenophon was himself experienced, but
Socrates was not: moneymaking (Xenophon, Memorabilia 2.7) and
estate management (Xenophon, Oeconomicus), suggesting that
Xenophon may have entered into the writing of Socratic discourses (as
Aristotle labeled the genre, Poetics 1447b11) making the
character Socrates a mouthpiece for his own views. His other works
mentioning or featuring Socrates are Anabasis,
Apology, Hellenica, and Symposium.


Something that has strengthened Xenophon’s prima facie claim
as a source for Socrates’s life is his work as a historian; his
Hellenica (History of Greece) is one of the chief
sources for the period 411–362, after Thucydides’s history abruptly
ends in the midst of the Peloponnesian wars. Although Xenophon tends
to moralize and does not follow the superior conventions introduced by
Thucydides, still it is sometimes argued that, having had no
philosophical axes to grind, Xenophon may have presented a more
accurate portrait of Socrates than Plato does. But two considerations
have always weakened that claim: (1) The Socrates of Xenophon’s works
is so pedestrian that it is difficult to imagine his inspiring fifteen
or more people to write Socratic discourses in the period following
his death. (2) Xenophon could not have chalked up many hours with
Socrates or with reliable informants. He lived in Erchia, about 15
kilometers and across the Hymettus mountains from Socrates’s haunts in
the urban area of Athens, and his love of horses and horsemanship (on
which he wrote a still valuable treatise) seem to have taken up
considerable time. He left Athens in 401 on an expedition to Persia
and, for a variety of reasons (mercenary service for Thracians and
Spartans; exile), never resided in Athens again. And now a third is in
order. (3) It turns out to have been ill-advised to assume that
Xenophon would apply the same criteria for accuracy to his Socratic
discourses as to his
 histories.[4]
 The biographical and historical background Xenophon deploys in his
memoirs of Socrates fails to correspond to such additional sources as
we have from archaeology, history, the courts, and literature. The
widespread use of computers in classical studies, enabling the
comparison of ancient persons, and the compiling of information about
each of them from disparate sources, has made incontrovertible this
observation about Xenophon’s Socratic works. Xenophon’s memoirs are
pastiches, several of which simply could not have occurred as
presented.
Plato (424/3–347)

  Philosophers have usually privileged the account of Socrates given by
their fellow philosopher, Plato. Plato was about twenty-five when
Socrates was tried and executed, and had probably known the old man
most of his life. It would have been hard for a boy of Plato’s social
class, residing in the political district (deme) of Collytus within
the city walls, to avoid Socrates. The extant sources agree that
Socrates was often to be found where youths of the city spent their
time. Further, Plato’s representation of individual Athenians has
proved over time to correspond remarkably well to both
archaeological and literary evidence: in his use of names and places,
familial relations and friendship bonds, and even in his rough dating
of events in almost all the authentic dialogues where Socrates is the
dominant figure. The dialogues have dramatic dates that fall into
place as one learns more about their characters and, despite
incidental anachronisms, it turns out that there is more realism in the
dialogues than most have
 suspected.[5]
 The Ion, Lysis, Euthydemus, Meno,
Menexenus, Theaetetus, Euthyphro, the frame
of Symposium, Apology, Crito,
Phaedo (although Plato says he was not himself present at
Socrates’s execution), and the frame of Parmenides are the
dialogues in which Plato had greatest access to the Athenians he
depicts.


It does not follow, however, that Plato represented the views and
methods of Socrates (or anyone, for that matter) as he recalled them,
much less as they were originally uttered. There are a number of
cautions and caveats that should be in place from the start. (i) Plato
may have shaped the character Socrates (or other characters) to serve
his own purposes, whether philosophical or literary or both. (ii) The
dialogues representing Socrates as a youth and young man took place,
if they took place at all, before Plato was born and when he was a
small child. (iii) One should be cautious even about the dramatic
dates of Plato’s dialogues because they are calculated with
reference to characters whom we know primarily, though not only, from
the dialogues. (iv) Exact dates should be treated with a measure of
skepticism for numerical precision can be misleading. Even when a
specific festival or other reference fixes the season or month of a
dialogue, or birth of a character, one should imagine a margin of
error. Although it becomes obnoxious to use circa or
plus-minus everywhere, the ancients did not require or desire
contemporary precision in these matters. All the children born during
a full year, for example, had the same nominal birthday, accounting
for the conversation at Lysis 207b, odd by contemporary
standards, in which two boys disagree about who is the
elder. Philosophers have often decided to bypass the historical
problems altogether and to assume for the sake of argument that
Plato’s Socrates is the Socrates who is relevant to potential
progress in philosophy. That strategy, as we shall soon see, gives
rise to a new Socratic problem (§2.2).


What, after all, is our motive for reading a dead philosopher’s words
about another dead philosopher who never wrote anything himself?  This
is a way of asking a popular question, Why do history of philosophy?
—which has no settled answer. One might reply that our study of
some of our philosophical predecessors is intrinsically
valuable, philosophically enlightening and satisfying. When we
contemplate the words of a dead philosopher, a philosopher with whom
we cannot engage directly—Plato’s words, say—we seek to
understand not merely what he said and assumed, but what his
propositions imply, and whether they are true. Sometimes, making such
judgments requires us to learn the language in which the philosopher
wrote, more about his predecessors’ ideas and those of his
contemporaries. The truly great philosophers, and Plato was one of
them, are still capable of becoming our companions in philosophical
conversation, our dialectical partners.  Because he addressed
timeless, universal, fundamental questions with insight and
intelligence, our own understanding of such questions is
heightened. That explains Plato, one might say, but where is Socrates
in this picture? Is he interesting merely as a predecessor to Plato?
Some would say yes, but others would say it is not Plato’s but
Socrates’s ideas and methods that mark the real beginning of philosophy
in the West, that Socrates is the better dialectical guide, and that
what is Socratic in the dialogues should be distinguished from what is
Platonic (§2.2). But how? That again is the Socratic
problem.
2.2  Contemporary interpretative strategies

 If it were possible to confine oneself exclusively to Plato’s
Socrates, the Socratic problem would nevertheless reappear
because one would soon discover Socrates himself defending one
position in one Platonic dialogue, its contrary in another, and using
different methods in different dialogues to boot. Inconsistencies
among the dialogues seem to demand explanation, though not all
philosophers have thought so (Shorey 1903). Most famously, the
Parmenides attacks various theories of forms that the
Republic, Symposium, and Phaedo develop and defend. In some
dialogues (e.g., Laches), Socrates only weeds the garden of
its inconsistencies and false beliefs, but in other dialogues (e.g.,
Phaedrus), he is a planter as well, advancing structured
philosophical claims and suggesting new methods for testing those
claims. There are differences on smaller matters as well. For example,
Socrates in the Gorgias opposes, while in the
Protagoras he supports, hedonism; the details of the relation
between erotic love and the good life differ from Phaedrus
to Symposium; the account of the relation between knowledge
and the objects of knowledge in Republic differs from the
Meno account; despite Socrates’s commitment to Athenian law,
expressed in the Crito, he vows in the Apology that
he will disobey the lawful jury if it orders him to stop
philosophizing. A related problem is that some of the dialogues appear
to develop positions familiar from other philosophical traditions
(e.g., that of Heraclitus in Theaetetus and Pythagoreanism in
Phaedo). Three centuries of efforts to solve the Socratic
problem are summarized in the following supplementary document:

Early Attempts to Solve the Socratic Problem


 Contemporary efforts recycle bits and pieces—including the
failures—of these older attempts.
The Twentieth Century

  Until relatively recently in modern times, it was hoped that
confident elimination of what could be ascribed purely to Socrates
would leave standing a coherent set of doctrines attributable to Plato
(who appears nowhere in the dialogues as a speaker). Many
philosophers, inspired by the nineteenth century scholar Eduard
Zeller, expect the greatest philosophers to promote grand,
impenetrable schemes. Nothing of the sort was possible for Socrates,
so it remained for Plato to be assigned all the positive
doctrines that could be extracted from the dialogues. In the latter
half of the twentieth century, however, there was a resurgence of
interest in who Socrates was and what his own views and
methods were. The result is a narrower, but no less contentious,
Socratic problem. Two strands of interpretation dominated views of
Socrates in the twentieth century (Griswold 2001; Klagge and Smith
1992). Although there has been some healthy cross-pollination and
growth since the mid 1990s, the two were so hostile to one another for
so long that the bulk of the secondary literature on Socrates,
including translations peculiar to each, still divides into two camps,
hardly reading one another: literary contextualists and analysts. The
literary-contextual study of Socrates, like hermeneutics more
generally, uses the tools of literary criticism—typically
interpreting one complete dialogue at a time; its European origins are
traced to Heidegger and earlier to Nietzsche and Kierkegaard. The analytic study of
Socrates, like analytic philosophy more generally, is fueled by the
arguments in the texts—typically addressing a single argument or
set of arguments, whether in a single text or across texts; its
origins are in the Anglo-American philosophical tradition. Hans-Georg
Gadamer (1900–2002) was the doyen of the hermeneutic strand, and
Gregory Vlastos (1907–1991) of the analytic.
Literary contextualism

  Faced with inconsistencies in Socrates’s views and methods from one
dialogue to another, the literary contextualist has no Socratic
problem because Plato is seen as an artist of surpassing literary
skill, the ambiguities in whose dialogues are intentional
representations of actual ambiguities in the subjects philosophy
investigates. Thus terms, arguments, characters, and in fact all
elements in the dialogues should be addressed in their literary
context. Bringing the tools of literary criticism to the study of the
dialogues, and sanctioned in that practice by Plato’s own use of
literary devices and practice of textual critique (Protagoras
339a–347a, Republic 2.376c–3.412b, Ion, and
Phaedrus 262c–264e), most contextualists ask of each
dialogue what its aesthetic unity implies, pointing out that the
dialogues themselves are autonomous, containing almost no
cross-references. Contextualists who attend to what they see as the
aesthetic unity of the whole Platonic corpus, and therefore seek a
consistent picture of Socrates, advise close readings of the dialogues
and appeal to a number of literary conventions and devices said to
reveal Socrates’s actual personality. For both varieties of
contextualism, the Platonic dialogues are like a brilliant
constellation whose separate stars naturally require separate
focus.


Marking the maturity of the literary contextualist tradition in the
early twenty-first century is a greater diversity of approaches and an
attempt to be more internally critical (see Hyland 2004).
Analytic developmentalism[6]


Beginning in the 1950s, Vlastos (1991, 45–80) recommended a set of
mutually supportive premises that together provide a plausible
framework in the analytic tradition for Socratic philosophy as a
pursuit distinct from Platonic philosophy. Although the premises have
deep roots in early attempts to solve the Socratic problem (see the
supplementary document linked above), the beauty of Vlastos’s
particular configuration is its fecundity. The first premise marks a
break with a tradition of regarding Plato as a dialectician who held
his assumptions tentatively and revised them constantly; rather,

Plato held philosophical doctrines, and 
Plato’s doctrines developed over the period in which he
wrote,



accounting for many of the inconsistencies and contradictions among
the dialogues (persistent inconsistencies are addressed with a complex
notion of Socratic irony.) In particular, Vlastos tells a story
“as hypothesis, not dogma or reported fact” describing the
young Plato in vivid terms, writing his early dialogues while
convinced of “the substantial truth of Socrates’s teaching and
the soundness of its method.” Later, Plato develops into a
constructive philosopher in his own right but feels no need to break
the bond with his Socrates, his “father image.” (The
remainder of Plato’s story is not relevant to Socrates.) Vlastos
labels a small group of dialogues ‘transitional’ to mark
the period when Plato was beginning to be dissatisfied with Socrates’s
views. Vlastos’s third premise is

It is possible to determine reliably the chronological order in
which the dialogues were written and to map them to the development of
Plato’s views.



The evidence Vlastos uses varies for this claim, but is of several
types: stylometric data, internal cross references, external events
mentioned, differences in doctrines and methods featured, and other
ancient testimony (particularly that of Aristotle). The dialogues of
Plato’s Socratic period, called “elenctic dialogues” for
Socrates’s preferred method of questioning, are Apology, Charmides,
Crito, Euthyphro, Gorgias, Hippias Minor, Ion, Laches, Protagoras,
and book 1 of the Republic. The developmentalists’ Platonic
dialogues are potentially a discrete sequence, the order of which
enables the analyst to separate Socrates from Plato on the basis of
different periods in Plato’s intellectual evolution. Finally,


Plato puts into the mouth of Socrates only what Plato himself
believes at the time he writes each dialogue.



“As Plato changes, the philosophical persona of his Socrates is
made to change” (Vlastos 1991, 53)—a view sometimes
referred to as the “mouthpiece theory.” Because the
analyst is interested in positions or doctrines (particularly as conclusions from,
or tested by, arguments), the focus of analysis is usually on a
particular philosophical view in or across dialogues, with no
special attention given to context or to dialogues considered as
wholes; and evidence from dialogues in close chronological proximity
is likely to be considered more strongly confirming than that from
dialogues of other developmental periods. The result of applying the
premises is a firm list (contested, of course, by others) of ten
theses held by Socrates, all of which are incompatible with the
corresponding ten theses held by Plato (1991, 47–49).


Many analytic ancient philosophers in the late twentieth century mined
the gold Vlastos had uncovered, and many of those who were productive
in the developmentalist vein in the early days went on to constructive
work of their own (see Bibliography).
2.3 Implications for the philosophy of Socrates


It is a risky business to say where ancient philosophy is now, but an
advantage of an entry in a dynamic reference work is that authors are
allowed, nay, encouraged to update their entries to reflect
recent scholarship and sea changes in their topics.  For many analytic
philosophers, John Cooper (1997, xiv) sounded the end of the
developmentalist era when he described the early- and middle-period
dialogue distinctions as “an unsuitable basis for bringing
anyone to the reading of these works. To use them in that way is to
announce in advance the results of a certain interpretation of the
dialogues and to canonize that interpretation under the guise of a
presumably objective order of composition—when in fact no such
order is objectively known. And it thereby risks prejudicing
an unwary reader against the fresh, individual reading that these
works demand.” When he added, “it is better to relegate
thoughts about chronology to the secondary position they deserve and
to concentrate on the literary and philosophical content of the works,
taken on their own and in relation to the others,” he proposed
peace between the literary contextualist and analytic developmentalist
camps. As in any peace agreement, it takes some time for all the
combatants to accept that the conflict has ended—but that is
where we are.


In short, one is now more free to answer, Who was Socrates really?
in the variety of ways that it has been answered in the past, in one’s
own well-reasoned way, or to sidestep the question, philosophizing
about the issues in Plato’s dialogues without worrying too much about
the long toes of any particular interpretive tradition. Those seeking
the views and methods of Plato’s Socrates from the perspective of what
one is likely to see attributed to him in the secondary literature
(§2.2) will find it useful to consult the related entry on
 Plato’s shorter ethical works.
3. A Chronology of the historical Socrates in the context of Athenian history and the dramatic dates of Plato’s dialogues


The larger column on the left below provides some of the biographical
information from ancient sources with the dramatic dates of
Plato’s dialogues interspersed [in boldface]
throughout. In the smaller column on the right are dates of major
events and persons familiar from fifth century Athenian history.
Although the dates are as precise as allowed by the facts, some are
estimated and controversial (Nails 2002).


When Socrates
was born in 469, a Persian invasion had been decisively repulsed at
Plataea, and the Delian League that would grow into the Athenian empire
had already been formed. Attica comprised 139 political districts
(demes), assigned variously to Athens’s ten tribes; regardless of
how far from the walled urban center a deme might be, its registered
members were Athenian.
 
 
 Socrates’s tribe was Antiochis, and his deme was Alopece
(south-southeast of the city wall). Assuming that his stoneworker father,
Sophroniscus, kept to the conventions, he carried the infant around the
hearth, thereby formally admitting him into the family, five days after
he was born, named him on the tenth day, presented him to his
phratry (a regional hereditary association) and took
responsibility for socializing him into the various institutions proper
to an Athenian male. Literacy had become widespread among males since
about 520, and there were a number of elementary schools teaching boys
to read and write, along with the traditional gymnastics and music, by
the 480s (Harris 1989, 55), so we can be confident that Socrates
received a formal education and that Plato was not exaggerating when he
described the young Socrates as eagerly acquiring the philosopher
Anaxagoras’s books (scrolls, to be more precise, Phaedo
98b).
 
469 tragedies
 of Aeschylus, poetry of Pindar prominent
 
462 democratic judicial reform of the Areopagus
 
459 Athens’s long walls to the Piraeus port begun
 
450s Athens extends empire, introduces democratic
reforms (archonship opened to third citizen class, pay for jurors
instituted, citizenship restricted)


In Socrates’s eighteenth
year, Sophroniscus presented him to the deme in a ceremony
called dokimasia. He was there examined and entered onto the
citizens’ roll, making him eligible—subject to age or class
restrictions—for the many tasks of government determined by lot
or required of all citizens, beginning with two years of compulsory
training in the Athenian militia. In an important sense,
the dokimasia marked a young man’s allegiance to the laws of
Athens. Sophroniscus died soon after Socrates came of age, making him
his mother’s legal guardian. Socrates’s mother, Phaenarete, later
remarried and had a second son, Patrocles (Plato, Euthydemus
297e); she became a midwife sometime thereafter
(Plato, Theaetetus149a).

 
 Athens was a city of numerous festivals, competitions, and
celebrations, including the Panathenaea which attracted visitors to the
city from throughout the Mediterranean. Like the Olympics, the
Panathenaea was celebrated with special splendor at four-year
intervals. [450 Parmenides] Plato depicts the
nineteen-year-old Socrates in conversation with the great visiting
philosophers from Elea, Parmenides and Zeno, at one of the Greater
Panathenaea festivals, in late July or early August of 450.
 
450–430
 “Golden Age of Pericles”: construction on the Athenian
acropolis, led by Phidias, Polyclitus; tragedy dominated by Sophocles
and Euripides; natural philosophy, rhetoric, and sophistry thrive in
atmosphere of relative affluence and freedom


After completing his two
years of military training, Socrates was subject to being sent beyond
the borders of Attica with the army, but these were years of relative
peace, so he is likely to have practiced a trade, at least until he
gave his mother in marriage to Chaeredemus.  Only at the age of thirty
was eligibility established for such responsibilities and offices as
jury service, generalship, and Council (executive body for the
sovereign Assembly), so Athenian men lived at home with their parents
during those ten years, and—depending on their class in Athens’s
rigid four-class system, based on wealth and birth—they spent
that period learning a trade or acquiring the skills in public
speaking and persuasion that would serve them well in Athens’s citizen
Assembly and courts. [433/2 Protagoras] When
Plato next writes of Socrates, he is attending Callias’s “open
house” where famous educators of the day (Protagoras, Prodicus,
Hippias) are vying for the lucrative opportunity to teach the
wealthiest and most prominent young men of the city.
 
448
 Spartan invasion
 
446 defeat at Coronea, loss of Boeotia, Spartan
 invasion
 
446/5 Thirty Years’ Peace signed with Sparta
 
442 comedy added to the Lenaean festival
 
433 Protagoras in Athens



 Athens was even then, however, sliding toward war with Sparta on a
scale that would involve all of Greece over the next three
decades. Two of Plato’s longer dialogues are set loosely throughout
the war.  [431–404 Republic, Gorgias] Both
Socrates and Alcibiades were posted that summer, 432, to Potidaea to
put down a revolt, Socrates as a footsoldier (hoplite). After
an initial battle, a long siege reduced the population to cannibalism
before it surrendered (Thucydides 2.70.1). As the army made its way
home, it engaged in battle near Spartolus and suffered heavy losses
(Thucydides 2.79.1–7). Socrates distinguished himself there by saving
the life and armor of the wounded Alcibiades (Plato,
Symposium 220d–e).  When the army finally returned to Athens
in May of 429, nearly three years had elapsed since its
deployment. Soon after his return, Socrates was accused by a comic
playwright of helping Euripides to write his tragedies, a claim that
was to be repeated at least twice more, by other comedy writers, on the
Athenian stage. Plato illustrates Socrates’s arrival and return to
conversation in the Charmides [429
Charmides], where
participants (including Plato’s relatives Critias and Charmides)
discuss moderation.
 
432
 revolt at Potidaea
 
431 Peloponnesian War begins
 
430 outbreak of plague
 
429 death of Pericles
 
427 Gorgias in Athens
 
425 Spartan peace offer refused
  


Socrates’s active duty
continued at the battle of Delium in 424, under the command of
Laches. This was another defeat for the Athenian army which, while
already under attack from Boeotian footsoldiers, was surprised by a
troop of cavalry. Socrates’s heroic behavior in the retreat is praised
by Laches (Laches 181b) the following winter, and later by
Alcibiades (Plato, Symposium 221a).  [424
Laches] The Laches, on the nature of courage,
shows Socrates as a friend of the famous Athenian general Nicias and
makes a point of Socrates’s being a favorite of the city’s youths while
remaining unknown to most of his fellow citizens. Any anonymity
Socrates may have enjoyed came to an abrupt end at the annual
Dionysian festival in the spring of 423. In the comedy category, at
least two of the plays involved Socrates: one had the title of
Socrates’s music teacher, Connus; the other was Aristophanes’s
Clouds (§2.1).
 
424 battle
 of Delium
 
424/3 birth of Plato
 
423 one-year truce with Sparta; Aristophanes,
Clouds


A year later, Socrates
fought at Amphipolis, another Athenian disaster following another
surprise attack. Plato sets a dialogue about the etymologies of words
[422 Cratylus] upon his return. Socrates, so
far as we know, did not return to war again.  Athens and Sparta
entered into a treaty named for Nicias that—while never
completely effective—allowed Attica to remain free of Spartan
invasion and crop-burnings for several years.  During the peace,
Socrates is represented as carrying on with his dialectical
conversations with Athenians, concentrating on the nature of erotic
love [418–416 Phaedrus], especially in
relation to the education in rhetoric that had been especially popular
in Athens since Gorgias’s visit in 427. Plato’s Symposium also
focuses on erotic love, bringing together in February of 416 renowned
Athenians—Socrates, the tragedian Agathon, the comedian
Aristophanes, the general Alcibiades, a doctor, an orator, an unknown
follower of Socrates, and Agathon’s older lover—who give
speeches in praise of love [416
Symposium]. Again education is a central theme, but
so are the democracy and Eleusinian Mystery religion. In fact, at least
half the persons who celebrated Agathon’s victory in the tragedy
competition were implicated in acts of sacrilege—profanations of
the Mysteries—presaged in the dialogue, that were
said to have taken place in the months following the symposium but
that had not been reported to the authorities until much later.
 
422
 battle of Amphipolis
 
421 “Peace of Nicias” declared
 
416 subjugation of Melos


It was at about this time
that Socrates married Xanthippe. From the fact that they named their
first son Lamprocles, it has been assumed both that her father was
named Lamprocles and that her dowry was enough to provide for her
needs. Their second son would be named Sophroniscus for Socrates’s
father.
 



Meanwhile, Alcibiades
persuaded the Assembly, over prescient objections from Nicias
(Thucydides 6.9–14), that Athens should invade Sicily. Both Nicias and
Alcibiades, along with Lamachus, were elected to command. When the
ships had been supplied and were on the verge of sailing, almost all
the city’s boundary markers, called herms, statues of the
face and phallus of the god Hermes, were mutilated in a single
night. Since Hermes was the god of travel, the city feared a
conspiracy against the democracy. A commission was formed to
investigate not only the herm-smashing, but all crimes of irreverence
(asebeia) that could be discovered, offering rewards for
information. In a climate of near-hysteria over three months,
accusations led to executions (including summary executions), exile,
torture, and imprisonment affecting hundreds of people, some of whom
were close to Socrates (Alcibiades, Phaedrus, Charmides, Critias,
Eryximachus, and others).  The actual herm-mutilators turned out to be
a young men’s drinking club, and some of the accusers ultimately
admitted to lying; although death penalties that has been imposed in
absentia were rescinded, nothing could bring back the innocent
dead.
 
415
 preparations to invade Sicily; herm
mutilations; fleet embarks; commission receives evidence
 
414 Alcibiades recalled for trial, defects to Sparta;
siege of Syracuse; death of Lamachus
 
414 (winter) Sparta reenters the war, following
Alcibiades’s advice, takes and fortifies the deme of Decelea,
encouraging Athenian slaves to escape


As the Sicilian
invasion foundered, Nicias, in sole command while gravely ill with
kidney disease, sent a letter to the Athenians saying the army was
under siege and should be called back or reinforced; he asked to be
relieved of his command (Thucydides 7.11–15). He was not relieved, but
reinforcements were sent—too few, too late. The war in Sicily
ended in complete and humiliating defeat. Spring brought a new attack
on Socrates by Aristophanes (Birds, lines 1280–3,
1553–5). Plato sets a dialogue between Socrates and a rhapsode before
the news of the defeat reached Athens [413
Ion], while the city—short of military
leaders—was trying to attract foreign generals to help with the
war.
 
413
 reinforcements arrive in Sicily; army
annihilated, some enslaved; execution of Nicias


The next few years were
chaotic in Athens as the empire shrank from revolts, and former allies
refused to pay extortion/tribute any longer.  The treasury was spent,
and the citizenry demoralized. The democracy was overthrown in a
revolution of “the Four Hundred” followed by a government
of “the Five Thousand.” What was left of the army,
however, was loyal to the democracy and persuaded Alcibiades to return
to his former command. Under his leadership, Athens began scoring
victories, and morale improved. Democracy was restored, peace offers
from Sparta were again rebuffed, and Athens established a commission
to rewrite all the existing laws.
 
412
 subject-allies revolt against Athens
 
411 oligarchic revolution; Alcibiades returns to
command
 
410 restoration of democracy; peace with Sparta
refused; legal reforms begun


A wrestling school, newly
erected, is the setting for Socrates to examine the nature of
friendship with a group of adolescents [409
Lysis] who were agemates of Plato and his older
brothers. One of the Lysis characters, Ctesippus, was present
again two years later for a display by two sophists (former generals)
[407 Euthydemus].
 
407
 Alcibiades in Athens; battle of Notium lost, Alcibiades
dismissed


Athens was meanwhile
pursuing the war with Sparta by sea. Athens won the sea battle of
Arginusae, but at such cost that the city never recovered: in barest
outline, what happened was this. Two of Athens’s board of ten generals
were under siege at Mytilene, so the other eight commanded the
battle. With thousands dead, and damage to the fleet, two captains were
sent to collect the casualties; a storm prevented their doing so,
while the generals hastened to give relief at Mytilene. When news of
the battle hit Athens, there was outrage at the failure to save the
wounded and collect the corpses for burial. The board of ten generals
was charged, but two fled (and two were still in Mytilene), so six
returned to Athens for trial in October of 406 (Lang 1990). By luck of
the lottery, Socrates was serving on the Prytanes, the presiding
committee of Council (Plato, Apology 32b; Xenophon,
Hellenica 1.7.15) when the trial took place, not in a court
before a jury but before the whole Assembly.
 
406
 battle of Arginusae; trial and execution of the
generals; deaths of Euripides and Sophocles


The generals were being
tried for a capital crime in one day—a flaw in the Athenian
legal code that Socrates would later criticize (Plato,
Apology 37a–b)—but, even worse, they were being tried
as a group, in direct violation of the Athenian law of Cannonus
requiring each defendant in a capital crime to receive a separate
trial. Some in the Assembly opposed the illegality, but the opposition
so incensed the majority that it overwhelmingly approved a motion to
subject the opposition to the same vote as would decide the fate of
the generals. At that point, several of the fifty members of the
Prytanes refused to put the question, so the generals’ accusers roused
the crowd to greater anger. Socrates alone among the Prytanes was left
standing for the law and the generals; his refusal to allow the vote
had the effect of allowing one last, eloquent speech from the floor
that proposed a preliminary vote to decide between sentencing the
group and permitting separate trials (Xenophon, Hellenica
1.7.16–33).  The Assembly approved separate trials, but a
parliamentary maneuver invalidated the vote. When the Assembly voted
again, it was to decide the lives of the generals up or down. All were
condemned. The Athenians were soon to regret having executed their
remaining military leaders.
 



The following spring,
Aristophanes again attacked Socrates, this time declaring that it was
no longer fashionable to associate with Socrates who, with his
“hairsplitting twaddle,” ignored the craft of the
tragedians (Frogs, lines 1491–99).
 
405
battle of Aegospotami; siege of Athens


The next naval battle,
Aegospotami, was cataclysmic and was followed by the Spartan siege of
Athens. The Athenians, recalling their own treatment of the Melians,
expected to be slaughtered when the siege inevitably ended, but
nothing of the sort occurred. When the Spartans entered Athens, they
required that the defensive long walls be demolished, and they
directed that the Athenians elect a government that would reinstitute
the city’s ancestral constitution to prevent the excesses of the
democratic Assembly. The authority of the government that was
subsequently elected, perhaps three per tribe—“the
Thirty”—lies at the root of any discussion of whether
Socrates committed what would now be called civil disobedience when he
disobeyed their order (Plato, Apology 32c–e). None of the
contemporaneous sources, no matter how hostile to the rule of the
Thirty—Isocrates, Lysias, Plato, and Xenophon—denies the
legitimacy of their election. That they formed a government that
abused and exceeded its authority no one could reasonably deny, but it
is against just such governments that acts of civil disobedience must
sometimes be directed. Undermining a corrupt government by refusing to
harm a good man might be unlawful, but not unjust.
 
404 legal
reforms begun in 410 completed; board appointed to add new laws,
assisted by Council; death of Alcibiades; Spartans enter the city
under Lysander; long walls demolished; “the Thirty”
elected; seizures and executions; roll of “the Three
Thousand”; death of Theramenes; democratic exodus to Phyle


The Thirty moved quickly
after the election to consolidate power by calling for Spartan aid,
seizing the property of wealthy Athenians and foreign residents, many
of whom they executed (including Lysias’s brother, Polemarchus; and
Nicias’s son, Niceratus—associates of Socrates). Critias and
Charicles, two leaders of the Thirty, sought to intimidate Socrates by
forbidding him, unsuccessfully, to speak to men under thirty
(Xenophon, Memorabilia 1.2.35). As the scope of the
government’s executions widened to include detractors, and a select
citizen roll of 3,000 was named, and all others disarmed, a moderate
member of the Thirty, Theramenes, objected to the wanton killings and
found himself taken captive at Critias’s instigation. Socrates, and two
young men with him, were said to have attempted to intervene unarmed
against the Scythian guards, stopped only when Theramenes himself
implored them to desist (Diodorus Siculus 14.5.1–3, likely
apocryphal).  After Theramenes’s execution, many citizens left the
walled city: some regrouped in the distant and mountainous deme of
Phyle, planning to topple the Thirty (among them was Socrates’s
childhood friend, Chaerephon); others went only as far as the Piraeus
where “the Ten” (including Charmides) chosen by the Thirty
were less effective at suppression than the Thirty themselves.
 



The Thirty, now
increasingly viewed as tyrannical, were also making contingency
plans: they sent forces to secure the deme of Eleusis for themselves
by putting to death the population on charges of supporting democracy
(Xenophon, Hellenica 2.4.8–10; Diodorus Siculus
14.32.5). Socrates remained in the city. The Thirty attempted to
implicate him in their executions by ordering him to join others in
going to Salamis to fetch the former democratic general, Leon. It was
Socrates’s refusal to obey this order that has controversially been
called an act of civil disobedience. Luckily for Socrates, before the
Thirty could exact revenge, the democrats from Phyle entered the city
through the Piraeus and met the forces of the Thirty in a battle where
both Critias and Charmides were killed. Remnants of the Thirty
returned to the city to consider their options. The Three Thousand,
increasingly suspicious of one another, deposed the Thirty and
replaced them with a Board of Ten that was elected one per tribe (Xenophon,
Hellenica 2.4.23). The Thirty began abandoning the city for
Eleusis as the board called for Spartan help. The Spartans arrived,
led by Lysander and by one of their two kings, Pausanias. Pausanias
especially attempted to effect reconciliation among all the Athenian
factions, allowing the exiles to return and the oligarchs to rule
themselves in Eleusis. One such exile was Anytus, a man hostile
to Socrates and who would later support charges of irreverence against
him. [402 Meno]. As soon as the Spartans’
backs were turned, the restored democrats raided Eleusis and killed
the remaining oligarchic supporters, suspecting them of hiring
mercenaries.  [winter 401/0 Menexenus]
 
403
battle of Munychia; Board of Ten takes charge, calls for Spartan aid;
Spartans arrive; reconciliation talks begin; exiles return
 
403/2 new legal era proclaimed; new religious
calendar adopted; Sparta encourages reconciliation among Athenian
factions
 
402–400 Spartan war with Elis
 
401 remaining oligarchs killed; Xenophon leaves
 Athens
 
400 conflict shifts to the courts





This brings us to the spring and summer of 399, to Socrates’s trial
and execution. Twice in Plato’s dialogues (Symposium 173b,
Theaetetus 142c–143a), fact-checking with Socrates took place
as his friends sought to commit his conversations to writing before he
was executed. [spring 399 Theaetetus] Prior to the
action in the Theaetetus, a young poet named Meletus had
composed a document charging Socrates with the capital crime of
irreverence (asebeia): failure to show due piety toward the
gods of Athens. This he delivered to Socrates in the presence of
witnesses, instructing Socrates to present himself before the king
archon within four days for a preliminary hearing (the same magistrate
would later preside at the pre-trial examination and the trial). At
the end of the
Theaetetus, Socrates was on his way to that preliminary
hearing. As a citizen, he had the right to countersue, the right to
forgo the hearing, allowing the suit to proceed uncontested, and the
right to exile himself voluntarily, as the personified laws later
remind him (Crito 52c).  Socrates availed himself of none of
these rights of citizenship. Rather, he set out to enter a plea and
stopped at a gymnasium to talk to some youngsters about mathematics
and knowledge.


When he arrived at the king archon’s stoa, Socrates fell into a
conversation about reverence with a diviner he knew, Euthyphro
[399 Euthyphro], and afterwards answered
Meletus’s charge. This preliminary hearing designated the official
receipt of the case and was intended to lead to greater precision in
the formulation of the charge. In Athens, religion was a matter of
public participation under law, regulated by a calendar of religious
festivals; and the city used revenues to maintain temples and shrines.
Socrates’s irreverence, Meletus claimed, had resulted in the corruption
of the city’s young men (Euthyphro 3c–d). Evidence for
irreverence was of two types: Socrates did not believe in the gods of
the Athenians (indeed, he had said on many occasions that the gods do
not lie or do other wicked things, whereas the Olympian gods of the
poets and the city were quarrelsome and vindictive); Socrates
introduced new divinities (indeed, he insisted that his
daimonion had spoken to him since childhood). Meletus handed
over his complaint, and Socrates entered his plea. The king-archon
could refuse Meletus’s case on procedural grounds, redirect the
complaint to an arbitrator, or accept it; he accepted it. Socrates had
the right to challenge the admissibility of the accusation in relation
to existing law, but he did not, so the charge was published on
whitened tablets in the agora and a date was set for the pre-trial
examination. From this point, word spread rapidly, probably accounting
for the spike of interest in Socratic conversations recorded
(Symposium 172a–173b). [399 Symposium
frame] But Socrates nevertheless is shown by Plato spending
the next day in two very long conversations promised
in Theaetetus (210d).
[399 Sophist, Statesman]


At the pre-trial examination, Meletus paid no court fees because it
was considered a matter of public interest to prosecute irreverence. To
discourage frivolous suits, however, Athenian law imposed a heavy fine
on plaintiffs who failed to obtain at least one fifth of the jury’s
votes, as Socrates later points out (Apology 36a–b). Unlike closely
timed jury trials, pre-trial examinations encouraged questions to and
by the litigants, to make the legal issues more precise. This
procedure had become essential because of the susceptibility of juries
to bribery and misrepresentation. Originally intended to be a
microcosm of the citizen body, juries by Socrates’s time were manned by
elderly, disabled, and impoverished volunteers who needed the meager
three-obol pay.


In the month of Thargelion [May-June 399 Apology] a
month or two after Meletus’s initial summons, Socrates’s trial occurred.
On the day before, the Athenians had launched a ship to Delos,
dedicated to Apollo and commemorating Theseus’s legendary victory over
the Minotaur (Phaedo 58a–b). Spectators gathered along with
the jury (Apology 25a) for a trial that probably lasted most
of the day, each side timed by the water clock. Plato does not provide
Meletus’s prosecutorial speech or those of Anytus and Lycon, who had
joined in the suit; or the names of witnesses, if any
(Apology 34a implies Meletus called
none). Apology—the Greek
‘apologia’ means ‘defense’—is
not edited as are the court speeches of orators. For example, there
are no indications in the Greek text (at 35d and 38b) that the two
votes were taken; and there are no breaks (at 21a or 34b) for
witnesses who may have been called. Also missing are speeches by
Socrates’s supporters; it is improbable that he had none, even though
Plato does not name them.


Socrates, in his defense, mentioned the harm done to him by
Aristophanes’s Clouds (§2.1). Though Socrates denied
outright that he studied the heavens and what is below the earth, his
familiarity with the investigations of natural philosophers and his
own naturalistic explanations make it no surprise that the jury
remained unpersuaded. And, seeing Socrates out-argue Meletus, the jury
probably did not make fine distinctions between philosophy and
sophistry.  Socrates three times took up the charge that he corrupted
the young, insisting that, if he corrupted them, he did so
unwillingly; but if unwillingly, he should be instructed, not
prosecuted (Apology 25e–26a). The jury found him guilty. By
his own argument, however, Socrates could not blame the jury, for it
was mistaken about what was truly in the interest of the city
(cf. Theaetetus 177d–e) and thus required instruction.


In the penalty phase of the trial, Socrates said, “If it were
the law with us, as it is elsewhere, that a trial for life should not
last one but many days, you would be convinced, but now it is not easy
to dispel great slanders in a short time” (Apology
37a–b).  This isolated complaint stands opposed to the remark of the
personified laws that Socrates was “wronged not by us, the laws,
but by men” (Crito 54c). It had been a crime since
403/2 for anyone even to propose a law or decree in conflict with the
newly inscribed laws, so it was ironic for the laws to tell Socrates
to persuade or obey them (Crito 51b–c). In a last-minute
capitulation to his friends, he offered to allow them to pay a fine of
six times his net worth (Xenophon Oeconomicus 2.3.4–5),
thirty minae. The jury rejected the proposal. Perhaps the
jury was too incensed by Socrates’s words to vote for the lesser
penalty; after all, he needed to tell them more than once to stop
interrupting him. It is more likely, however, that superstitious
jurors were afraid that the gods would be angry if they failed to
execute a man found guilty of irreverence. Sentenced to death,
Socrates reflected that it might be a blessing: either a dreamless
sleep, or an opportunity to converse in the underworld.


While the sacred ship was on its journey to Delos, no executions were
allowed in the city. Although the duration of the annual voyage varied
with conditions, Xenophon says it took thirty-one days in 399
(Memorabilia 4.8.2); if so, Socrates lived thirty days beyond
his trial, into the month of Skirophorion. A day or two before the
end, Socrates’s childhood friend Crito tried to persuade Socrates to
escape.  [June–July 399 Crito] Socrates
replied that he “listens to nothing … but the argument that
on reflection seems best” and that “neither to do wrong or
to return a wrong is ever right, not even to injure in return for an
injury received” (Crito 46b, 49d), not even under threat
of death (cf. Apology 32a), not even for one’s family
(Crito 54b). Socrates could not point to a harm that would
outweigh the harm he would be inflicting on the city if he now exiled
himself unlawfully when he could earlier have done so lawfully
(Crito 52c); such lawbreaking would have confirmed the
jury’s judgment that he was a corrupter of the young (Crito
53b–c) and brought shame on his family and friends.


The events of Socrates’s last day, when he “appeared happy both
in manner and words as he died nobly and without fear”
(Phaedo 58e) were related by Phaedo to the Pythagorean
community at Phlius some weeks or months after the execution.
[June–July 399 Phaedo] The Eleven, prison
officials chosen by lot, met with Socrates at dawn to tell him what to
expect (Phaedo 59e–60b). When Socrates’s friends arrived,
Xanthippe and their youngest child, Menexenus, were still with him.
Xanthippe commiserated with Socrates that he was about to enjoy his
last conversation with his companions; then, in the ritual lamentation
expected of women, was led home. Socrates spent the day in
philosophical conversation, defending the soul’s immortality and
warning his companions not to restrain themselves in argument,
“If you take my advice, you will give but little thought to
Socrates but much more to the truth. If you think that what I say is
true, agree with me; if not, oppose it with every argument”
(Phaedo 91b–c). On the other hand, he warned them sternly to
restrain their emotions, “keep quiet and control
yourselves” (Phaedo 117e).


Socrates had no interest in whether his corpse was burned or buried,
but he bathed at the prison’s cistern so the women of his household
would be spared from having to wash his corpse. After meeting with his
family again in the late afternoon, he rejoined his companions. The
servant of the Eleven, a public slave, bade Socrates farewell by
calling him “the noblest, the gentlest, and the best” of men
(Phaedo 116c). The poisoner described the physical effects of
the Conium maculatum variety of hemlock used for citizen
executions (Bloch 2001), then Socrates cheerfully took the cup and
drank. Phaedo, a former slave echoing the slave of the Eleven, called
Socrates, “the best, … the wisest and the most upright”
(Phaedo 118a).
4. The Socratic tradition and its reach beyond philosophy


Once one has begun to read about Socrates in Plato’s dialogues, one
begins to realize that the old philosopher is an icon of popular
culture who has inspired diverse associations and whose name has been
appropriated for all manner of different purposes: Socrates is a crater
on Earth’s moon; Socrates is a barefoot rag doll made by the Unemployed
Philosophers Guild; Socrates is a European Union education and training
program; Socrates is the fifth movement of Leonard Bernstein’s Serenade
for Solo Violin, String Orchestra, Harp, and Percussion, after Plato’s
Symposium; Socrates is a sculpture park in New York City; and
eSocrates is a business enterprise. Allusions to Socrates abound in
literature, history, and political tracts, and he has been a subject
for artists since ancient times. Among the more famous paintings are
Raphael’s
 “School of Athens”
 at the Vatican and David’s
 “Death of Socrates”
 at the Metropolitan Museum in New York. Socrates’s influence was
particularly notable among the U.S. founders, as the following short
collection of quotations demonstrates:


Had every Athenian citizen been a Socrates, every Athenian assembly
would still have been a mob.—James Madison, Federalist
No. 55

 On July 6, 1756, during the French and Indian War, Washington chose
‘Xanthippe’, the name of Socrates’s wife, for the
countersign at Fort Cumberland.—Carl J. Richard, The
Founders and the Classics

 When, therefore Plato puts into his [Socrates’s] mouth such
paralogisms, such quibbles on words, and sophisms as a schoolboy would
be ashamed of, we conclude they were the whimsies of Plato’s own foggy
brain and acquit Socrates of puerilities so unlike his
character.—Thomas Jefferson, Letter to William Short

 Humility: Imitate Jesus and Socrates.—Benjamin Franklin,
Autobiography

 I found this [Socratic] method the safest for myself and very
embarrassing to those against whom I used it; therefore, I took
delight in it, practiced it continually, and grew very artful and
expert in drawing people, even of superior knowledge, into concessions
the consequences of which they did not foresee, entangling them in
difficulties out of which they could not extricate themselves, and so
obtaining victory that neither myself nor my causes always
deserved.—Benjamin Franklin, Papers


 Like Benjamin Franklin, the English romantic era poets were taken
with Socrates as a model for moral behavior and pressed the comparison
with Jesus. Percy Bysshe Shelley, who refers to Socrates as “the
Jesus Christ of Greece” (line 33, fragments of
“Epipsychidion”), wrote a splendid translation of Plato’s
Symposium (O’Conner 2002); and John Keats wrote in 1818,
“I have no doubt that thousands of people never heard of have
had hearts completely disinterested: I can remember but
two—Socrates and Jesus.” George Gordon, Lord Byron, gives
the ghost of Socrates a walk-on part in his play, The Deformed
Transformed where two characters disagree over what is
significant about Socrates:


Arnold:

     What! that low, swarthy, short-nosed,
round-eyed satyr,
 
 
     With the wide nostrils and Silenus’ aspect,

 
     The splay feet and low stature! I had better

 
     Remain that which I am.

Stranger:

           
         And yet he was

 
     The earth’s perfection of all mental beauty,

 
     And personification of all virtue.



In contemporary political life, and internationally, Socrates is
invoked for widely variant purposes. In his 1963 “Letter from
Birmingham Jail,” Martin Luther King, Jr., wrote, “To a
degree, academic freedom is a reality today because Socrates practiced
civil disobedience.” The South African statesman, Nelson
Mandela, eleven of whose twenty-seven prison years were spent at hard
labor in rock quarries, describes the efforts of the prisoners to
educate themselves by forming study groups in the quarries. “The
style of teaching was Socratic in nature,” he says (Long
Walk to Freedom), with questions posed by leaders to their study
groups. Equally contemporary, but contemptuous of Socrates, is the
introduction of the
 Al Qaeda Training Manual
 (Department of Justice translation, ellipses in original):


 The confrontation that we are calling for with the apostate regimes
does not know Socratic debates …, Platonic ideals …, nor
Aristotelian diplomacy. But it knows the dialogue of bullets, the
ideals of assassination, bombing, and destruction, and the diplomacy
of the cannon and machine-gun.



Philosophers and students of philosophy with a desire to see how
Socrates is viewed outside the discipline might wish to consult the
following supplementary document:


The Reception of Socrates