In 1933 the Polish logician Alfred Tarski published a paper in which
he discussed the criteria that a definition of ‘true
sentence’ should meet, and gave examples of several such
definitions for particular formal languages. In 1956 he and his
colleague Robert Vaught published a revision of one of the 1933 truth
definitions, to serve as a truth definition for model-theoretic
languages. This entry will simply review the definitions and make no
attempt to explore the implications of Tarski’s work for
semantics (natural language or programming languages) or for the
philosophical study of truth. (For those implications, see the entries
on
 truth
 and
 Alfred Tarski.)
 
1. The 1933 programme and the semantic conception

In the late 1920s Alfred Tarski embarked on a project to give rigorous
definitions for notions useful in scientific methodology. In 1933 he
published (in Polish) his analysis of the notion of a true sentence.
This long paper undertook two tasks: first to say what should count as
a satisfactory definition of ‘true sentence’ for a given
formal language, and second to show that there do exist satisfactory
definitions of ‘true sentence’ for a range of formal
languages. We begin with the first task; Section 2 will consider the
second.

We say that a language is fully interpreted if all its
sentences have meanings that make them either true or false. All the
languages that Tarski considered in the 1933 paper were fully
interpreted, with one exception described in Section 2.2 below. This
was the main difference between the 1933 definition and the later
model-theoretic definition of 1956, which we shall examine in Section
3.

Tarski described several conditions that a satisfactory definition of
truth should meet.
1.1 Object language and metalanguage

If the language under discussion (the object language) is
LLL, then the definition should be given in another language known
as the metalanguage, call it MMM. The metalanguage should
contain a copy of the object language (so that anything one can say in
LLL can be said in MMM too), and MMM should also be able to talk
about the sentences of LLL and their syntax. Finally Tarski allowed
MMM to contain notions from set theory, and a 1-ary predicate symbol
True with the intended reading ‘is a true sentence of
LLL’. The main purpose of the metalanguage was to formalise
what was being said about the object language, and so Tarski also
required that the metalanguage should carry with it a set of axioms
expressing everything that one needs to assume for purposes of
defining and justifying the truth definition. The truth definition
itself was to be a definition of True in terms of the other
expressions of the metalanguage. So the definition was to be in terms
of syntax, set theory and the notions expressible in LLL, but not
semantic notions like ‘denote’ or ‘mean’
(unless the object language happened to contain these notions).

Tarski assumed, in the manner of his time, that the object language
LLL and the metalanguage MMM would be languages of some kind of
higher order logic. Today it is more usual to take some kind of
informal set theory as one’s metalanguage; this would affect a
few details of Tarski’s paper but not its main thrust. Also
today it is usual to define syntax in set-theoretic terms, so that for
example a string of letters becomes a sequence. In fact one must use a
set-theoretic syntax if one wants to work with an object language that
has uncountably many symbols, as model theorists have done freely for
over half a century now.
1.2 Formal correctness

The definition of True should be ‘formally
correct’. This means that it should be a sentence of the
form

For all xxx, True(x)(x)(x) if and only if ϕ(x)ϕ(x)\phi(x),


where True never occurs in ϕϕ\phi; or failing this, that
the definition should be provably equivalent to a sentence of this
form. The equivalence must be provable using axioms of the
metalanguage that don’t contain True. Definitions of
the kind displayed above are usually called explicit, though
Tarski in 1933 called them normal.
1.3 Material adequacy

The definition should be ‘materially adequate’
(trafny – a better translation would be
‘accurate’). This means that the objects satisfying
ϕϕ\phi should be exactly the objects that we would intuitively count
as being true sentences of LLL, and that this fact should be
provable from the axioms of the metalanguage. At first sight this is a
paradoxical requirement: if we can prove what Tarski asks for, just
from the axioms of the metalanguage, then we must already have a
materially adequate formalisation of ‘true sentence of
LLL’ within the metalanguage, suggesting an infinite regress.
In fact Tarski escapes the paradox by using (in general) infinitely
many sentences of MMM to express truth, namely all the sentences of
the form
ϕ(s) if and only if ψϕ(s) if and only if ψ
\phi(s) \text{ if and only if } \psi


whenever sss is the name of a sentence SSS of LLL and ψψ\psi
is the copy of SSS in the metalanguage. So the technical problem is
to find a single formula ϕϕ\phi that allows us to deduce all these
sentences from the axioms of MMM; this formula ϕϕ\phi will serve
to give the explicit definition of True.

Tarski’s own name for this criterion of material adequacy was
Convention T. More generally his name for his approach to
defining truth, using this criterion, was the semantic conception
of truth.

As Tarski himself emphasised, Convention TTT rapidly leads to the
liar paradox if the language LLL has enough resources to talk about
its own semantics. (See the entry on
 the revision theory of truth.)
 Tarski’s own conclusion was that a truth definition for a
language LLL has to be given in a metalanguage which is essentially
stronger than LLL.

There is a consequence for the foundations of mathematics. First-order
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory is widely regarded as the standard of
mathematical correctness, in the sense that a proof is correct if and
only if it can be formalised as a formal proof in set theory. We would
like to be able to give a truth definition for set theory; but by
Tarski’s result this truth definition can’t be given in
set theory itself. The usual solution is to give the truth definition
informally in English. But there are a number of ways of giving
limited formal truth definitions for set theory. For example Azriel
Levy showed that for every natural number nnn there is a
ΣnΣn\Sigma_n formula that is satisfied by all and only the
set-theoretic names of true ΣnΣn\Sigma_n sentences of set theory. The
definition of ΣnΣn\Sigma_n is too technical to give here, but three
points are worth making. First, every sentence of set theory is
provably equivalent to a ΣnΣn\Sigma_n sentence for any large enough
nnn. Second, the class of ΣnΣn\Sigma_n formulas is closed under
adding existential quantifiers at the beginning, but not under adding
universal quantifiers. Third, the class is not closed under negation;
this is how Levy escapes Tarski’s paradox. (See the entry on
 set theory.)
 Essentially the same devices allow Jaakko Hintikka to give an
internal truth definition for his
 independence friendly logic;
 this logic shares the second and third properties of Levy’s
classes of formulas.
2. Some kinds of truth definition on the 1933 pattern

In his 1933 paper Tarski went on to show that many fully interpreted
formal languages do have a truth definition that satisfies his
conditions. He gave four examples in that paper. One was a trivial
definition for a finite language; it simply listed the finitely many
true sentences. One was a definition by quantifier elimination; see
Section 2.2 below. The remaining two, for different classes of
language, were examples of what people today think of as the standard
Tarski truth definition; they are forerunners of the 1956
model-theoretic definition.
2.1 The standard truth definitions

The two standard truth definitions are at first glance not definitions
of truth at all, but definitions of a more complicated relation
involving assignments aaa of objects to variables:
a satisfies the formula Fa satisfies the formula F
a \text{ satisfies the formula } F


(where the symbol ‘FFF’ is a placeholder for a name of a
particular formula of the object language). In fact satisfaction
reduces to truth in this sense: aaa satisfies the formula FFF if
and only if taking each free variable in FFF as a name of the object
assigned to it by aaa makes the formula FFF into a true sentence.
So it follows that our intuitions about when a sentence is true can
guide our intuitions about when an assignment satisfies a formula. But
none of this can enter into the formal definition of truth, because
‘taking a variable as a name of an object’ is a semantic
notion, and Tarski’s truth definition has to be built only on
notions from syntax and set theory (together with those in the object
language); recall Section 1.1. In fact Tarski’s reduction goes
in the other direction: if the formula FFF has no free variables,
then to say that FFF is true is to say that every assignment
satisfies it.

The reason why Tarski defines satisfaction directly, and then deduces
a definition of truth, is that satisfaction obeys recursive
conditions in the following sense: if FFF is a compound
formula, then to know which assignments satisfy FFF, it’s enough
to know which assignments satisfy the immediate constituents of FFF.
Here are two typical examples:

The assignment aaa satisfies the formula ‘FFF
and GGG’ if and only if aaa satisfies FFF and
aaa satisfies GGG.
The assignment aaa satisfies the formula ‘For all
xxx, GGG’ if and only if for every individual iii, if bbb
is the assignment that assigns iii to the variable xxx and is
otherwise exactly like aaa, then bbb satisfies GGG.


We have to use a different approach for atomic formulas. But for
these, at least assuming for simplicity that LLL has no function
symbols, we can use the metalanguage copies #(R)#(R)\#(R) of the predicate
symbols RRR of the object language. Thus:

The assignment aaa satisfies the formula R(x,y)R(x,y)R(x,y) if and only
if #(R)(a(x),a(y))#(R)(a(x),a(y))\#(R)(a(x),a(y)).


(Warning: the expression ##\# is in the metametalanguage, not in the
metalanguage MMM. We may or may not be able to find a formula of
MMM that expresses ##\# for predicate symbols; it depends on exactly
what the language LLL is.)

Subject to the mild reservation in the next paragraph, Tarski’s
definition of satisfaction is compositional, meaning that the
class of assignments which satisfy a compound formula FFF is
determined solely by (1) the syntactic rule used to construct FFF
from its immediate constituents and (2) the classes of assignments
that satisfy these immediate constituents. (This is sometimes phrased
loosely as: satisfaction is defined recursively. But this formulation
misses the central point, that (1) and (2) don’t contain any
syntactic information about the immediate constituents.)
Compositionality explains why Tarski switched from truth to
satisfaction. You can’t define whether ‘For all
x,Gx,Gx, G’ is true in terms of whether GGG is true, because in
general GGG has a free variable xxx and so it isn’t either
true or false.

The reservation is that Tarski’s definition of satisfaction in
the 1933 paper doesn’t in fact mention the class of assignments
that satisfy a formula FFF. Instead, as we saw, he defines the
relation ‘aaa satisfies FFF’, which determines what
that class is. This is probably the main reason why some people
(including Tarski himself in conversation, as reported by Barbara
Partee) have preferred not to describe the 1933 definition as
compositional. But the class format, which is compositional on any
reckoning, does appear in an early variant of the truth definition in
Tarski’s paper of 1931 on definable sets of real numbers. Tarski
had a good reason for preferring the format ‘aaa satisfies
FFF’ in his 1933 paper, namely that it allowed him to reduce
the set-theoretic requirements of the truth definition. In sections 4
and 5 of the 1933 paper he spelled out these requirements
carefully.

The name ‘compositional(ity)’ first appears in papers of
Putnam in 1960 (published 1975) and Katz and Fodor in 1963 on natural
language semantics. In talking about compositionality, we have moved
to thinking of Tarski’s definition as a semantics, i.e. a way of
assigning ‘meanings’ to formulas. (Here we take the
meaning of a sentence to be its truth value.) Compositionality means
essentially that the meanings assigned to formulas give at
least enough information to determine the truth values of
sentences containing them. One can ask conversely whether
Tarski’s semantics provides only as much information as we
need about each formula, in order to reach the truth values of
sentences. If the answer is yes, we say that the semantics is
fully abstract (for truth). One can show fairly easily, for
any of the standard languages of logic, that Tarski’s definition
of satisfaction is in fact fully abstract.

As it stands, Tarski’s definition of satisfaction is not an
explicit definition, because satisfaction for one formula is defined
in terms of satisfaction for other formulas. So to show that it is
formally correct, we need a way of converting it to an explicit
definition. One way to do this is as follows, using either higher
order logic or set theory. Suppose we write SSS for a binary
relation between assignments and formulas. We say that SSS is a
satisfaction relation if for every formula G,SG,SG, S meets the
conditions put for satisfaction of GGG by Tarski’s definition.
For example, if GGG is ‘G1G1G_1 and G2G2G_2’,
SSS should satisfy the following condition for every assignment
aaa:
S(a,G) if and only if S(a,G1) and S(a,G2).S(a,G) if and only if S(a,G1) and S(a,G2).
S(a,G) \text{ if and only if } S(a,G_1) \text{ and } S(a,G_2).


We can define ‘satisfaction relation’ formally, using the
recursive clauses and the conditions for atomic formulas in
Tarski’s recursive definition. Now we prove, by induction on the
complexity of formulas, that there is exactly one satisfaction
relation SSS. (There are some technical subtleties, but it can be
done.) Finally we define

aaa satisfies FFF if and only if: there is a satisfaction relation
SSS such that S(a,F)S(a,F)S(a,F).


It is then a technical exercise to show that this definition of
satisfaction is materially adequate. Actually one must first write out
the counterpart of Convention TTT for satisfaction of formulas, but
I leave this to the reader.
2.2 The truth definition by quantifier elimination

The remaining truth definition in Tarski’s 1933 paper –
the third as they appear in the paper – is really a bundle of
related truth definitions, all for the same object language LLL but
in different interpretations. The quantifiers of LLL are assumed to
range over a particular class, call it AAA; in fact they are second
order quantifiers, so that really they range over the collection of
subclasses of AAA. The class AAA is not named explicitly in the
object language, and thus one can give separate truth definitions for
different values of AAA, as Tarski proceeds to do. So for this
section of the paper, Tarski allows one and the same sentence to be
given different interpretations; this is the exception to the general
claim that his object language sentences are fully interpreted. But
Tarski stays on the straight and narrow: he talks about
‘truth’ only in the special case where AAA is the class
of all individuals. For other values of AAA, he speaks not of
‘truth’ but of ‘correctness in the domain
AAA’.

These truth or correctness definitions don’t fall out of a
definition of satisfaction. In fact they go by a much less direct
route, which Tarski describes as a ‘purely accidental’
possibility that relies on the ‘specific peculiarities’ of
the particular object language. It may be helpful to give a few more
of the technical details than Tarski does, in a more familiar notation
than Tarski’s, in order to show what is involved. Tarski refers
his readers to a paper of Thoralf Skolem in 1919 for the
technicalities.

One can think of the language LLL as the first-order language with
predicate symbols ⊆⊆\subseteq and =. The language is interpreted as
talking about the subclasses of the class AAA. In this language we
can define:

‘xxx is the empty set’ (viz. x⊆x⊆x \subseteq every
class).
‘xxx is an atom’ (viz. xxx is not empty, but every
subclass of xxx not equal to xxx is empty).
‘xxx has exactly kkk members’ (where kkk is a
finite number; viz. there are exactly kkk distinct atoms ⊆x)⊆x)\subseteq
x).
‘There are exactly kkk elements in AAA’ (viz.
there is a class with exactly kkk members, but there is no class
with exactly k+1k+1k+1 members).


Now we aim to prove: 

Lemma. Every formula FFF of LLL is equivalent to (i.e. is
satisfied by exactly the same assignments as) some boolean combination
of sentences of the form ‘There are exactly kkk elements in
AAA’ and formulas of the form ‘There are exactly kkk
elements that are in v1v1v_1, not in v2v2v_2, not in v3v3v_3 and in
v4v4v_4’ (or any other combination of this type, using only
variables free in F)F)F).


The proof is by induction on the complexity of formulas. For atomic
formulas it is easy. For boolean combinations of formulas it is easy,
since a boolean combination of boolean combinations is again a boolean
combination. For formulas beginning with ∀∀\forall, we take the
negation. This leaves just one case that involves any work, namely the
case of a formula beginning with an existential quantifier. By
induction hypothesis we can replace the part after the quantifier by a
boolean combination of formulas of the kinds stated. So a typical case
might be:

∃z∃z\exists z (there are exactly two elements that are in zzz and
xxx and not in y)y)y).


This holds if and only if there are at least two elements that are in
xxx and not in yyy. We can write this in turn as: The number of
elements in xxx and not in yyy is not 0 and is not 1; which is a
boolean combination of allowed formulas. The general proof is very
similar but more complicated.

When the lemma has been proved, we look at what it says about a
sentence. Since the sentence has no free variables, the lemma tells us
that it is equivalent to a boolean combination of statements saying
that AAA has a given finite number of elements. So if we know how
many elements AAA has, we can immediately calculate whether the
sentence is ‘correct in the domain AAA’.

One more step and we are home. As we prove the lemma, we should gather
up any facts that can be stated in LLL, are true in every domain,
and are needed for proving the lemma. For example we shall almost
certainly need the sentence saying that ⊆⊆\subseteq is transitive.
Write TTT for the set of all these sentences. (In Tarski’s
presentation TTT vanishes, since he is using higher order logic and
the required statements about classes become theorems of logic.) Thus
we reach, for example:

Theorem. If the domain AAA is infinite, then a sentence
SSS of the language LLL is correct in AAA if and only if SSS
is deducible from TTT and the sentences saying that the number of
elements of AAA is not any finite number.


The class of all individuals is infinite (Tarski asserts), so
the theorem applies when AAA is this class. And in this case Tarski
has no inhibitions about saying not just ‘correct in
AAA’ but ‘true’; so we have our truth
definition.

The method we have described revolves almost entirely around removing
existential quantifiers from the beginnings of formulas; so it is
known as the method of quantifier elimination. It is not as
far as you might think from the two standard definitions. In all cases
Tarski assigns to each formula, by induction on the complexity of
formulas, a description of the class of assignments that satisfy the
formula. In the two previous truth definitions this class is described
directly; in the quantifier elimination case it is described in terms
of a boolean combination of formulas of a simple kind.

At around the same time as he was writing the 1933 paper, Tarski gave
a truth definition by quantifier elimination for the first-order
language of the field of real numbers. In his 1931 paper it appears
only as an interesting way of characterising the set of relations
definable by formulas. Later he gave a fuller account, emphasising
that his method provided not just a truth definition but an algorithm
for determining which sentences about the real numbers are true and
which are false.
3. The 1956 definition and its offspring

In 1933 Tarski assumed that the formal languages that he was dealing
with had two kinds of symbol (apart from punctuation), namely
constants and variables. The constants included logical constants, but
also any other terms of fixed meaning. The variables had no
independent meaning and were simply part of the apparatus of
quantification.

Model theory
 by contrast works with three levels of symbol. There are the logical
constants (=,¬(=,¬(=, \neg, & for example), the variables (as before),
and between these a middle group of symbols which have no fixed
meaning but get a meaning through being applied to a particular
structure. The symbols of this middle group include the nonlogical
constants of the language, such as relation symbols, function symbols
and constant individual symbols. They also include the quantifier
symbols ∀∀\forall and ∃∃\exists, since we need to refer to the
structure to see what set they range over. This type of three-level
language corresponds to mathematical usage; for example we write the
addition operation of an abelian group as +, and this symbol stands
for different functions in different groups.

So one has to work a little to apply the 1933 definition to
model-theoretic languages. There are basically two approaches: (1)
Take one structure AAA at a time, and regard the nonlogical
constants as constants, interpreted in AAA. (2) Regard the
nonlogical constants as variables, and use the 1933 definition to
describe when a sentence is satisfied by an assignment of the
ingredients of a structure AAA to these variables. There are
problems with both these approaches, as Tarski himself describes in
several places. The chief problem with (1) is that in model theory we
very frequently want to use the same language in connection with two
or more different structures – for example when we are defining
elementary embeddings between structures (see the entry on
 first-order model theory).
 The problem with (2) is more abstract: it is disruptive and bad
practice to talk of formulas with free variables being
‘true’. (We saw in Section 2.2 how Tarski avoided talking
about truth in connection with sentences that have varying
interpretations.) What Tarski did in practice, from the appearance of
his textbook in 1936 to the late 1940s, was to use a version of (2)
and simply avoid talking about model-theoretic sentences being true in
structures; instead he gave an indirect definition of what it is for a
structure to be a ‘model of’ a sentence, and apologised
that strictly this was an abuse of language. (Chapter VI of Tarski
1994 still contains relics of this old approach.)

By the late 1940s it had become clear that a direct model-theoretic
truth definition was needed. Tarski and colleagues experimented with
several ways of casting it. The version we use today is based on that
published by Tarski and Robert Vaught in 1956. See the entry on
 classical logic
 for an exposition.

The right way to think of the model-theoretic definition is that we
have sentences whose truth value varies according to the situation
where they are used. So the nonlogical constants are not variables;
they are definite descriptions whose reference depends on the context.
Likewise the quantifiers have this indexical feature, that the domain
over which they range depends on the context of use. In this spirit
one can add other kinds of indexing. For example a Kripke structure is
an indexed family of structures, with a relation on the index set;
these structures and their close relatives are fundamental for the
semantics of modal,
 temporal
 and
 intuitionist
 logic.

Already in the 1950s model theorists were interested in formal
languages that include kinds of expression different from anything in
Tarski’s 1933 paper. Extending the truth definition to
infinitary logics was no problem at all. Nor was there any serious
problem about most of the generalised quantifiers proposed at the
time. For example there is a quantifier QxyQxyQxy with the intended
meaning:

QxyF(x,y)QxyF(x,y)QxyF(x,y) if and only if there is an infinite set XXX of
elements such that for all aaa and bbb in X,F(a,b)X,F(a,b)X, F(a,b).


This definition itself shows at once how the required clause in the
truth definition should go.

In 1961 Leon Henkin pointed out two sorts of model-theoretic language
that didn’t immediately have a truth definition of
Tarski’s kind. The first had infinite strings of
quantifiers:
∀v1∃v2∀v3∃v4…R(v1,v2,v3,v4,…).∀v1∃v2∀v3∃v4…R(v1,v2,v3,v4,…).
\forall v_1 \exists v_2 \forall v_3 \exists v_4\ldots R(v_1,v_2,v_3, v_4,\ldots).


The second had quantifiers that are not linearly ordered. For ease of
writing I use Hintikka’s later notation for these:
∀v1∃v2∀v3(∃v4/∀v1)R(v1,v2,v3,v4).∀v1∃v2∀v3(∃v4/∀v1)R(v1,v2,v3,v4).
\forall v_1 \exists v_2 \forall v_3 (\exists v_4 /\forall v_1) R(v_1,v_2,v_3, v_4).


Here the slash after ∃v4∃v4\exists v_4 means that this quantifier is
outside the scope of the earlier quantifier ∀v1∀v1\forall v_1 (and also
outside that of the earlier existential quantifier).

Henkin pointed out that in both cases one could give a natural
semantics in terms of Skolem functions. For example the second
sentence can be paraphrased as
∃f∃g∀v1∀v3R(v1,f(v1),v3,g(v3)),∃f∃g∀v1∀v3R(v1,f(v1),v3,g(v3)),
\exists f\exists g \forall v_1 \forall v_3 R(v_1,f(v_1),v_3,g(v_3)),


which has a straightforward Tarski truth condition in second order
logic. Hintikka then observed that one can read the Skolem functions
as winning strategies in a game, as in the entry on
 logic and games.
 In this way one can build up a compositional semantics, by assigning
to each formula a game. A sentence is true if and only if the player
Myself (in Hintikka’s nomenclature) has a winning strategy for
the game assigned to the sentence. This game semantics agrees with
Tarski’s on conventional first-order sentences. But it is far
from fully abstract; probably one should think of it as an operational
semantics, describing how a sentence is verified rather than whether
it is true.

The problem of giving a Tarski-style semantics for Henkin’s two
languages turned out to be different in the two cases. With the first,
the problem is that the syntax of the language is not well-founded:
there is an infinite descending sequence of subformulas as one strips
off the quantifiers one by one. Hence there is no hope of giving a
definition of satisfaction by recursion on the complexity of formulas.
The remedy is to note that the explicit form of
Tarski’s truth definition in Section 2.1 above didn’t
require a recursive definition; it needed only that the conditions on
the satisfaction relation SSS pin it down uniquely. For
Henkin’s first style of language this is still true, though the
reason is no longer the well-foundedness of the syntax.

For Henkin’s second style of language, at least in
Hintikka’s notation (see the entry on
 independence friendly logic),
 the syntax is well-founded, but the displacement of the quantifier
scopes means that the usual quantifier clauses in the definition of
satisfaction no longer work. To get a compositional and fully abstract
semantics, one has to ask not what assignments of variables satisfy a
formula, but what sets of assignments satisfy the formula
‘uniformly’, where ‘uniformly’ means
‘independent of assignments to certain variables, as shown by
the slashes on quantifiers inside the formula’. (Further details
of revisions of Tarski’s truth definition along these lines are
in the entry on
 dependence logic.)
 Henkin’s second example is of more than theoretical interest,
because clashes between the semantic and the syntactic scope of
quantifiers occur very often in natural languages.