In the first decades of the twentieth century, the members of the
so-called “Munich and Göttingen circles” of
phenomenology made important contributions to the philosophy of mind,
the philosophy of language, the philosophy of action, epistemology,
social philosophy, the philosophy of values and ontology. Some of the
most prominent members of these circles are (in alphabetical order):
Theodor Conrad, Hedwig Conrad-Martius, Johannes Daubert, August
Gallinger, Moritz Geiger, Roman Ingarden, Herbert Leyendecker, Paul
Linke, Alexander Pfänder, Adolf Reinach, Hermann Ritzel, Wilhelm
Schapp, Kurt Stavenhagen, and Edith Stein. The ideas of these authors
were influenced by such thinkers as Henri Bergson, Bernard Bolzano,
Franz Brentano, Theodor Lipps, Anton Marty, Alexius Meinong,
and—to an even more significant degree—by the work of
Edmund Husserl.


Some of the most original insights provided by what has also been
characterized as “early phenomenology” concern the notion
of intentionality, i.e., the feature of some mental states by means of
which they are directed to objects and states of affairs. Several
members of the Munich and Göttingen circles claimed that there are
radically different kinds of intentional acts and states, which cannot
be reduced to a unitary genus. For instance, it was argued that the act
of perceiving a state of affairs and the act of
meaning it with a linguistic expression are not of the same
genus and that both acts are further distinct from informing
someone about this state of affairs or from enjoying it.
Moreover, some of these authors maintained that all these acts or
experiences assume different shapes if they are performed by an
individual or by a collective subject.


Early phenomenologists understood the investigation of mental
experiences as part of a general theory of objects or ontology, and
their contributions thereto share some common traits. In particular, it
was usually assumed that objects and facts exist independently of
anyone’s beliefs, mental states or conceptual schemes and that
they instantiate essential properties. The two main categories of
phenomenological ontology, to which several members of both circles
devoted extensive research, are that of objects and states of
affairs.
 
1. The Munich and Göttingen Circles of Phenomenology: A Brief History


At the turn of the twentieth century, psychology was a discipline on
the rise, and the relation between philosophy and psychology was
intensely debated. Among other issues, the debate concerned whether
psychology is a philosophical discipline or, the other way around,
whether philosophy is based on psychology. Of importance for this
debate, e.g., is the nature of ethical, metaphysical and logical
concepts: are these concepts merely psychological? And are they about
merely psychological entities? Since these concepts are usually held to
be constitutive of the corresponding laws of ethics, metaphysics and
logic, claiming that these concepts are psychological would imply that
such laws are in the end psychological laws.


Generally, positions advocating that logical concepts are
psychological have been labeled as “psychologism” (cf.
Kusch 2011) or even more specifically as “logical
psychologism” (Mohanty 1982, §2). For instance, according
to psychologism, the logical law of the excluded middle has to be
interpreted in terms of a psychological law, which states that it is
impossible for a subject to judge at the same time that p and that
non-p. Psychologism has been contested by a competing
approach: within the “anti-psychologist” strand, there are
different views as to how logical concepts and laws have to be
positively defined; still they do all agree on the negative insight
that logic does not depend, in any sense, on psychology.


It is against this background that Theodor Lipps founded the
Akademischer Verein für Psychologie or Academic
Society for Psychology in Munich, most likely in 1895. Lipps was
both a philosopher and a trained psychologist, and he helped to shape
the Department of Philosophy in Munich, where he was professor from
1894, by focusing on psychology and its philosophical implications.
Although Lipps would redefine his initial views over the years, by the
end of the nineteenth century, he seemed to endorse the psychologistic
approach, promoting a form of psychology that he at times qualified as
“descriptive” (1903, 5). Lipps understood descriptive
psychology as a discipline that, by means of inner perception,
describes, compares, systematizes, etc. (1903, 5) mental contents
(basically, mental states and acts such as sensations, perceptions,
judgments, etc.). Inner perception, Lipps maintained, is able to grasp
these contents with evidence.


Following Lipps’s investigations, as well as the general
interest in philosophical psychology of that period, the meetings of
the Akademischer Verein dealt with different issues at the
intersection of philosophy and psychology. Topics discussed in the
first years encompassed themes such as “the sensations and the
contents of consciousness as objects of psychology” (1895),
“the theory of feelings and striving” (1895–1896),
“the definition of psychology” (1896), etc. (cf. Schuhmann
2000, 19f). The senior figures of the circle were Alexander
Pfänder, Max Ettlinger and Johannes Daubert, who—together
with Lipps himself—were among the first to give talks during the
circle’s initial meetings. These talks were then intensely
discussed by a rapidly growing community of young students who
continued to be attracted to the circle in the decades after its
foundation. These students, many of whom became scholars in their own
right, included (in alphabetical order): Maximilian Beck, Alfred
Brunswig, Theodor Conrad (nephew of Theodor Lipps), Aloys Fischer,
August Gallinger, Moritz Geiger, Dietrich von Hildebrand, Paul Linke,
Karl Loewenstein-Freudenberg, Adolf Reinach, Hermann Ritzel, Herman
Schmalenbach, Otto Selz, Gerda Walther and Czesław Znamierowski
(cf. Avé-Lallemant 1975a, Smid 1982). It should be noted that
Max Scheler, Privatdozent in Munich from 1906, also took part
in these meetings, starting in 1907. Although Scheler’s
philosophical development represents a sui generis case
within the history of phenomenology, his thought deeply influenced the
members of the Munich and, later on, Göttingen circles.


Tradition credits Daubert with bringing Edmund Husserl’s work
to the attention of the group in Munich. It was in 1902 (cf. Schuhmann
2002, Smid 1985, 269) that Daubert began to discuss some of the theses
from the Logical Investigations (1900–01, henceforth:
LI) during the meetings of the Verein. This
two-volume work follows Husserl’s first book of 1891
(Philosophy of Arithmetic. Psychological and Logical
Investigations) and is the result of almost ten years of research.
In the LI, Husserl attempted to square the different positions
that inspired his thinking in that period, such as the logical realism
advocated by authors like Bernard Bolzano, Hermann Lotze and Gottlob
Frege, and the philosophical psychology in particular of Franz Brentano
and Carl Stumpf. In 1901, after the publication of the LI,
Husserl was appointed Extraordinary Professor at the University of
Göttingen.


In 1903, Daubert visited Husserl in Göttingen. This was the
first personal contact between Husserl and a member of the Munich
circle and has been called “easily the most important single
event in the history of the Munich Phenomenological Circle”
(Spiegelberg 1982, 169). As a consequence of this meeting, Husserl was
invited to give a lecture in Munich in May 1904, after which the
LI became one of the main references for the members of the
Munich circle.


The LI were not received without substantial criticism, but
some of the elements that, on the early phenomenological reading of
this work, were especially appreciated in Husserl’s arguments
were its anti-psychologism and the systematic basis it provided for
what could be qualified as an “objectivist” approach to
philosophical problems (according to which ontology, logic, ethics and
aesthetics are about entities with an ontological status of their own,
cf. Conrad 1954, 81; also Geiger speaks of a “turning to the
object (Wendung zum Objekt)” in the LI, cf.
Geiger 1933, 13). Husserl dedicated extensive effort in the first
volume of the LI, i.e., in the Prolegomena to Pure
Logic, to demonstrating that the laws of logic and ontology are
not psychological. Mental acts, he argued, are intentional, i.e., they
are directed towards objects, but these objects are not mere contents
of consciousness and, hence, they have a structure of their own and
follow specific laws of their own. In Husserl’s view, this
provides evidence for the autonomy and independence of metaphysics and
logic from psychology. At the same time, the Prolegomena
questions what it means to say that mental experiences are
intentionally directed towards objects and asks for a clarification of
the relationship between logic and psychology. The second volume of the
book (Investigations in Phenomenology and Theory of Knowledge)
attempts to provide a solution to these and other questions by
presenting an articulated theory of intentionality.


In 1905, Daubert and Reinach began to attend Husserl’s
lectures in Göttingen. This initiated a trend that culminated in
what has been described as an “invasion” from Munich
(Schapp 1959, 20f): in 1906, several students of Lipps left Munich to
study under Husserl. The first were Moritz Geiger, Alfred Schwenninger
and Fritz Weinmann, but many others followed: most notably, Conrad in
1907 and von Hildebrand in 1909. Göttingen became thus home to a
steadily and rapidly growing community composed not only of researchers
from Munich, but also of those who gathered around Husserl and decided
to study under him. The list includes such names as Winthrop Bell,
Rudolf Clemens, Hedwig Conrad-Martius, Fritz Frankfurter, Siegfried
Hamburger, Erich Heinrich, Jan Hering, Heinrich Hoffman, Roman
Ingarden, Alexandre Koyré, Hans Lipps, Dietrich Mahnke, Helmuth
Plessner, Wilhelm Schapp, Kurt Stavenhagen, Edith Stein and Alfred von
Sybel (cf. Avé Lallemant 1988, Sepp 1988).


This group of young scholars gave itself an institutional form when
Conrad and von Sybel founded the Göttingen Philosophische
Gesellschaft in 1907. Arguably, the center of this new circle of
phenomenology was Adolf Reinach, who taught at the university of
Göttingen as a lecturer after having received his venia
legendi in 1909. Reinach’s philosophical and didactic skills
were so admired that several members referred to him as their true
teacher in phenomenology (cf. Conrad-Martius 1921, Ingarden 1968, 408f,
Stein 1965, 195, von Hildebrand 1975, 78).


The period that extended from 1906 to the end of the First World War
was very fruitful in the history of phenomenology. Important
dissertations were submitted and defended (e.g. Conrad in 1908,
Conrad-Martius in 1912, von Hildebrand in 1912, and Stein in 1917). In
addition, in 1911, Pfänder edited the important
Lipps-Festschrift with the title Munich Philosophical
Essays, which contains influential articles by Conrad, Geiger,
Reinach and Pfänder himself. Just two years later, in 1913, the
first volume of the Yearbook for Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research appeared: Geiger, Pfänder, Reinach and Scheler were
its co-editors, together with Husserl. This volume probably marks the
peak in the philosophical production of the two circles, for it
presents classics such as the first part of Pfänder’s On
the Psychology of Sentiments, Geiger’s Contributions to
the Phenomenology of Aesthetic Enjoyment, the first part of
Scheler’s Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of
Values and Reinach’s The Apriori Foundations of the
Civil Law.


This volume also includes Husserl’s Ideas Pertaining to a
Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, in which
he places transcendental philosophy at the core of his research agenda
in terms that are clearer than those he has used up to this point.
Husserl’s transcendental phenomenology has many facets, but one
idea seems particularly significant: this is the idea of a necessary
correlation between reality and consciousness (cf. Zahavi 2008, 361).
To put this in Husserl’s own words: “[a]n
object existing in itself is never one with which consciousness or the
Ego pertaining to consciousness has nothing to do” (Hua
III/1, Eng. trans. 106). Husserl’s transcendentalism is still a
matter of debate today: questions concerning the relation between
Husserl’s Ideas and his previous works (especially the
LI) or the exact location of his transcendentalism between the
two poles of idealism and realism have not yet found a definite answer
in the secondary literature.


In the Munich and Göttingen circles, Husserl’s
Ideas was intensely discussed. Parts of its research program
were pursued further, with Hering and Ingarden, for instance,
attempting to develop Husserl’s theory of essences. Generally,
however, this work provoked what could be seen as a mirror image
reaction, for they provided the young phenomenologists with an
opportunity to renew their commitment to a robust form of metaphysical
realism, which they perceived as being incompatible with
Husserl’s transcendentalism. Reality, it was claimed, exists
independently of subjectivity (whether this is intended empirically or
transcendentally). The clash between these two different approaches to
phenomenology has also been labeled “the realism-idealism
controversy” (Ingarden 1929, Avé-Lallemant 1975b) and
turned out to be one of the most decisive issues in the history of the
phenomenological movement. To mention just one of the most important
consequences of this controversy, Husserl cited Pfänder’s
refusal of transcendentalism (shared, as he writes, by “the
phenomenologists of the Munich and Göttingen tradition”) as
the main reason for preferring Martin Heidegger as his successor for
the professorship in Freiburg in 1928 (cf. Husserl 1994, 180f).


The tragedy of the Great War not only led to an abrupt stop in the
scientific production of the two circles, but also contributed to the
dissolution of the Munich and, in particular, Göttingen groups.
Several of its members died at the front: Reinach fell in 1917, and his
fate was shared by, among others, Clemens, Frankfurter and Ritzel. In
1916, when Husserl moved to Freiburg to take over Heinrich
Rickert’s position as chair of philosophy, the two circles’
“tradition of phenomenology” remained active mainly in
Munich and Bergzabern (a small city in Rhineland-Palatinate), where the
Conrads had an estate and regularly hosted discussions in which Hering,
Koyré, Lipps, Stein, and von Sybel took part (cf. Feldes 2008).
It was in Munich, however, that the future of this approach to
phenomenology seemed most secure, thanks to its presence at that
university, where Pfänder became full professor in 1929 and
Gallinger and von Hildebrand taught as Privatdozenten. The
rise of Nazism in Germany, however, put an end to this group, as well.
Due to his opposition to the regime, von Hildebrand had to flee to the
United States. Gallinger, who was of Jewish origin, left Germany for
Sweden. Geiger (full professor in Göttingen from 1923) was forced
to retire in 1933. And Stein died in Auschwitz in 1942.


Although it could be argued that the Munich and Göttingen
seasons of phenomenology ended in those years, some of its members
(e.g., Conrad-Martius, von Hildebrand, Ingarden, and Stavenhagen)
continued to publish and remained active even after the Second World
War. Their ideas have also directly influenced other authors, including
Friedrich Bassenge, Nicolai Hartmann, Aurel Kolnai, José Ortega
y Gasset, Herbert Spiegelberg, and Karol Wojtyła.
2. Philosophy of Mind


Some of the most interesting contributions developed within the
Munich and Göttingen circles of phenomenology concern philosophy
of mind and, in particular, the theory of intentionality. These
contributions generally converge on the idea that there are
many primitive kinds of of-ness or about-ness, which are
radically different from each other. This idea can be claimed to
conflict with Husserl’s theory of intentionality as presented in
his Logical Investigations: on a possible interpretation of
this theory, there are several kinds of “objectifying” acts
(like thinking, perceiving, and imagining) that must, however, all be
qualified as intentional in exactly the same sense, since they all
instantiate the very same essence (they are “species” of
the genus of “intention,” cf. Hua XIX 380f, 432f,
625f.)
 

The assumption of radically different kinds of intentionality
first arises in connection with an important distinction drawn by
early phenomenologists between the act of “meaning”
something and presentation, i.e., acts like perceptions or
imaginations (cf. section 2.1 below). But it is also at work when
phenomenologists address and describe other types of acts—and
especially social acts and intentional actions (cf. 2.2) and
collective acts (2.3). As we will see in the following sections, all
these kinds of acts are held to be irreducible or primitive and, in
any case, not explainable by merely referring to other kinds of
experiences. This idea leads early phenomenologists to a multi-faceted
and articulated view about intentionality: in many ways,
phenomenological insights on how the mind refers to the world, on what
it means to do things with words or on what it means to share an
experience seem to have anticipated contemporary debates on these
issues.
2.1 Theory of Intentionality


Within early phenomenology, the notion of thinking is generally
associated (if not simply identified) with that of Meinen
(literally: “to mean,” hereafter “meaning
something” or “meaning act,” cf. Mulligan 2011) as a
specific kind of intentional act, which fundamentally differs from
presentation. It can be argued that early phenomenologists share a
basic understanding of this concept, which remains constant despite the
different nuances it assumes over time. As it has been shown (cf.
Mulligan 2011, 2012), the reflection on meaning acts accompanies the
entire history of the two circles. This section illustrates some of the
key passages in the phenomenological theorizing about the act of
meaning something and its relation to presentation.
2.1.1 Meaning Acts and Presentations
 

This section focuses on three main claims that might be argued to
be at the core of phenomenlogical theorizing about meaning acts: (i)
to mean something is to mean something which is intuitively absent
(i.e., which is not seen or imagined); (ii) to mean something and to
present something are not species of a common genus and, therefore,
they cannot “fuse” (i.e., presentations cannot
“fulfil” meaning acts); and (iii) to mean something is a
conceptual act, whereas to present—i.e., to perceive or
imagine—something is non-conceptual. All these claims are
developed by different phenomenologists, by drawing on the
contributions of their colleagues, and could be argued to mutually
support each other.


Alexander Pfänder is most likely the first who, in his
habilitation of 1899 (published 1900), discusses the notion of meaning
something and characterizes this act as essentially non-intuitive. In
this work, which is mainly devoted to the experience of willing, by
“meaning something,” Pfänder understands a particular
kind of mental act towards a content which is not present to
the mind. Any description of willing, Pfänder argues, requires a
preliminary description of meaning acts. Indeed, willing always
presupposes a meaning act in the sense that, when one wants something,
one is directed towards something that is not (yet) present. For
instance, if you want to eat a pizza, you have to be able to
mean eating the pizza, although, at the very moment in which
the corresponding will occurs, this event is absent (or, according to a
possible interpretation, it is not believed to be present, cf.
Uemura/Yaegashi 2012).


To be sure, in this early work, Pfänder still classifies meaning
something as a kind of presentation (Vorstellung): roughly,
to mean something is to present a (representing) content that
symbolically refers to another (represented) content that itself is
not present in sensation, whereby the two contents are in a similarity
or depictive relation (1900, 25ff, cf. also Fischer 1905).
Pfänder’s position, however, rapidly evolves in the
following years. As early as 1898, at a talk at the Verein,
he recognizes that presentations are always intuitive
(anschaulich), whereas the directedness towards an absent
correlate does not bear intuitive content. Pfänder
presents the example of someone attending a lecture (1898, 61): if the
auditor understands the speaker, then she is directed towards the same
objects about which the speaker is talking. That is, the auditor is
not—or not only—directed towards the sounds emitted by the
speaker (these being intuitive contents). Rather, she is directed
towards the referent of these words. The referent, however,
is not given intuitively or, at least, is not required to be
intuitively given.


In his later work, Pfänder develops this position by
increasingly stressing the differences between presenting and meaning
something (cf. 1911, 135). Eventually, he comes to consider the latter
experience as an act of its own kind and no longer as a kind
of presentation (cf. 1913, 19): The concept of a non-intuitive
presentation is thus held to be a genuine contradiction in terms (cf.
1921, 140, 1933, 21f), and meaning acts, being defined by a lack of
intuitive content, are described as referring to an object only in a
linguistic way (cf. 1973, 153). This is why such acts could also be
addressed under the label of “thinking” or, at least, as
one kind of thinking among others (such as questioning, conjecturing,
assuming, inferring, etc., cf. 1921, 145f, 1933, 21).


Pfänder’s early positions provide the basis for a series of
arguments that, in his 1911 paper On the Theory of Negative
Judgment, Reinach develops to illustrate that meaning something
is an act of its own kind that is fundamentally different from
presentation. Reinach seems to understand the notion of meaning
something as being very close to—if not simply interchangeable
(but see Mulligan 2011, 266 for a different interpretation)
with—that of thought (cf. 1908a, 339f, 1913a, 419). Note,
however, that this broad sense of “thinking” is contrasted
with a narrower one according to which only ideal objects like numbers
are said to be “thought” (cf. 1911a, 104). Reinach also
operates with a broad notion of presentation (Vorstellung),
which encompasses all acts that have an intuitive access to
their objects: they include imaginations, sensual and categorial
perceptions, presentifications (i.e., the act of making
“present” a past object), etc. (1911a, 101).


According to Reinach, there are a number of properties that
characterize acts of meaning, but not that of presenting (1911a,
102ff). One of the most important is the following: whilst
presentations are not linguistic (1911a, 104), meaning something is a
linguistic act, for it always bears what Reinach calls
“linguistic clothing.” This is conducive to the idea that,
whereas presentations are defined in terms of experiences that give
intuitive access to the object, meaning acts are “blind”
(1911a, 119): if one means an object, no intuitive aspect of the object
becomes present simply due to the fact of this object having been
meant. That makes meaning acts non-extended in time or even
“temporally punctual.” By contrast, the objects of
presentations are intuitively present, i.e., they stay “in front
of” the subject as in perception, imagination, presentification,
etc., and therefore can stretch in time. All this aligns with
Pfänder’s view about meaning acts, but Reinach develops an
additional argument that turns out to be crucial for the understanding
of this kind of act.


After distinguishing these two types of experiences, Reinach questions
whether this distinction boils down to the one introduced by Husserl
in his Logical Investigations between acts lacking intuitive
content and acts that are intuitively fulfilled. Roughly,
Husserl’s idea is that objectifying acts either have to be
described as intuitions (Anschauungen) because they
bear intuitive content—in the case of perceptions, this content,
also qualified as “real [reell],” is saliently
made of sensations (Empfindungen, later also labeled as
hyle—for the development of this notion cf. Taipale
2014, 27ff). Or they lack such content, and then they have to be
qualified as thinking acts (in the sense of
“meaning-intentions” or “significations”).
Husserl makes the point that objectifying acts can be more or
less intuitively fulfilled, meaning that the intuitive content
typically comes in degrees: if the act has a maximum of intuitive
content, then one faces a so-called “pure intuition,” in
which “no part, no side, no property of its object fails to be
intuitively presented […], none is merely indirectly co-meant
[mitgemeint]” (Hua XIX 611, Eng. trans. mod., 236). By
contrast, if the act is empty, then it is a signitive presentation (or
a thinking act). In addition, if an intuition and a thinking act are
directed to the same object in the same sense, they can
“fuse,” to the effect that the intuition can be said to
intuitively fulfill the empty act. Note that this view seems to imply
that, since the presence of intuitive content is not essential for the
act to be an objectifying act, every such act either is a
signification or is always co-constituted by a signification. (It
should not go unmentioned that, contrary to his initial position in
the LI, Husserl changes his mind about this issue; in later
works, he stresses that intuitions are not co-constituted by thinking
acts, cf. Hua XVI §17, Hua XX/I, 85–98 and Melle 2002.)


On his end, Reinach accepts that, first, a presentation can
be more or less intuitively fulfilled, but he also stresses (1911a,
105) that the act’s component, which is fulfilled by the
intuitive content, is not a meaning act. In addition, Reinach
accepts that the subject can simultaneously present an object and mean
this very same object. However, he maintains that in this case the
meaning act remains vis à vis the presentation, as it
were; the acts do not relate to each other in any intrinsic way:
“this identity of reference point of the two acts cannot sanction
the identification of the acts themselves, i.e. by allowing the
dissolution of the punctual act of meaning within [sic] the
stretched-out act of presentation” (1911a, 103, Eng. 324). In
other words, Reinach maintains that, although the objectual correlates
of both acts can coincide, meaning acts cannot enter a relation of
fulfillment with presentations (or with intuitions in Husserl’s
sense), i.e., they cannot fuse (1911a, 106, on this, also cf. Salice
2012).


The reason for rejecting the claim that meaning something and
presentation can enter a relation of fulfillment becomes obvious if
one considers how Reinach qualifies meaning acts: being
“blind,” these acts simply cannot have intuitive
content. They can only be accompanied by such contents, but
these contents “do not ‘exhibit’ or
‘present’ anything—for of course in the sphere of
meaning there is absolutely nothing to hand which is presented”
(1911a, 106 Eng. 328; cf. also Gallinger 1914, 36 who applies this
idea to the investigation of memory). Thus, intuitive contents are not
and cannot be immanent in meaning acts and, if these acts did have
such contents, they would not be meaning acts, but presentations (in
1908a, 339 this argument is developed in explicit contrast to
Husserl).  Indeed, while meaning acts are always “empty”
(or, more precisely, they do not show anything like the dichotomy of
emptiness/fullness), it is “very questionable whether there
exist absolutely intuition-free presentations” (1911a, 106, Eng.
329).


From this view, one could conclude that, although presentations and
meaning acts, are both directed to objects and states of affairs,
their directedness is not of the same kind: if it were of the
same kind, meaning acts and presentation could fuse. To put this
differently, the “of-ness” of presentations and
perceptions does not coincide with the intentionality of
intentions or meaning acts—and, as we will see below, one
additional way to flesh out this point is that the latter form of
directedness, not the former, is conceptual. This distinction is
terminologically fixed by Conrad, who in his 1911 essay,
Perception and Presentation (An Essential
Comparison), pushes Reinach’s view further and reserves the
expression, “Intentionalität,” to the
directedness of meaning acts (1911, 64 fn) by qualifying presentations
as the consciousness of an object or of a thing,
i.e., a pure passive “having” of the object (for this
notion cf. also Pfänder 1911, 167f; on the idea of
“rezeptives Haben” cf. Reinach 1911, 102, von Hildebrand
1916, 85, Karelitzki 1914, 35, among others).


This approach to the intentionality of meaning acts, however, raises a
question: if these acts are “blind” in the sense that the
objects they refer to are intuitively absent, how does their
intentionality work? We have already seen that to mean or to intend
something is to mean it via linguistic signs (cf. also Conrad
1910, Schmücker 1956); this idea is further investigated by Herman
Ritzel in his dissertation of 1914 (published 1916). What makes
Ritzel’s proposal particularly interesting is that he justifies
the distinction between meaning acts and presentations in an original
way, which seems to anticipate the debate on the theory of direct
reference and on rigid designators.  Ritzel accepts Reinach’s
argument that presentations require the intuitive presence of the
object, whereas meaning something does not (1916, 35), but he
complements this view by claiming that meaning acts and presentation
differ because the kinds of objects towards which they are directed
differ. Whereas presenting directly points at objects, meaning points
at concepts, and it is by means of concepts that meaning acts
can be said to refer to objects (1916, 48f).


One interesting point Ritzel makes is that, when it comes to meaning
acts pointing at “empirical concepts” (an expression he
takes from Kant to express concepts based on sensorial experience, cf.
KdrV A50 B74, 1916, 22), semantic reference works in the same way in
which, on John Stuart Mill’s view, proper names denote
individuals: just as proper names directly refer to individuals, so,
Ritzel writes, do “[empirical concepts] denote [nennen]
their object directly [in direkter Weise]” (1916, 17).
More precisely, what both cases have in common is that meanings of
proper names or of terms of empirical concepts change if the objects
they denote change. That is, the content of an empirical concept is
identical with the kind the concept refers to (and not, e.g., with some
set of properties of the objects at issue). In contrast to the
traditional view, in these cases, it is not the intension (the content)
of a concept that determines its extension, but rather the extension
that determines the intension. 
2.1.2 Stances and Perceptions


The views illustrated in the previous section seem to support a
statement made by Conrad in his last publication according to which
Husserl’s students in Göttingen rejected Husserl’s
claim that intentionality is the essential characteristic of perception
and presentation (cf. 1968, 3). Indeed, despite the differences in the
details, the general idea that intentionality is not a genus but a
property that characterizes only a specific kind of experience (i.e.,
acts of meaning something) seems to have been a matter of communis
opinio, given that authors like Geiger (1911, 125, 139),
Stavenhagen (1925, 164f, 1933, 38), or Brunswig (1910, 64f) mention the
idea without needing to justify it. Other advocates of this view are
von Hildebrand and Linke, both of whom enrich the debate in an original
way.


Von Hildebrand elaborates upon the idea of intentional acts or
intention (Intention) as developed in early phenomenology by
arguing in The Idea of Moral Action of 1912 (published 1916)
that stances or position-takings (Stellungnahmen) are also
intentions. By “stances” von Hildebrand mainly means
affective and conative experiences in which the subject actively takes
a given position towards an object or a state of affairs (e.g., she
emotively responds towards the value of an object or she wants to bring
about a given state of affairs). By building on ideas that in
particular Pfänder, Reinach and Scheler developed about emotions
(on emotions in early phenomenology, s. Vendrell Ferran 2008; on
Scheler’s account, cf. Mulligan 2008a), von Hildebrand sharply
distinguishes between so-called cognitions (Kenntnisnahmen)
and stances: like Conrad, he also characterizes cognitions as the
“consciousness of an object” (cf. von Hildebrand 1916,
14ff), meaning that perceptions and presentations are experiences that
can be said to be of an object, but in which their subject
remains passive.


By contrast, the subject is spontaneously or actively
directed towards a correlate when he or she has an intention
(Intention). What characterizes these experiences is their
spontaneity and the “ideal relation” they enter into with
their correlates (1916, 13). What is particularly interesting about von
Hildebrand’s point is that stances are also spontaneous or active
experiences in the sense that, when one emotionally responds to the
value of an object, the subject is acting spontaneously by entering
into an ideal relation with values (cf. 1916, 14ff, 75): the subject
instantiates the kind of stance that is ideally required by the value
itself (1916, 39f). This insight seems to be illustrated by the
possibility of a subject’s grasping a value, say, the beauty of
an artwork, by, nonetheless, remaining nonplussed or passive towards it
(cf. 1916, 76): in this case, the specific act of cognition that,
according to von Hildebrand, provides access to values (and that he
labels “value-taking [Wertnehmen],” cf. 1916,
78ff; on this notion, cf. Mulligan 2010, 235f) does not trigger an
emotive and active response to it. Von Hildebrand’s position is
also worthy of mention because it appears to represent the way in which
many other phenomenologists understood the relation between emotions as
affective responses that already presuppose the grasping of values (cf.
Brunswig 1911, 47, Reinach 1912/13, 295ff, Scheler 1913/16, 267ff).


So far, we have mainly dealt with meaning acts, but how do early
phenomenologists describe presentations and, especially, perceptions?
An interesting contribution is provided by Linke (cf. 1929): when
tackling the notion of perception, Linke denies that perceiving
consists in conceptually grasping (or in apprehending) sensations. In
particular, he refuses the explanation of perception proposed by
Husserl in the LI (cf. also Rollinger 2000). As we saw in
2.1.1, Husserl argues that perceptions (and intuitions more generally
speaking) can “fuse” with thinking acts—this is made
possible by the structure of these acts and, in particular, by the
fact that their structure includes so-called
“apprehensional” matter (Auffassungsmaterie): if
a perception and a thinking act are structured in such a way as to
include matter of the same kind, then these two matters can be brought
to “coincidence.” Since the matter of thinking acts is
characterized by Husserl as conceptual (Hua XIX 105f), it seems
plausible to argue that, in order for this matter to be brought to
coincidence with perceptual matter, the latter must also be
conceptual.  Accordingly, to perceive something would thus mean to
apprehend or even to “interpret” (interpretieren)
intuitive content (sensations or Empfindungen, cf. 2.1.1) by
means of conceptual content. However, Husserl himself seems to refuse
this interpretation at times (cf. Hua XIX 550f), making the content of
intuitions a debated topic not only in the secondary literature
(cf. Hopp 2008, Mulligan 2005), but also in early phenomenology, as we
will soon see. Such debate also anticipates many of the themes that,
from Fred Dretske onwards (cf. his 1969), are discussed under the
labels “conceptual” and “non-conceptual
content.”


Against this background, Linke maintains that perception consists of
recognizing conceptual forms, but these, he argues, already lie
in—or structure—the object of perception (Linke 1929, 169,
220f). Accordingly, Linke’s theory of perception seems to be on
par with that of his colleagues in Göttingen: even if perceptions
are about objects, they are not intentional in the sense
that, for them to be directed towards an object, they need to bear
apprehensional (or conceptual) matter. But, now, if perception does
not rest upon the apprehension (Auffassung) of sensations,
how can the difference between perceptions and sensations be accounted
for? To be sure, early phenomenologists seem to be rather suspicious
of the very notion of sensation. Some of them denied its existence:
Daubert, for example, held that sensations are a sort of theoretical
entity that does not actually exist, but whose existence can be
assumed for heuristic purposes in order to explain how perception
works (s.  Fréchette 2012). The idea that sensations are not
real parts of perception seems to be typical for many other members of
the two circles (and prominently for Scheler, cf. 1925, 285): indeed,
according to Schapp the members of the Munich circle “did not
believe anymore in the sensation as constituent of perception”
(Schapp 1959, 21; cf. Ingarden 1968, 419).


Others endorsed the view that sensations are of or about objects:
Linke, for example, argued that sensations are intentional experiences
(1929, 164ff). Other phenomenologists also distinguished between the
experience of sensing and its content. So did Conrad-Martius (1916,
442), von Hildebrand (1916, 74), Pfänder (1904, 212f) and Reinach
(1913a, 378).
2.1.3 The Relation between Meaning Acts and Presentations


Although the two circles seem, in general, to have agreed with the
thesis that a subject can be directed towards objects in fundamentally
distinct ways, one of which is active, spontaneous, linguistic and
conceptual, whereas the other is passive, non-linguistic and
non-conceptual, this position nevertheless also attracted objections
and criticism. Some early phenomenologists refused parts of its
implications, while others refused the thesis altogether.


Karelitzki, for instance, sides with Reinach and Conrad when it
comes to distinguishing meaning from presentation, but he rejects their
cardinal point that meaning is always blind, i.e., that it can
never get sight of the object (1914, 33f). Karelitzki argues that,
although meaning is generally blind, it does not have to be
so: he presents an example in which someone asks the question
“what do you mean with…?” and the one asked gives a
characterization of what was meant, hence bringing the meaning act step by step
closer to what Karelitzki calls the “essence” of the meant
object (1914, 36).


Other voices within the groups maintained—very much in line with
Husserl’s work—that intentions (be they thoughts or
intuitions) can constitutively be fulfilled by intuitive
material. This idea is advocated by Schapp (1910), Hofmann (1913) and
Leyendecker (1913), who apply it to the phenomenology of perception,
and by Heinrich, who presupposes it in his work on concepts
(1909). Indeed, in early works, Schapp holds that, within perception,
sensual givenness and ideas (or concepts) can only be separated
conceptually, but not factually: without ideas, we cannot perceive
things (1910, 133f).  Although Hofmann was critical towards the
existence of sensations (the first chapter of his 1913 essay is a
critique of this notion), he nonetheless puts Husserl’s concept
of apprehension at the core of perception: perception is apprehension,
even though the apprehended contents are still not sensations, but are
already structured “sight or visual things”
(Sehdinge), cf. Hofmann 1913, 82 (on the notion of
Sehding, cf. Casati 1994).  Leyendecker investigated the
phenomenon of cognitive penetrability and how perception is permeable
to thinking, by analyzing different perceptual scenarios like those of
“overlooking” something (1913, 12ff) and of selective
perception (1913, 48ff), as well as figures such as the Rhombille
tiling (1913, 87) and different kinds of illusions (cf. 1913,
127ff).


Importantly, the debate about thought, presentation and their
relation was not confined to the perimeters of phenomenology, but had
close ties to the tradition of thought-psychology, or
Denkpsychologie, which was strongly represented in Munich by
some of its main figures, namely, Oswald Külpe, Karl Bühler
and Otto Selz (who was also a member of the Verein in Munich)
and supported by neoscholastic philosophers like Clemens Baeumker and
Joseph Geyser (many phenomenological dissertations arose from this
cooperation). One of the basic ideas of thought psychology, i.e., the
existence of non-depictive or non intuitive acts (also classified as
the “situation of consciousness”, “meaning
awareness”, or “thoughts”, cf. Kusch 1999, 21–30),
which can neither be reduced to other experiences nor, most notably, to
presentations or sensations, could arguably be identified as one of the
motives for this reciprocal interest.
2.2 Social Acts and Intentional Actions


In early phenomenology, the notion of social acts (soziale
Akte) comprises, roughly, all those acts that today are widely
known as “speech acts.” These acts, which include
promises, orders, bets, and apologies, must secure their uptake in
order to be successfully or happily performed. (Term and concept of
“social act” as “social operation of the mind”
can be found in Thomas Reid, cf. Schuhmann/Smith 1990. Reid was not
unknown within the two circles of phenomenology, cf. Peters 1909, but
there is no solid evidence that early phenomenologists adopted this
idea from Reid, cf. Mulligan 1987, 33f n 5.) Although the history of
philosophy has generally associated speech act theory with the names
John L. Austin or John Searle, the two circles of phenomenology
already provided a comprehensive theory of such acts. One main
difference between the two approaches is that the tradition
inaugurated by Austin generally understands speech acts as
conventional or ritual actions (cf. Austin 1962, 14), whereas
phenomenology—as we will see below—describes social acts
as a kind of mental act or experience (cf. Smith 1990).
 

The first steps towards such a theory are established by
Pfänder in his reflections on the act of ordering someone to do
something and the logic of imperatives (1909), as well as by Daubert
in his tentative theory of questions of 1911/12 (cf. Schuhmann/Smith
1987). It is plausible to assume that Reinach—who in 1913
presented the most advanced and articulated theory of such acts within
phenomenology—developed his position in close dialogue with both
Pfänder and Daubert (cf. Schuhmann 2004b, Smith 1990).


In his Imperativenlehre, Pfänder pursues the idea of
developing a deontic logic, i.e., a logic for those propositions that
have the form “subject s should (should not) be/do
x.” Accordingly, his interest is primarily in orders
qua ideal objects and not in orders qua acts. There
is a close link between these two notions, though. Just as ideal
thoughts or propositions are types or species of thinking acts (cf.
1921, 7f), so might ideal orders be described as types of orders. For
instance, one and the same order can be given by different persons in
the sense that their acts instantiate the same type. Based on this
type-token relation, it is possible to read the phenomenological
structure of orders-qua-acts from the ideal structure of
orders-qua-types. There are two insights that one can derive
from doing so. The first is that, as Pfänder stresses, acts of
ordering are sui generis experiences, given that they are
instances of distinct ideal types. The second insight is that
the structure of ideal orders might require an addressor (1909, 307)
and an addressee (1909, 301). This suggests that Pfänder also
recognized the existence of ordering acts that are addressed by someone
to someone else. Even though Pfänder indicates in some
passages that the addressor has to understand the order and that both
addressor and addressee have to enter into a social relation of some
sort (cf. 1909, 298, 301, 313), he did not provide a systematic
treatment of all the conditions that have to be fulfilled for an act of
order to be happily realized.


Similar conclusions can be drawn from Daubert’s reflections
about questions during the same period (cf. Schuhmann/Smith 1987).
Daubert, too, distinguished the questioning act from its ideal meaning
or from the question in an ideal sense but, in contrast to
Pfänder’s sparse indications about acts of orders, he
described the experience of questioning in more detail. This act
coincides neither with intellectual states like uncertainty, doubt or
conjecture, nor with volitional stances like the wish or the desire to
know something. Questions can be motivated by all these experiences,
but they cannot be reduced to them. For instance, questions are
temporally punctual acts, whereas the aforementioned phenomena are
state-like experiences.


Daubert’s insightful point about speech acts is that a question
can be realized in two different ways: one can pose an inner question,
as when—in order to draw some conclusion q or
not-q—one wonders whether p is the case.  Or,
one can direct one’s question to someone else, in which case we
have an instance of a “directed question
(Anfrage)”. When the question is directed to someone
else, Daubert contends, the act has to be uttered externally in order
to give the addressee the possibility of apprehending the question.
This is a decisive step towards the recognition of social acts as a
distinct class of acts, and it can be argued that Daubert’s
intuition contains the idea of social acts “in germ” (cf.
Schuhmann/Smith 1987, 375).


Reinach develops Daubert’s idea from its initial germination
when he claims that a question that does not have to be uttered is not
a question at all. Of course, there are erotetic experiences that can
be realized internally, but such experiences are not
questions; rather, they are erotetic attitudes
(Fragehaltungen, cf. Reinach 1912/13, 281f and Pfänder
1911, 180f), which do not even need to be linguistically
“clothed”. The main difference between such attitudes and
genuine acts of questioning is that the latter have to be
uttered externally. And this is because, again by necessity, questions
require be heard by their addressees in order to be happily performed.
As such, they are in-need-of-being-heard
(“vernehmungsbedürftig”). This is an
essential property not only of questions, but of a whole group of acts
encompassing promises, orders, bets, communications, etc. (cf. Mulligan
1987): all acts which are in need of being heard are social acts.


Social acts are a basic kind of intentional act. The requirement of
uptake as an “essential” property has to be understood in
its exact sense: without this property, the corresponding experiences
would not be of the kind that they are. As such, it is not possible to
trace back experiences that are in-need-of-being-heard to experiences
that do not exhibit this property. Take the act of communicating or
informing (Mitteilen) as an example: at first glance, Reinach
describes it as though communicating were just asserting. Assertion is
construed as a complex act constituted by two parts: an act of meaning,
which is accompanied by a conviction (1911a, 107). In this sense, to
assert a state of affairs is to mean it with the concomitant conviction
that it subsists. Communication has the same constituents of assertion:
when one (honestly) informs someone of a given state of affairs, one
means it only insofar as one is also convinced of its subsistence.
Still, communication is irreducible to assertion (which is an inner
act) because, unlike assertion, communication is in need of being
heard. Communication presupposes that someone who is able to hear the
act must be there: since the act can be heard only if it assumes a
“body” (cf. Reinach 1913b, 160), the act has to be uttered.
Another difference between inner and social acts is the capacity, which
several social acts have, to generate social effects, i.e., to produce
social entities. For instance, it belongs to the essence of a promise
to produce a claim and an obligation once the act is successfully
realized. By contrast, the mere assertion that I am willing to do
something does not bring me under the obligation to do so.


Reinach’s insights about speech acts are further developed by
von Hildebrand, who extends the domain of “social”
experiences. In addition to linguistic acts, von Hildebrand argues that
there are a number of stances that specifically address other persons
and must be understood by their targets. Mainly, these are the stances
of love and hate (in their manifold forms) towards another person. For
instance, if one loves someone else, there is a sense in which the
emotion could be assessed as successful if the lover manages to let the
loved one know of his or her love (if the lover spiritually
“touches” the loved one, von Hildebrand 1930, 28f). This
appears to be so because, if the addressee is emotionally touched by
the expressed love, then he or she can respond to the social stance and
can reciprocate the love of which she is the target.


The results of Reinach’s investigations about social acts are
further developed by Schapp and Stein. Both explore some of the legal
implications of Reinach’s theory. In the first volume of his
The New Science of Law (1930), Schapp focuses on the idea that
social acts generate social entities and, in particular, on the view
that promises generate claims and obligations. This insight is employed
to shed light on the notion of contracts and on the relations between
contracts and values. First, Schapp recognizes several forms of
contracts and argues that they can be described as more or less complex
forms of promises. More interestingly, he also investigates the
relations into which promises and contracts enter with values. For
instance, in an agreement of sale, what is paid (or what is given) and
what one gets bear values that the two counterparts evaluate before
deciding to enter into the agreement, i.e., to promise something.


In her An Investigation Concerning the State (1925), Stein
argues that states are collective persons, which are sovereign and
which are posited by free acts of “foundation”
(Staatsgründung, 1925, 30). In this sense, states are
social entities generated by such acts. Further, she argues that a
state’s legislative power is exerted by means of acts of
enactments (Bestimmungen). Indeed, Reinach devoted large parts
of his monograph to the description of the social act of enacting and
its function in bringing positive law into existence. Although Stein
seems to confound Reinach’s notion of enactment with that of an
order (cf. Schuhmann 2004c), she explicitly addresses a point which
Reinach left unsolved: Reinach did not discuss the authority a person
must have in order to be able to produce effective enactments. Stein
argues that enactments are acts carried out in the name of a state: it
is via the state’s sovereignty that the enactments performed by
individuals receive the authority they must have in order to be
effective.


Phenomenological accounts of social acts often contain elements of a
theory of action. On the one hand, an action is what is
generally promised, ordered or apologized for. On the other, social
acts themselves share characteristics that are typical of intentional
actions; Schapp, e.g., points out that to conclude a contract (i.e. to
realize a peculiar promise) is an intentional action (i.e. an action
led by volitional experiences) in the sense that it can be the result
of a process of deliberation (1930, 2f).


Intentional actions are yet another long-standing research topic in
early phenomenology. They are mainly investigated in several works by
Pfänder (1900, 1911, 1913/1916), von Hildebrand (1916),
Scheler (1913/16, 141ff), Reinach (1912/13), and Reiner
(1927). Generally, these authors agree that the phenomenon of
intentional action has to be analyzed into at least two distinct
parts. On the one hand, we have the will, conceived of as another
stance of the volitional kind in addition to wishing, striving,
etc. The will can lead to a decision (Entschluss) or a
deliberation (Vorsatz) and may be the result or the effect of
previous experiences (such as premeditation, cf.  Reinach 1912/13, or
the feeling of a value, cf. von Hildebrand 1916).  These experiences
can be said to “motivate” the decision, where motivation
is understood as a peculiar form of causation, namely, as mental
causation (cf. Pfänder 1911, Stein 1922). On the other hand, the
will may lead to “acts of realization
(Realisierungsakte)” that accompany and affect bodily
movements (Scheler 1913/16, 142, von Hildebrand 1916, 26). This is a
distinct act, which can also be characterized as
“trying”—once one decides to do something, one also
tries to do it.

2.3 Collective Intentionality


Phenomenological investigation into social acts already pointed out
that such acts can be performed not only by an individual, but also
collectively: not only can orders be given to a group, but they can
also be performed by a group (Pfänder 1909, 312; Reinach
classifies these cases as one of the several modifications that social
acts can undergo, cf. his 1913b, 164f). In general, phenomenological
investigations into collective intentionality presuppose that, if one
wants to know what a group is and how a group is created or
constituted, one has to look at what may be called the
“internal” or “subjective” conditions that the
group’s members have to fulfill. Questions related to collective
intentionality are discussed mainly in the works of von Hildebrand,
Stein and Walther. Their positions are developed in close relation to
the work of Scheler, who provided influential insights into the nature
of groups (cf. 1913/16, 1923), and anticipate many aspects of more recent
debates about “social ontology” (for some of these aspects,
cf. Mulligan 2001, Schmid 2012, Schmid/Schweikard 2013).


Walther, for instance, argues that a group arises if some
psychological conditions are fulfilled. Roughly, these are: the
members must first share a common background or habitus (a
concept she adopts from, among others, Pfänder, cf. his
1913/1916) in which the existence of others is taken for
granted—somehow, the others “are in me”
already. Other conditions concern cognitive relations between the
group’s members. In particular, to form a community, two or more
individuals must share the same intentional experience, which is
directed towards the same object; they must empathize with the
experience of the counterpart, and they must reciprocally
“unify” (where “reciprocal unification
[Wechseleinigung]” can be defined as a positive
intentional feeling of togetherness, cf. León and Zahavi 2015).
In addition, the individuals have to empathize with each act of
unification again. One could ask, however, whether this cognitive
architecture of interlocked experiences is both a necessary and
sufficient condition for the existence of a group and of collective
intentionality (Schmid 2012, 132–138, León and Zahavi
2015).


An ontologically more robust position, according to which collective
intentionality cannot be reduced to I-intentionality plus some
cognitive relations, was proposed by Stein. In her treatise,
Individual and Community (1922), Stein also advocates the
idea that the constitution of a group has to be explained by means of
clarifying the subjective or internal conditions that the
group’s members have to fulfill (Stein 1922, 216f). Against this
background, she develops a fine-grained account of the experiences
that lay the foundation for the existence of groups by classifying
three different kinds of groups: the mass, the community and the
society (this classification is broadly adopted from Scheler, cf 1913/16,
529ff, who substantially modified an earlier taxonomy proposed by
Ferdinand Tönnies in 1887). Whereas the mass develops out of mere
emotional contagion (1922, 219ff), community and society presuppose
more complex forms of sociality. In particular, the community is
characterized by its members sharing a “collective life
(Gemeinschaftsleben).” By this concept, Stein intends a
primitive form of intentionality where at least two subjects are
directed together towards one and the same object. This kind
of intentionality should be distinguished from the one in which two
subjects direct their intentional acts to each other (cf. Stein 1922,
120ff, 244—empathy would be an instance of this form of
intentionality, cf. Stein 1917, Scheler 1912) and which could be
called an “I-Thou intentional relation” (von Hildebrand
1930, 32) in contrast to “collective” intentionality
proper (s. also De Vecchi 2014).


According to Stein, the difference between associations and
communities lies in the way in which the members consider themselves:
in associations, the members see themselves as objects; in communities,
they see themselves as subjects or persons (1925, 2). That is,
societies exist only to reach a common goal and are founded by the free
acts of their members, whereas communities arise spontaneously, and
their members are in solidarity with one another. To exist, societies
require communities, but not vice versa. Interestingly, communities
might also develop into collective persons (Gesamtpersonen),
which can be seen as the “ideal limit” of community, i.e.
as a community in which, ideally, all the members see themselves as
fully responsible for the entire community (1922, 249f).


The notion of collective person is adopted by Stein from Scheler,
from whom she also draws on for other aspects of her theory. Scheler
insisted with assiduity on the role that shared experiences, and,
especially, shared feelings, play in the constitution of groups (cf.
Scheler 1913/16, 529ff, 1923). In particular, communities, Scheler
contends, are groups whose members co-experience the same mental
states: such collective experiences give rise to a single stream of
consciousness, whose subject is the community itself (1913/16, 530). He
also advocates the idea that every person is, in addition to being an
individual person, also “a member of a comprehensive collective
person”: thanks to the existence of persons, collective persons
could be said to exist actually, not only ideally (1913/16, 523ff).


The idea that communities are persons was contested by von Hildebrand
in his Metaphysics of Community of 1930 (written in
collaboration with Hamburger, cf. A. Hildebrand 2000, 227). On the one
hand, in his work, von Hildebrand sides with the other
phenomenologists in arguing that there are different kinds of social
groups. So, e.g., associations are mere artifacts, communities of love
or friendships presuppose strong social relations based on reciprocal
feelings, and life spheres [Lebenskreise] arise
“spontaneously” without any plan or design. On the other
hand, von Hildebrand disputes the view that one can account for all of
the different kinds of groups by merely referring to their
members’ subjective features: this is true for associations,
I-Thou communities and primitive life-spheres, but not for
communities. With respect to this kind of group, von Hildebrand
stresses an external principle of constitution, i.e., what he
calls the unifying force (virtus unitiva) that
values can exert over individuals. Von Hildebrand’s
idea is that individuals are constantly geared to values and that the
values toward which they produce a response (Wertantwort)
“incorporate” the individuals into themselves (1930,
67ff). Accordingly, the individuals incorporated within the same value
are “unified” and form a community (a similar view is
advanced by Stavenhagen in 1933). Von Hildebrand does not deny that
some further conditions must be fulfilled in order for the
community’s members to be aware of being part of a community and
that such awareness is required in order for them to intentionally act
as a group. Still, as far as the ontological structure of a
community is concerned, such conditions do not represent a genuine tie
between the individuals. These ties can be recognized, but they are
not created all at once when such conditions are satisfied.

3. The Theory of Objects in the Munich and Göttingen Circles
 

In one of his first publications, Geiger argues that phenomenology
has to do with both acts and objects (Geiger 1907, 354). In a sense,
this distinction might be misleading, for experiences, too, can be
considered as objects of a given kind, namely of a mental kind. Still,
Geiger’s statement captures the idea that phenomenological
investigations are not confined to the sphere of acts, for they also
include the acts’ objectual correlates. That is, phenomenology
does not merely coincide with the material ontology or the eidetics of
the mental (i.e., with a discipline about the essential properties of
mental objects). Rather, this is only one chapter of phenomenology.
Phenomenology also provides a general theory of objects, or an
ontology.  There are at least three interrelated features that broadly
characterize the wide range of early phenomenological investigations
on ontology. These are: metaphysical realism, ontological pluralism,
and essentialism.
3.1 General Features
3.1.1 Metaphysical realism


Early phenomenology generally assumed that the world is made of
objects of different kinds and that their existence is
intentionality-independent. That is, objects exist independently of a
subject that might know them (whether the notion of subject is
interpreted as an empirical or as a transcendental I). In
addition, it is held that objects have an ontological structure and
that such structure is, in principle, fully intelligible.  It is
intelligible in the sense that, if there is an object, then it is
possible to know it and its structure adequately. This is not to say,
however, that the ideal inventory of all entities in the world
includes only objects existing independently of subjects. Artifacts
and social objects like institutional facts (claims, obligations,
rights and duties, etc.) exist because there are individuals or
communities that create them. Also more volatile entities such as
perceptual phenomena (Erscheinungen) partly owe their
existence to subjects.

3.1.2 Ontological Pluralism
 

The second feature is related to the first: the world is made of
objects that do not all belong to the same category and, because there
are different kinds of objects, there are also different disciplines
investigating them. This idea of ontological pluralism is inconsistent
with psychologism: psychologism collapses different objectual domains
into one, leading to the conclusion that there is one
discipline—psychology—in charge of investigating them.


The ontological pluralism advocated by phenomenology also motivates a
strong tendency towards anti-reductionism, as well as towards a
descriptive approach to ontological questions: all objects must be
described as they are—without succumbing to the temptation to
reduce them to other kinds of entities (cf. Geiger
1933). Occasionally, such a descriptive tendency seems to suggest that
phenomenology has to confine itself to pure descriptions denying the
scientific role of definitions: the idea is that definitions have to
be avoided because they reduce one concept to other concepts, hence,
“betraying” the very essence of the definiendum
(cf. Reinach 1914, 535, on the relations between explanation and
description, cf. also Brunswig 1905 and Mulligan 2012 §1). This
approach has been criticized, even within phenomenology, for it
allegedly leads to a form of phenomenology characterized as
“picture book phenomenology”
(Bilderbuchphänomenologie, cf. Scheler 1913/16,
11, Hering 1939, 370 n 1).

3.1.3 Essentialism


In addition to the previous features, phenomenological ontology was
committed to a form of essentialism according to which objects are
constituted by an essence. Against this background, any attempt to
reduce entities with a given essence to entities with a different one
was perceived as a pernicious endeavor.  The word “essence
(Wesen),” however, is ambiguous (Reinach 1912): on the
one hand, it can refer to the so-being of an individual object,
i.e. to that which makes an individual the individual it is, e.g. the
property of a quill to write finely (cf.  Hering 1921, 496f; Hering
reserves the term, “essence (Wesen),” for this
concept). On the other hand, it can also indicate what or what kind a
given object is (Hering uses the word “essentiality
(Wesenheit)” to refer to essence in this second sense,
cf. 1921, 505ff and Seifert 1996). Essences, especially in the second
sense, are taken to—ideally—exist independently of whether
they have exemplifications or not. As such, they are described as
ideal or atemporal objects. Over the years, this conception would be
substantially enriched, e.g., by Geiger’s idea of “dynamic
essences” (cf. Geiger 1924), evolving through time and being
characteristically instantiated in artworks (e.g., in essences like
the tragic).


Within early phenomenology, one finds general agreement in the idea
that, since objects instantiate essences, they enter into necessary
relations (Hering 1921, Ingarden 1925, Reinach 1911b). So, e.g., it
was claimed that certain kinds of facts are necessary (it is a
necessary fact, for instance, that promises generate claims and
obligations, that colors have extension, that movements have velocity,
that tones have pitch and intensity, etc.,) and that these facts are
grounded in the essence of promise, of color, of movement, of tone,
etc. This highlights an idea that has recently become the focus of an
intense debate (cf. Fine 1994a, 1994b, 1995), namely the idea that the
concept of necessity is distinct from that of essentiality and that
the latter grounds the former (cf. Mulligan 2004).
 

The necessity grounded in essentiality has to be distinguished
from other kinds of necessities, like “empirical”
necessity or causality (cf. Reinach 1911b, 85f, where he uses the term
“modal” for the necessity grounded in essences and,
somehow misleadingly, “material” for
“empirical” necessity). Within a judgment, modal necessity
applies to the copula (Reinach 1911b, 86) and does not enrich the
“content” of the judgment: for instance, the judgment
“two multiplied by two is necessarily four” is made true
by the same state of affairs which makes the judgment “two
multiplied by two is four” true. In other words, by affecting
the copula, modal necessity affects the entire state of affairs
posited in the judgment, which can hence be characterized as a
necessary state of affairs. By contrast, empirical necessity applies
to the predicate and enriches it; to say that “a is
necessarily [in the sense of “causally”] related to
b” is to introduce an additional claim over and above what
it means to merely say that “a is related to b”
(Reinach 1911b, 87).
3.2 Objects and States of Affairs


The research into ontology conducted within the two circles was
decisively influenced by the views of both Husserl and Alexius
Meinong.  Indeed, almost all phenomenological investigations into
ontology presuppose that objectualities
(Gegenständlichkeiten) come in two kinds: objects or
states of affairs. States of affairs are the referents of
propositional attitudes like assumptions and judgments, and they are
distinguished from objects—i.e., what nominal intentional acts
refer to. If one carries out an act of assumption or of judgment, one
cannot but judge or assume that something is or is not the
case. That which is or is not the case is the state of affairs towards
which the mental attitude is directed.  From a linguistic point of
view, objects are the referents of singular terms, be they concrete or
abstract. By contrast, states of affairs are the referents or semantic
values of declarative sentences as well as of perfect nominals;
perfect nominals are linguistic constructions that contain a gerund
and can syntactically act as names (e.g., “the rose’s
being red,” cf. Vendler 1967, Bennett 1988).


As argued by Husserl in the LI, early phenomenology takes the
category of object to be divided into the two sub-categories of real
and ideal objects, which are distinguished by reference to their
relation to time (cf. Hua XIX 129f). Ideal objects are atemporal;
these are usually taken to be either general or individual objects.
Properties and essences are general because they can be predicated of
several objects. On the contrary, ideal objects, which cannot be
predicated, are individual. So, e.g., Reinach takes natural numbers to
be ideal and individual for they are not predicated of other
entities (1911c, 58; 1914, 539f). Real objects are temporal; this
category is traditionally divided into the classes of material and of
mental objects.


Over the years, this standard classification was revised: in
particular, the increasing attention devoted to social ontology led
phenomenology to enrich its table of categories (cf. Salice 2013).
First, the notion of real object was no longer confined to the material
and the mental: although communities, e.g., are neither mental nor
material entities, they are still temporal and, hence, real. Second,
the case of abstract entities such as the claims and obligations
generated by acts of promising called into question the strong
connection hitherto endorsed or presupposed between ideality and
temporality: on the one hand, these entities are neither material nor
mental; on the other, they are temporal (they come into being at a
given time and disappear when the promise is honored). Third, we have
already seen that investigations into aesthetics led some
phenomenologists to accept the existence of essences that are ideal,
but nonetheless temporal or historical (for a similar conception cf.
also Husserl’s idea of “bound idealities,” 1938,
321). 


Phenomenological investigations of types of objects run parallel to
those of states of affairs. The German expression for state of affairs
is Sachverhalt (whereas Meinong’s equivalent reads
“objective [Objektiv],” cf. Salice 2009): this
term, which apparently was introduced by Carl Stumpf in the Brentano
School around 1888 (cf. Rojszczak/Smith 2003, 165), has its roots in
the theory of law (Smith 1978a) where it is used to express
“juridical ‘status’ in the sense of ‘status
rerum’ (state or constitution of things)” (cf. Smith 1988,
25). Indeed, this is conducive to how early phenomenologists use the
term Sachverhalt: objects or things are held to have a
structure and to be related to each other. So, e.g., an object’s
being extended, being colored, being related to other objects, etc.,
are all held to be states of affairs (Sachverhalte). Early
phenomenological debate about these entities extends over many years
and is rich and multifaceted.


The different positions can be sorted into two more or less well
defined competing views. According to the first, states of affairs as
such have an ontological status which is intentionality-independent,
whereas the second claims that only some restricted classes of states
of affairs are intentionality-independent entities, while all others
eventually depend on intentionality. Which classes are
intentionality-dependent and which are independent remains a matter of
debate: for instance, are there non-obtaining states of affairs (e.g.
Elvis’s being the president of the US), are there negative states
of affairs (e.g. the not being red of the White House) or existential
states of affairs (the existence of Barack Obama) or impersonal states
of affairs (the state of affairs that it is raining)?


In this debate, Reinach’s theory represents one extreme position
(cf. Reinach 1911a): according to him, all judgments or all
declarative sentences (whether true or false) refer to states of
affairs. That is, all the aforementioned questions receive a positive
answer within his theory. True sentences (i.e., those sentences which
express true propositions) refer to obtaining states of affairs, false
ones to non-obtaining. States of affairs might hence be characterized
as truth-makers and the corresponding logical propositions as
truth-bearers. Despite his clear remarks on the topic, one will not
find in Reinach’s work a full-blown theory of the truth-making
relation; such a theory is developed by Pfänder in his
Logic of 1921 where he gives an account of truth-making in
terms of the principle of sufficient reason (cf. Mulligan 2008b).


In addition, Reinach suggests that states of affairs are either
positive or negative, and it is argued that either a positive state of
affairs or its negative contradictory obtains (either the being-red of
the rose obtains or its not-being red). The principle of the excluded
middle is hence claimed to hold for states of affairs and,
analogously, other principles traditionally believed to be of a
logical nature (and in particular the laws of inference, cf. 1911a,
115) are interpreted by Reinach as being primarily ontological
principles, i.e., principles which hold for states of affairs. That
is, states of affairs are the primal objects of logic (1911a, 138 n
1), and logic is primarily about states of affairs and only
secondarily about truth-bearers (cf. Gardies 1985).


Reinach’s rather cursory but influential description of states
of affairs represents the basis for further investigations thereof
within phenomenology (for instance, cf. Honecker 1921): in particular,
his idea that states of affairs are the bearers of modal properties
(and, especially, of possibility and necessity) was investigated
further by Gallinger in his The Problem of Objective
Possibility of 1912. Gallinger tries to solve a problem which is
implicit in Reinach’s position: if all states of affairs either
obtain or do not obtain, in what sense can some of them be said to be
possible? In order to solve this problem, Gallinger relies on another
idea advocated by Reinach: states of affairs are connected to each
other, in particular by the connection between grounds (or objective
reasons) and consequences. This is a connection which should not be
confused with causality (which is held to be a connection between
events, processes and states, cf. Reinach 1911b, 87). Accordingly, one
state of affairs (e.g., the fact that it is raining) can be the
grounds for a consequence (e.g., the fact that the streets are
wet).


Gallinger claims that, when one correctly judges that a state of
affairs p is possible, one is not asserting that this state of
affairs lies in a third ontological realm between being and non-being
(a position advocated, e.g., by Meinong, cf. his 1915). Rather, one is
stating that p is “partially motivated” by a further
state of affairs q. That is, there is a further state of affairs
q which is a (merely partial) reason for the subsistence of the
first. For q to be a partial reason for p means that p
cannot be the case if q is not the case. In this sense,
possibility is seen as a connection or, more precisely, as a negative
connection of being (negative Seinsverknüpfung), i.e.,
as a peculiar connection of grounding or motivation between states of
affairs (Gallinger 1912, 92).  Gallinger respects Reinach’s
principle: possible states of affairs either obtain or do not obtain,
but—in addition to their obtaining (or non-obtaining)—they
can be said to be possible, if they are partially motivated or
partially grounded.


An ontologically more parsimonious counterpart to this first position
was developed by Daubert. In his theory of judgment, Daubert draws a
distinction between two notions. First, he calls “states of
affairs” complex entities which exist independently of
intentionality, e.g., the being-red of the rose (cf. Schuhmann/Smith
1987, Schuhmann 2004d). In addition to states of affairs, he also
identifies so-called “states of affairs as cognized”
(Kenntnisverhalte), which are described as
intentionality-dependent entities. (Although using different
terminology, Pfänder, too, seems to have had a similar
distinction in mind in 1921 when he speaks of “the objects in
their objectual state (das Selbstverhalten der
Gegenstände)” and of “states of affairs”
as entities which are “projected or outlined
(entworfen)” by judgment and which are
“completely dependent” on judgment, cf. Pfänder 1921,
40f, 253.)


Daubert’s idea is that, within a judgment, an aspect of the
state of affairs is selected by the mind and conceptually framed. So,
for instance, the expressions “the chairman opens the
meeting,” “the chairman is opening the meeting,”
“the meeting is being opened by the chairman,” “the
opening of the meeting is being conducted by the chairman” and
“the chairman has opened the meeting,” (cf. Schuhmann/Smith
1987, 368) point at different “states of affairs as
cognized” (Kenntnisverhalte) to which the same state of
affairs pertains. The same can be said for expressions such as “a
> b” and “b < a”. In the LI, Husserl
employs this very same example to argue that the two sentences express
different propositional meanings pointing at the same state of affairs
(Hua XIX A 48), and Daubert reports having discussed this example with
Husserl (cf. Schuhmann 2004d, 206 n 25). This discussion might have
inspired Husserl to substitute his previous theory of the LI
with his later distinction between states of affairs and situations
(Sachlagen, cf. Hua XXVI 97f, Husserl 1938, 285ff), which is
analogous to Daubert’s position.


To be sure, Reinach, too, distinguishes between coarse-grained
“factual material (Tatbestand)” and fine-grained
states of affairs (cf. Smith 1987, 218ff). Yet, contrary to Reinach,
Daubert contends that such ontological fragments do not exist without
the corresponding judgments. Daubert claims, moreover, that not only do
states of affairs as cognized (Kenntnisverhalte) exist in
dependence of judgments, but that states of affairs as questioned
(Frageverhalte) or states of affairs as ordered
(Befehlsverhalte) also exist only in relation to acts of
question or of order (Schuhmann 2004b, 91).


This position leaves the question open as to what properties qualify
states of affairs and what properties affect intentionality-dependent
states of affairs as cognized: for instance, Daubert holds that there
are no negative states of affairs, but only negative
Kenntnisverhalte (cf. Schuhmann 1987—based on a
somewhat similar approach, Ingarden, too, denied the existence of
intentionality-independent negative states of affairs, cf. 1964 II/1,
Chrudzimski 2010). Analogously, Pfänder (cf. 1921, 72f) argues
that, when it comes to giving an account of impersonal judgments, these
have impersonal states of affairs as their correlates, but the
incompleteness that characterizes such states of affairs has no place
at the level of reality, i.e. at the level of “the objects in
their objectual state” (a position which, again, is in agreement
with Daubert, cf. Schuhmann 1998, 184).
4. Conclusion


Early phenomenologists make up a philosophical tradition that has
been almost wholly overlooked by historians of 20th century philosophy.
Partly building upon the ideas of Husserl and other philosophers, while
nevertheless also developing their own ideas independently, they made
contributions to as many fields as the philosophy of mind, the
philosophy of psychology, the philosophy of speech acts, epistemology,
social philosophy, the philosophy of values and ontology.


Some of their most important contributions are accounts of the
distinction between presentations (perceptions and imaginations) and
the acts of meaning something with an expression; of affective
phenomena, including episodic emotions and long-lasting sentiments; of
knowledge as a direct grasp of objects and states of affairs rather
than any sort of belief or conviction; of the distinction between
attitudes or stances, such as belief and emotions, on the one hand, and
knowledge, on the other; of the distinction between motivation and
reasons, on the one hand, and mental causality, on the other; of the
structure of speech acts such as promises, orders and questions; of
collective intentionality and its relation to social facts; and of
value, its grasp and our reactions to it. In ontology, they developed
theories of states of affairs and an account of modality according to
which the most important type of necessity flows from the essences or
natures of objects. That their ideas have been consistently overlooked
is made even more curious by the fact that they write in clear German
and that many of their ideas were rediscovered, beyond phenomenology,
during the twentieth century.


Uncovering the full extent of these still rather neglected resources
is an ongoing process that promises to impact different strands of
philosophical debate and to substantially enrich the received picture
of the phenomenological movement.