The idea that some characteristics of an organism are explained by
the organism's intrinsic nature, whilst others reflect the
influence of the environment is an ancient one. It has even been argued
that this distinction is itself part of the evolved psychology of the
human species. The distinction played an important role in the history
of philosophy as the locus of the dispute between Rationalism and
Empiricism discussed in
 another entry
 in this encyclopedia. This entry, however, focuses on
twentieth-century accounts of the innate/acquired distinction. These
accounts have for the most part been inspired by the sciences of mind
and behaviour.


Innateness must be clearly distinguished from heritability, at least
in the scientific sense of that term. The idea that heritability scores
measure the degree to which a characteristic is innate is a vulgar
fallacy. Heritability is a statistical measure of the sources of
individual differences in a population. While heritability itself is
well understood, its relationship to the innate/acquired distinction
remains highly controversial.


The belief that a trait is innate is today commonly expressed by
saying it is ‘in the genes’. But genes play an essential
role in the production of every trait. Consequently, it will not do to
say simply that innate traits are ‘caused by genes’ whilst
acquired traits are ‘caused by the environment’. Any
relationship between genetic causation and the innate/acquired
distinction will be far more complex than this.


Recent philosophical analyses of the innate/acquired distinction can
be classified into four types. The first identifies innate traits with
those characteristic of an entire species and identifies acquired
traits with those that vary between populations and individuals. A
second type of analysis identifies innate traits with those that can be
explained by natural selection. The third, and currently the most
influential, identifies innate traits with those produced by a
particular patterns of interaction between genes and environment. A
fourth, quite different, type of analysis suggests that labelling a
trait ‘innate’ is a way to indicate that it lies outside
the domain of psychology.


Finally, there is a tradition of scepticism about the
innate/acquired distinction. Sceptics argue that it confounds a number
of distinctions that are better kept separate, or, perhaps
equivalently, that there is no one property of a trait that corresponds
to its being innate.
 
1. The innate/acquired distinction in the sciences of mind and behaviour


Instinctive behaviour was at the heart of early 20th
century psychology and accounts of instinct were offered by many
leading psychologists of the period, including Conwy Lloyd Morgan,
James Mark Baldwin, William James and William McDougall (Richards
1987). In the 1920s, however, a strong reaction against the idea of
instinct developed in psychology in North America (e.g. Dunlap 1919;
Kuo 1921). In part, this was a reaction to the apparently unconstrained
postulation of new ‘instincts’. The critics were also
suspicious of the vitalistic sympathies of some leading instinct
theorists, particularly McDougall (1908; 1923). Most importantly,
however, appeals to instinct appeared scientifically vacuous when set
against the experimentally testable, mechanistic explanations offered
by the emerging behaviorist school of psychology. The most radical
critics believed that even John Broadus Watson, the founder of
behaviourism, had conceded too much to instinct by allowing that a
small number of links between simple stimuli and responses were inborn
(Watson 1925). A scientist should never be satisfied to say that
behaviour is ‘inherited’ or ‘instinctive’,
argued Zing Yang Kuo, since this merely poses the question ‘How
are our instincts acquired?’ (Kuo 1922). Few psychologists went
as far as Kuo (see, e.g. Tolman 1922) but criticisms like this
effectively banished the idea of instinct from scientific psychology,
at least in North America.


The study of instinct was rehabilitated in the years on either side
of World War Two by the founders of ethology, Konrad Lorenz and Niko
Tinbergen (Tinbergen 1942; Tinbergen 1951; Lorenz 1957 (1937); Lorenz
and Tinbergen 1957 (1938)). Ethology was a Darwinian approach to
behaviour and the direct ancestor of today's behavioural ecology
and sociobiology. It treated an organism's behavior as simply one
more evolved characteristic alongside its skeleton and its digestive
system. Instinctive behavior was thought to be composed of identifiable
units– ‘fixed action patterns’ — whose evolution
could be studied like that of a bone by comparing the different form
taken by the same (homologous) behavior in different species. The
evolutionary relationships of birds, for example, were thought to be
reflected in similarities and differences in their courtship rituals as
surely as in similarities and differences in their bones.


The early ethologists placed considerable emphasis on the
‘deprivation experiment’, in which an animal is raised
without the opportunity to learn a behavior and then tested to see if
it can perform the behaviour when provided with an appropriate
stimulus. A songbird, for example, can be raised from egg to adult
without hearing a member of its own species sing, and tested to see
which song it produces the following spring. If it produces the
typical song of its own species, then the song is innate. But the
innate/acquired distinction was not defined solely by this test. The
early ethologists also emphasised the stereotypical nature of the
behaviours that constitute a fixed action pattern, the fact that the
pattern is ‘released’ as a whole rather than requiring
input from the environment for its completion, and the fact that
innate behaviours occur spontaneously as ‘vacuum
activities’ when the animal is deprived of the specific stimuli
that usually elicits the behaviour. They drew further support from the
fact that the comparative patterns found in the behaviour of different
species were congruent with those found by comparing morphological
characteristics. The idea of a distinctive realm of instinctive
behaviour was thus a theoretical postulate supported by multiple lines
of evidence, rather than a matter of definition (for more on Lorenz
and Tinbergen's ideas about instinct, see Griffiths 2004; Brigandt
2005; Browne 2005 (Other Internet Resources); Burkhardt 2005).


The idea of instinct in classical ethology was strongly criticised
by several North American psychologists, most famously by Daniel S.
Lehrman in ‘A critique of Konrad Lorenz's theory of instinctive
behavior’ (Lehrman 1953). This paper documented the role of
environmental factors in the development of species-typical behavior
patterns, drawing on many existing studies, including some by Kuo.
Endogenous and exogenous influences on behavioral development interact
in numerous ways, Lehrman argued, and no one pattern of interaction is
distinctive of the development of evolved features of the behavioral
phenotype. According to Lehrman, Lorenz's attempt to draw a sharp
distinction between instinctive and acquired behavior was simply
untenable in the light of what was already known about behavioral
development. Lehrman summarised his position at a later date:
‘Natural selection acts to select genomes that, in a
normal developmental environment, will guide development into organisms
with the relevant adaptive characteristics. But the path of development
from the zygote stage to the phenotypic adult is devious, and includes
many developmental processes, including, in some cases, various aspects
of experience.’ (Lehrman 1970, 36)



Lehrman was particularly critical of the use of the deprivation
experiment to infer that a certain trait is innate
simpliciter, rather than merely that the factors controlled
for in the experiment are not needed for the development of that trait.
Many of Lehrman's ideas were incorporated into mainstream
ethological theory. By the 1960s Tinbergen regarded the use of the term
‘innate’ to characterize behaviors as “heuristically
harmful” (Tinbergen 1963, 425) and endorsed Lehrman's
critique of the deprivation experiment: “The conclusion can only
be formulated correctly in negative terms, in describing which
environmental aspect was shown not to be influential”
(Tinbergen 1963, 424). In the same period Tinbergen and his students
shifted their focus of their research from behaviors as stable
taxonomic characters to behaviors as adaptations shaped by the
ecological demands of the environment (Burkhardt 2005; Griffiths 2008).
Determining the extent to which behaviour develops independently of the
environment ceased to be important to the Tinbergen school, or to the
new discipline of behavioural ecology in which students of Tinbergen
like Richard Dawkins played such a prominent role. Interest turned
instead to testing population genetic and game theoretic models of
behavioural evolution


Lorenz responded to his critics with a new account of the
innate/acquired distinction (Lorenz 1965; see also Browne 2005 (Other
Internet Resources)). No trait is innate in itself, but “certain
parts of the information which underly the adaptedness of the whole,
and which can be ascertained by the deprivation experiment, are indeed
innate” (Lorenz 1965, 40). A trait is innate insofar as its
development is guided by ‘inherited information’ rather
than ‘environmental
information.’ Lorenz defined
‘information’ in terms of adaptation. An adaptive trait
‘fits’ its environment and hence can be said to contain
information about that environment just as a key can be said to
contain information about the lock it will open. The question is where
that information comes from – how does the organism
‘know’ about its environment? If a woman has calluses on
her palms rather than on the backs of her hands, this represents
information about where her skin gets rubbed most. If she
were born with
calluses on her palms, as Ostriches are born with calluses that match
pressure points on their legs, this would imply advance
‘knowledge’ of where her skin is going to be rubbed
most. Such anticipatory information, Lorenz argued, must be in the
genome. It is in the genome as a result of natural selection, which
can be seen as a form of trial-and-error learning.


Lorenz's analysis can readily be expressed in information-theoretic
terms, with the environment as the signal source and the organism as
the receiver. Organisms need to reduce their uncertainty about what
demands the environment will place on them and to develop in a way
that meets those demands. There are two ways to do this. The first way
is to gather information about the environment during development. The
water flea Daphnia pulex monitors chemical traces of
predators as it develops. If an individual flea detects evidence that
predators are present, then that flea grows defensive armor. Thus, a
flea's possession or lack of defensive armour reflects
environmental information. The alternative is to inherit information
from your ancestors. The human sickle cell allele has harmful effects
in homozygotes and survives in a population only because it confers
resistance to malaria in heterozygotes. Hence the fact that an
individual carries the allele provides information about the
prevalence of malaria in the ancestral environment and thus, probably,
in the environment of the organism which inherits the allele. The
sickle cell allele can thus be seen as passing on information about
the environment which was ‘learnt’ by ancestors through
natural selection. To the extent that the functional adjustment of a
trait to its environment is explained by ‘inherited
information’ of this kind, Lorenz argued, the trait is
innate. Hence, albeit in a very different way from Tinbergen, Lorenz
also came to see whether a behavior is an adaptation as the key
issue. Writing in the 1960s Lorenz naturally assumed that genes were
the only source of inherited information. It is now known that much
information about the environment is transmitted from parent to
offspring via epigenetic signals, such as methylation patterns on the
DNA or RNAs from the mother included in the egg. For example, if a
female water flea detects predators and grows defensive armor, its
offspring will develop armor even if they do not detect any evidence
of predators themselves.  Lorenz's theory would imply that traits
produced in this way are also innate, since they reflect inherited
information, albeit epigenetically rather than genetically
inherited.


Classical ethology flourished in the years immediately following
World War Two (Burkhardt 2005). At the same time others started to
question the emphasis on environmental factors in behavioral
development which had developed between the wars. Numerous lines of
evidence suggested that psychology would have to take account of
species-specific biological endowments if it was to understand how
different species interact with their environment and the distinctive
things each species is able to learn from these interactions (e.g.
Harlow 1953; Tomkins 1962; Seligman 1970). By far the most influential
criticism of behaviorism, however, came from linguistics. The linguist
Noam Chomsky argued that existing behaviorist accounts of the
development of language were unworkable and offered a general argument
for the conclusion that the ability to acquire language is innate
(Chomsky 1957; Chomsky 1959; Chomsky 1966). According to this
‘poverty of the stimulus’ argument, the examples of speech
to which children are exposed do not contain enough evidence to settle
which utterances are grammatical in the language they are trying to
acquire. Nevertheless, children reliably acquire the grammar of their
native language. Therefore, Chomsky and his followers concluded,
children must have innate knowledge about grammar which supplements the
evidence to which they are exposed during development. If this argument
is sound, every normal childhood is a deprivation experiment that
confirms the innateness of grammar. The details of the original poverty
of the stimulus argument, its elaboration by Chomsky's followers,
and the current state of the evidence for linguistic nativism are
discussed in detail in the entry
 Innateness and Language.
 I will not
repeat them here. What matters for my purposes is that Chomsky's
work produced a very broad consensus in psychology that language
acquisition is explained by a complex, evolved mechanism that is
present at birth and which can produce normal linguistic development in
a wide range of environments, including those which are
‘impoverished’ with respect to language.


The ‘language acquisition device’ has served as an
exemplar for research on whether other psychological and behavioral
traits are innate. Like the language acquisition device these
putatively innate traits are supposed to explain patterns in the
development of the child's mind. These patterns can be seen as
representing innate ‘knowledge’ or innate
‘theories’ about various cognitive domains. For example,
the eminent cognitive developmental psychologists Susan Carey and
Elizabeth Spelke argue that children possess four domains of innate
‘core knowledge’ which underlie much of their later
cognitive development. These domains are ‘objects, agents,
numbers and space’ (Carey and Spelke 1996, 517). Children think
about each of these four domains in distinctive ways that do not seem
to depend on the details of the child's environment. The
distinctive way in which children think about living, as opposed to
inanimate, entities has also been proposed as a domain of innate
knowledge (e.g. Medin and Atran 2004). The recent philosophical
literature on the concept of innateness which is outlined in later
sections of this entry is mostly intended to analyse innateness as it
is understood in this extensive body of ‘neo-nativist’
psychology (for a thorough introduction to this field and the
controversies arising from it, see Carruthers, Laurence et al.
2005–9).


It may have struck some readers as odd that this brief sketch of the
history of the innate/acquired distinction in 20th century
science has concentrated on behavioural biology and psychology and
barely touched on genetics. The next two sections deal with behavioral
genetics and molecular genetics respectively, and make clear how
tenuous the connections are between these fields and the
innate/acquired distinction.
2. Innateness and heritability


Popular discussion of whether psychological and behavioural traits
are innate is bedevilled by the conflation of this issue with whether
psychological and behavioural traits are heritable.
‘Heritability’ is a quantity calculated by behavioural
geneticists, with values between 0 and 1. Heritability scores for
socially significant behaviors are regularly reported in the media.
People who do not know how these numbers are calculated typically
understand a score like the 0.49 reported for the mental disorder of
schizophrenia to mean that this disorder is 49% innate, or innate in
49% of the people who suffer from it. To see why this is a mistake,
consider these two facts: 1. In a population of genetically identical
individuals, all traits have a heritability of zero. But it is absurd
to suppose that my IQ would change from innate to acquired if I left a
population of normal human beings and joined a population of my clones.
2. Providing equal access to education for all children in a community
will increase the heritability of IQ in that community. So if
heritability were a measure of innateness, then using education to
increase IQ would also be a way to make IQ more innate, which is
obviously absurd.


The measures of heritability used in behavioural genetics, and in
quantitative genetics more generally, are not and do not pretend to be
measures of whether the traits of individual organisms owe more to the
genes or more to the environment. Instead, they report the results of
an important but highly unintuitive statistical technique called the
analysis of variance (ANOVA). This technique and the measures of
heritability it generates are explained in the entry
 Heredity and Heritability.
 In very simple
terms, however, we can say that heritability analysis asks how many of
the pairwise differences between all individuals in a population can be
correlated with genetic differences between each pair of individuals,
and how many can be correlated with differences in the environment of
each pair of individuals. That is why in our example above making
people more genetically similar reduces heritability, because
there are proportionally less genetic differences to correlate with any
phenotypic differences. Conversely, making the environment more uniform
increases heritability because there are proportionally less
environmental differences to correlate with any phenotypic
differences.


But although heritability is in no way a measure of innateness, this
does not mean that it is irrelevant to the distinction between innate
and acquired characteristics. The fact that traits are highly heritable
has been used to argue that those traits cannot be changed by changing
the environment, the issue at the heart of people's concerns when
they ask whether a trait such as IQ or sexual orientation is innate.
The argument connecting heritability to environmental malleability is
simple. It starts with the assumption that trait differences are caused
by the factors with which they correlate, an assumption I will not
question here. Suppose that most differences between individuals in a
population with respect to some trait are correlated with genetic
differences and very few are correlated with differences in
environment, which is simply to say that the trait is highly heritable.
Surely, this implies that changing the environment will have little
effect on the pattern of differences? For example, making the
environments of all the individuals the same would not eliminate all
the differences between them, because we have postulated that most of
those differences were caused by genetic differences and those
differences are still there.


But things are not that simple. The effect of a genetic difference
on a trait sometimes depends on the environment. In that case, changing
the environment can eliminate a difference caused by a gene. To take a
simple but not unrealistic example, suppose that a gene produces an
enzyme which only works below a certain temperature. If two individuals
only one of whom has this gene are raised in environments below that
critical temperature, then one will show the effects of the enzyme and
the other will not. But if the two individuals are raised in
environments above the critical temperature, then there will be no
difference between them. So in this case, changing the environment
eliminates a difference caused by a gene. In other cases, changing a
gene can eliminate a difference caused by the environment. Effects like
these show up in heritability analyses as statistical interactions
between genes and environment, meaning that how heritable the trait is
depends on the specific distribution of environments across the
population. One practical implication of gene-environment interaction
effects is that when they occur, heritability scores cannot be
extrapolated from one population to another. A trait can show high
heritability in one population, but low heritability in another.
Another practical implication is that high heritability does not imply
that changing the environment will not eliminate the differences
between individuals (nor does low heritability imply that genetic
manipulation cannot eliminate those differences.)


Statistical interactions between genes and environment are
well-documented in behavioural genetic studies on animals (Fuller,
Sarkar et al. 2005). Whether this lesson can be extrapolated to human
behaviour, and why or why not, is the subject of a set of interlocking
controversies which are too intricate to pursue here. There is an
extensive philosophical literature on these controversies and their
history. Some recent contributions which include citations of the
relevant scientific literatures include: (Kaplan 2000; Sesardic 2005;
Schaffner 2006a; Schaffner 2006b; Griffiths and Tabery 2008).
3. Innateness and genetics


During the 2008 US presidential election journalists frequently
referred to a candidate's characteristic beliefs or attitudes as
‘part of their political DNA’. This is an example of how in
contemporary English ‘in the DNA’ or ‘in the
genes’ has come to replace older phrases like ‘in the
blood’. But if genetics can be used to elucidate the
innate/acquired distinction it is certainly not because some traits,
the innate ones, are caused by the genes whilst others, the acquired
ones, are caused by the environment. While the difference
between two individuals can be caused by a genetic or an environmental
difference between them, the development of any trait in an individual
depends on both genes and environment. Every aspect of development,
including learning, consists in the regulated expression of the genome.
Conversely, innumerable aspects of the environment are required at each
stage in the life of the organism to keep development on its normal
course, or, on other words, to ensure that the right genes are
expressed in the right cells at the right time. Thus, all traits
develop through the interaction of genome and environment. Philip
Kitcher has referred to this as the ‘interactionist
consensus’ (Kitcher 2001).


But if all traits depend on genes, it may still be that some traits
depend on them in a special way. If asked about phrases like ‘in
the DNA’ or ‘in the genes’, most people would
probably refer to the idea that the genes contain instructions or a
program. After all, everyone knows that there is a genetic code, so it
must be coding for something. Perhaps genes ‘code
for’ innate traits but not for acquired ones. However, as Peter
Godfrey-Smith has noted, ‘All the genes can code for, if they
code for anything, is the primary structure (amino acid sequence) of a
protein’ (Godfrey-Smith 1999, 328). Considered as a language, the
genetic code can only refer to the twenty-three standard amino acids
and can only say which order to put them in. The only exceptions to
this are the ‘start’ and ‘stop’ codons which
affect where DNA transcription begins and ends. Many other things
happen as a downstream causal consequence of the order of amino acids,
but to paraphrase Godfrey Smith's argument, genes do not
‘code for’ these downstream causal consequences for the
same reason that President Nixon's order to cover up the
Watergate scandal was not an ‘order’ to get him impeached
by Congress. ‘Coding for’, like ‘ordering’ and
other semantic locutions, is not merely another name for
‘causing’. The idea that the ‘genetic program’
or ‘genetic instructions’ for phenotypes are literally
written in the genetic code is a continuing barrier to the public
understanding of genetics, one that is reinforced every time a
journalist reports that scientists have ‘decoded’ the gene
for something. In reality there are no tiny ‘traitunculi’
hidden in the genome awaiting a sufficiently powerful genetic
microscope to read them (Schaffner 1998).


But although the sequences of nucleotides in the genome do not
literally ‘code for’ phenotypic traits, they are, of
course, amongst the causes of phenotypic traits. Several philosophers
and scientists have introduced senses of ‘genetic
information’ based on these causal relationships in order to
explicate the intuitive idea that genes carry information about
phenotypes. These proposals are discussed in more detail in the
 entry
 Biological information.
 Here I
will simply make two points about these proposals. The first point is
that there are some very straightforward senses in which genes
‘carry information’ about phenotypes. The human Y
chromosome carries information about sex in the same way that
‘smoke means fire’: one can be predicted from the other. In
addition, the SRY region on the Y-chromosome is an adaptation for
making organisms into males, so we can apply a version of
‘teleosemantics’, an approach which defines information in
terms of adaptation, to this piece of DNA (Millikan 1984; Sterelny,
Dickison et al. 1996 and see the entry on 
 teleological theories of mental content).
 The second point is that these straightforward senses of
‘information’ also seem to be applicable to environmental
causes in development (Oyama 1985; Griffiths and Gray 1997; Griffiths
and Knight 1998; Griffiths and Gray 2005). Mammals have a chromosomal
system of sex-determination. But many reptiles use temperature, an
environmental signal, to switch genetically identical eggs between male
or female developmental pathways. Other reptiles have a genetic system
which can be overridden by an environmental signal. Some fish even
switch sex in adulthood in response to environmental cues. These
environmental signals carry information about sex in the unproblematic
‘smoke means fire’ sense. Moreover, the behaviours that
parents use to give appropriate cues to their eggs, and some of the
products of those behaviours, such as nests of rotting vegetation which
maintain a suitable temperature range, are designed by natural
selection to ensure the correct sex-ratio in offspring, so the
teleosemantic program can be applied to them too. The idea that genes
‘carry information’ about phenotypes in a special sense
which distinguishes them from other causes is not the piece of
common-sense it is often taken to be, but rather a highly contested
idea that is the focus of current research in the philosophy of biology
(Oyama 1985, Maynard Smith 2000, Griffiths 2001, Robert 2004).


If all traits are caused by both genetic and environmental factors,
then reconstructing the innate/acquired distinction in genetic terms
means distinguishing different ways in which genes interact
with the environment. The pattern of interaction between gene and
environment is commonly represented using ‘norms of
reaction’ — graphical representations of a phenotypic variable as
a function of genotypic and environmental variables. These diagrams
were introduced at around the same time as the idea of the gene and the
distinction between genotype and phenotype (Sarkar 1999) and have long
been advocated as the clearest way to think about the role of genes in
development (Hogben 1933; Lewontin 1974; Gottlieb 1995; Kitcher 2001).
Suppose, for example, that with respect to some environmental variable
(E) an organism with a given genotype (G1) will develop the same
phenotype (P) way no matter what value the environmental variable takes
(Figure 1).



Figure 1. A norm of reaction in which the phenotype P is
‘genetically determined’



If a norm of reaction has this shape, we can say that P is
‘genetically determined’ even though it has an
environmental factor as one of its causes. Philip Kitcher suggests that
some norms of reaction may have this form, but only in some limited,
but perhaps contextually important, range of environments (Kitcher
2001). For example, a disease caused by the loss of one or both normal
copies of a gene might develop in every environment except
those specifically structured as clinical interventions to cure the
disease.


Another norm of reaction is one in which genetic and environmental
factors interact ‘additively’ (Figure 2). Genotype makes a
constant difference across some range of environment. While
the genetic variable does not determine the actual value of the trait
in each individual, it does determine the differences between
individuals. Moreover, when the norms of reaction has this form,
heritability scores become relevant to the question of whether and how
much a phenotype can be altered by environmental intervention, as
discussed in the previous section. A famous diagram in the early days
of behaviour genetics depicted the relationship between IQ (P),
genotype (G) and the ‘enrichment’ of the environment (E) as
having roughly this form (Gottesman 1963a). If correct, this would mean
that educational enrichment would cause everyone to get higher test
scores, but would not change the ordering of their scores.



Figure 2. Purely additive interaction between genotype and
environment



In perhaps the most famous paper on this topic the geneticist
Richard Lewontin (1974) argued that actual norms of reaction are likely
to be non-additive (Figure 3). In that case, it makes no sense to talk
of a particular genotype ‘determining’ a phenotypic
difference. Genotype and environment jointly determine the
outcome in the straightforward sense that the effect of each factor on
the outcome is a function of the particular value taken by the other
factor. Whether norms of reaction are typically non-additive and
exactly what this implies is the subject of an extensive scientific and
philosophical literature on ‘gene-environment interaction’, as
discussed in the previous section.



Figure 3. Non-additive interaction between genotype and
environment



Philip Kitcher has argued that ‘genetic determinism’
should be understood as the claim that many norms of reaction have
roughly the ‘determinist’ shapes depicted in Figures 1 and
2 (for an alternative view, see Griffiths 2006). In Section 4.3 I
discuss a recent proposal to define ‘innate’ in the same
spirit.
4. Recent philosophical analyses of the concept of innateness


Recent philosophical analyses of the innate/acquired distinction can
be classified into four types. The first identifies innate traits with
those characteristic of an entire species and acquired traits with
those that vary between populations and individuals. A second type of
analysis identifies innate traits with those that can be explained by
natural selection. The third, and currently most influential,
distinguishes different patterns of interaction between genes and
environment and identifies one pattern with the innate and another with
the acquired. A fourth, quite different, type of analysis suggests that
labeling a trait ‘innate’ is a way to indicate that it lies
outside the domain of psychology.
4.1 Innateness as universality


In his seminal paper ‘The idea of innateness’ (1975)
Stephen Stich made a number of tentative suggestions about the
structure of the innateness concept. One was that an innate trait
might be defined as a trait an organism will manifest in the normal
course of development. But Stich himself offered a counterexample to
this analysis: universally held beliefs, such as the belief that water
quenches thirst, will count as innate traits on this analysis, which
seems counterintuitive (Stich 1975, p. 9). André Ariew has
offered another counterexample: humans acquire a typical gut flora
during development, but these bacteria are intuitively an acquired
trait rather than an innate trait (Ariew 1999, p. 133). Ariew suggests
that Stich's analysis confuses evidence for innateness with innateness
itself. Universality is evidence for the existence of a particular
kind of developmental mechanism (Ariew 2006, p. 10, and see 4.3
below). A recent empirical study, however, suggests that universality
influences judgments of innateness independently of beliefs about
developmental mechanisms (Griffiths, Machery & Linquist,
forthcoming), so Stich's analysis may still have something to
offer to an understanding of the innateness concept. Additional
support for this view comes from the fact that a number of scientific
authors have used the term ‘innate’ to mean ‘shared
by all members of the species’ (Bateson 1991; Mameli and Bateson
2006).
4.2 Innateness as adaptation


We have already encountered the suggestion that a trait is innate if
its development is guided by ‘inherited information’
rather than ‘environmental information’ (Lorenz 1966;
Browne 2005 (Other Internet Resources); see Section 1 above). A
similar analysis was independently suggested by Stich (1975,
13–16). The first hurdle for any analysis along these lines, Stich
noted, is to specify what is meant by ‘information’ (Stich
1975, p.  15). As we have seen above, Lorenz identified
‘information’ in this context with adaptive fit. In
essence his ‘inherited information’ analysis amounts to
the claim that a trait is innate if its fit to the environment can
only be explained by evolutionary adaptation.


Stich's 1975 suggestion has been elaborated and defended by
Muhammad Ali Khalidi who like Stich seems not to
have encountered Lorenz's work (Khalidi 2002; Khalidi 2007). Both
Stich and Khalidi restrict the analysis to innate cognitive
traits, although it seems clear from Lorenz's work that it can be
made general. Khalidi presents his analysis in terms of the
‘poverty of the stimulus’ argument outlined in Section 1
above : ‘…a belief (concept, idea, capacity) may be
considered to be innate to the degree that it would emerge as the
result of an impoverished stimulus’ (Khalidi
2002, p. 269). However, he goes on to define impoverishment as
‘informational impoverishment’ which is in turn defined as
a gap between the information in the developmental environment and the
information manifested in the trait that develops in that environment
(e.g. Khalidi 2007, 100). Khalidi admits that severe difficulties stand
in the way of actually measuring the information content of
developmental environments and capacities. He suggests, however, that
scientists have rough-and-ready ways to assess the informational gap,
using various forms of deprivation experiment (see Section 1
above).


It is unclear whether Khalidi would endorse Lorenz's analysis
of information and of the significance of the deprivation experiment.
According to Lorenz, a trait contains more ‘information’
than its developmental environment if the functional adjustment of the
trait to the environment cannot be explained by the developmental
environment. The deprivation experiment is designed to eliminate just
those factors that could explain the trait's functional
adjustment to the environment. Khalidi makes no reference to the
adaptive value of innate traits, and like Stich he thinks that the idea
of innateness should be applicable to disease phenotypes as well as to
functional phenotypes (Khalidi 2007, 97). But Khalidi's idea of
an informational gap between the developmental environment and the
innate trait seems rather problematic in the case of innate diseases.
Is the normal developmental environment of the human child
‘informationally impoverished’ relative to the cognitive
deficits seen in Trisomy 21 (Down's syndrome)? What information
is manifest in a child born anencephalic and thus, presumably, with no
cognitive traits at all? I suggest that without the additional
resources offered by the concept of adaptation Khalidi's concept
of ‘information’ would collapse into a simple notion of
covariance, and his analysis of innateness would be a version of the
canalisation analysis discussed in the next section.
4.3 Innateness as canalisation


Andre Ariew has published an influential series of papers (1996;
1999; 2006) arguing that the concept of an innate trait can be
explicated using the idea of ‘developmental canalization’.
This concept was introduced by the influential mid-20th
century embryologist and theoretical biologist Conrad H. Waddington
(1940; 1942; 1957; 1959).


Developmental canalization was part of a broader vision of how an
organism develops from the fertilized egg. The entire collection of
genes and their interactions makes up a ‘developmental
system’ (Waddington 1952) which produces a phenotype. Many
features of the phenotype are explained by the dynamical properties of
that developmental system as a whole, rather than by the influence of
one or a few specific alleles. Thus, for example, Waddington sought to
explain one of the major biological discoveries of his day – the
fact that extreme phenotypic uniformity can be observed in many wild
populations despite extensive genetic variation in those same
populations – by appealing to the global dynamics of
developmental systems. A genetically canalized developmental system
takes development to the same endpoint from many different genetic
starting points. The development of wild-type phenotypes can thus be
buffered against genetic variation. Waddington represented this idea
with his famous ‘developmental landscape’ (Figure 4).








Figure 4. Waddington's developmental landscape (A) and its
underpinnings (B) (Waddington 1957, 29 & 36, reproduced with
permission)




The ‘developmental landscape’ is a representation of
development as a system whose parameters are genetic loci and whose
state space is a set of phenotypic states. The state space is depicted
as a surface, each point of which represents a phenotype. The genetic
parameters are depicted as pegs that pull on the surface and thus
determine its contours. Epistatic interactions between genetic loci are
represented by links between the strings by which those loci pull on
the surface. The development of the organism is represented by the
trajectory over the surface of a ball which passes through a series of
phenotypic states as it rolls ‘downhill’ from conception to
death. Waddington intended this diagram to make vivid the idea that the
effect of a change at one genetic locus depends upon the states of all
the other genetic loci, since it is all the loci together which
determine the shape of the landscape. Some genetic changes, such as
those which affect the tops of inaccessible ‘hills,’ will
have no effect on development. Other changes of the same intrinsic
genomic magnitude which affect the entrance of a valley or
‘canal’ will have a massive effect on development. The
phenotypic impact of a genetic change is not proportional to the
magnitude of the genomic change, but depends on the structure of the
developmental system. Furthermore, the phenotypic difference produced
by a genetic difference is not explained by that genetic difference in
itself, but by how that change interacts with the rest of the
developmental system. This picture retains considerably validity in the
light of contemporary developmental genetics.


If we suppose that some of the ‘pegs’ in
Waddington's model are environmental factors, rather than genetic
loci, then we can define separate notions of ‘environmental
canalisation’ and ‘genetic canalisation’. A
phenotypic outcome is environmentally canalised if those features of
the surface which direct development to that endpoint are relatively
insensitive to the manipulation of the environmental parameters. A
phenotypic outcome is genetically canalised if those features of the
surface which direct development to that endpoint are relatively
insensitive to the manipulation of the genetic parameters. Ariew
proposes to identity innateness with environmental
canalization. Innateness-as-canalization is a matter of degree. A trait
is more innate the more environmental parameters its development is
buffered against and the wider the range of variation in those
parameters against which it is buffered.


Griffith's and Machery have offered a counterexample to
Ariew's analysis (Griffiths and Machery 2008). The developmental
psychobiologist Celia Moore showed that the spinal cord nuclei of male
rats differ from those of female rats in ways that allow the male to
use his penis during copulation (Moore 1984; Moore 1992). These neural
differences result from differences in gene expression in the
developing spinal cord of the rat pup, which in turn result from
differences in the amount of licking of the genital area by the mother,
which in turn results from greater expression in male pups of a
chemical that elicits maternal licking. According to Ariew's
characterization of innateness as canalization, these experiments show
that the rat's ability to copulate is not innate:
“Distinguish between two reasons why the trait
appears invariantly in an environmental range: the first, because an
environmental condition is developmentally required yet is found
everywhere the system develops; the second, because the system develops
independently of the environmental condition. Innateness should be
identified with the second sort of invariance, not the first.”
(Ariew 2006, 10)


The rat's ability to copulate depends on an environmental
condition that is found everywhere the system develops and so,
according to Ariew, it is not innate. But intuitively the rat's
ability to copulate is innate. Griffiths and Machery argue
that this intuition results from the fact that the ability to copulate
is an evolutionary adaptation and universal in male rats. Additional
counterexamples can be constructed using this formula.


However, Ariew has argued, and his critics accept, that the
existence of intuitive counterexamples is not really to the point. His
analysis is not meant to capture what everyday speakers of English mean
by the word ‘innate’, although it obviously has some
continuity with what they mean. Instead, the analysis is meant to
explicate a research strategy used by scientists like Chomsky. The use
of terms like ‘innate’ and ‘instinct’ by these
scientists should be interpreted in the context of this research
strategy, which Ariew calls ‘biologicising the mind’ (Ariew
2006). ‘Biologicising the mind’ means analysing the
development of a psychological or behavioral trait on the model of
paradigmatically ‘biological’ traits such as legs and
livers. According to Ariew, canalised development is the hallmark of
the development of these paradigmatically biological traits, and the
research programs of scientists like Chomsky should be seen as attempts
to demonstrate the canalised development of psychological traits.


Other recent contributors to the philosophical literature on
innateness have adopted a similar methodological stance. Ron Mallon and
Jonathan Weinberg argue that much neo-nativist psychology can be seen
as an investigation into psychological traits that are ‘closed
process invariant’ (Mallon and Weinberg 2006). This means that
they develop in all normal environments (the ‘invariance
condition’) as the result of a set of developmental mechanisms
that are only capable of producing one or a few developmental outcomes
across a wide range of possible environments (the ‘closed process
condition’). Mallon and Weinberg suggest that their account of
innateness applies to paradigmatically biological traits such as legs
and livers, so ‘closed process invariantism’ can be seen as
another attempt to elucidate the strategy of ‘biologicising the
mind’.


Mallon and Weinberg's account is supposed to count examples
like the penile reflexes of the rat described above as innate because
they are produced by a ‘closed process’ – one that
can only produce one or a few possible outcomes. The idea of a closed
process remains in need of further elaboration. Mallon and Weinberg
themselves are concerned about how to individuate developmental
processes. They do not want early, general phases of development like
the closure of the neural tube to count as part of the development of
specific traits like language. Another significant hurdle for the
account is to provide individuation criteria for developmental
outcomes. If the outcomes in the previous example are classified simply
as ‘functional penis’ or ‘non-functional
penis,’ then the example involves a closed process. If we attend
to the details of the nerve ganglia of the rat's spinal cord,
different outcomes can be distinguished, resulting from different
amounts of maternal licking and it becomes an open process. While this
may seem somewhat artificial in this case, it is entirely natural when
dealing with a quantitative phenotype such as the ‘stress
reactivity’ phenotype in highly analogous work on maternal care
in the rat by Michael J. Meaney and collaborators (Meaney 2001a; Meaney
2001b and see below).
4.4 Innateness as disciplinary boundary marker


Fiona Cowie (1999) and Richard Samuels (2002) have taken a rather
different approach to the innateness concept. Cowie argues that the
term ‘innate’ has been used by a number of significant
figures in the history of psychology to indicate that the development
of a trait does not involve the kinds of processes the study of which
is distinctive of psychology. Samuels has suggested that this is the
best explication of the concept of innateness in contemporary
neo-nativist psychology. On this account innate traits are those which
must be explained by developmental biologists rather than psychologists
and which for this reason can legitimately be treated as primitives in
psychological explanation (for this reason the approach is referred to
as ‘primitivism’ about innateness). Primitivism becomes a
more substantive thesis if it is linked to an account of the nature of
psychological explanation, or perhaps of psychological explanation as
conceived in the neo-nativist tradition.


There is an obvious symmetry between ‘primitivism’ and
Ariew's ‘biologicising the mind’. Ariew suggests that
innateness guides research by embodying a strategy of investigating
psychological traits as if they were paradigmatically biological traits
like hearts and hair. Cowie and Samuels suggest that innateness guides
research by embodying a strategy of not investigating a trait as if it
were a paradigmatically psychological trait like a belief or a phobia,
but instead treating it as a boundary condition in psychological
explanations of related traits. These two ‘strategies’
would seem to be complementary.
5. Scepticism about the innate/acquired distinction


While neo-nativism thrives in contemporary psychology and cognitive
science, there is a strong sceptical tradition concerning the
innate/acquired distinction in other areas of the sciences of mind and
behavior. The incorporation of Lehrman's critique of Lorenz into
the ethological tradition had a lasting impact on animal behaviour
research. After a half-century of research on the development of
birdsong the doyen of researchers in that field, Peter Marler sums up
his view of innateness like this:
“we find ourselves confirming what Lehrman (1953)
asserted 50 years ago, that in the long run classifying behavior as
‘learned’ or ‘innate’ is not conceptually
productive; however, it is not clear whether this is worth getting
upset about. The habit of labeling behaviors in this fashion is so
deep-rooted that we will probably never succeed in eradicating it. And
it does have some value in placing behaviors on a lability continuum,
with some behaviors more ‘nurture dependent,’ more
changeable and variable, and others more ‘nature
dependent,’ more stereotyped and resistant to change.”
(Marler, 2004, 31)


Other leading animal behaviour researchers see even this casual use
of the distinction as pernicious. One concern is that the term
‘innate’ has no definite meaning and hence leads to
fallacies of ambiguity. Ethologist Patrick Bateson urges researchers to
“Say what you mean (even if it uses a bit more space) rather than
unintentionally confuse your readers by employing a word such as innate
that carries so many different connotations” (Bateson 1991, p.
22). Matteo Mameli and Bateson have recently systematically reviewed
the scientific use of the term ‘innate’ and identified no less than
twenty-six proposed definitions. They judge eight of these to be both
genuinely independent definitions and potentially valuable scientific
constructs (Mameli and Bateson 2006, p. 177–8). Unless it can be
demonstrated that the eight properties picked out by these definitions
are highly correlated with one another, something which they doubt on
empirical grounds, the term ‘innate’ is confusing and
unhelpful.


Sceptics also question whether there really is even a rough
‘lability continuum’ as Marler suggests. Several recent
philosophical defenders of the innateness concept suggest in a spirit
of common sense that whatever the limitations of the concept, traits
can at least be placed along a rough continuum of dependence on the
environment (e.g. Ariew 2006; Mallon and Weinberg 2006; Khalidi 2007).
But this does not seem like common sense to many scientists who
actually study behavioral development. Developmental psychobiology is a
field that grew out of the research tradition of which Lehrman was part
(for a textbook treatment see Michel and Moore 1995; two excellent
popular introductions are Bateson and Martin 1999, and Moore 2001). The
consensus in this field is that experimental research on the
development of a trait typically reveals sensitive dependence on
environmental parameters. These parameters are highly varied, and they
interact non-additively with genetic parameters. The idea of a
‘lability continuum’ seems implausible to researchers in
this tradition both because there is no single set of parameters with
which to compare different species, and because the idea of
partitioning developmental causation between genes and environment in
the case of a single species is subject to the formal objections
arising from non-additive interaction discussed in Sections 2 and 3
above (on this last point see Meaney 2001a; Suomi 2003).


Developmental psychobiologists reject a basic idea at the heart of
much discussion of innateness, which is that evolution makes
development reliable by making it insensitive to environmental
parameters. Instead, they argue that evolution often makes development
reliable by stabilizing environmental parameters at the right value or
by exploiting pre-existing environmental regularities. The birdsong
researchers Meredith West and Andrew King have described this as
locating development in an ‘ontogenetic niche’ and research
in developmental psychobiology can be conceived as the study of this
niche and its interaction with the genome. West and King and their
collaborators have conducted a long term study of the ontogenetic niche
of the Brown-headed Cowbird Molothrus Ater (West and King
1987; West and King 1988; West, King et al. 2006). Cowbirds are
obligate nest parasites (like cuckoos) and do not hear their parents
sing as they grow up. It was therefore assumed that they sing
‘innately’. West and King showed that, amongst other
processes, male song is shaped by feedback from female cowbirds, whose
wing stroking and gaping displays in response to the songs they prefer
are strong reinforcers for males. Female song preferences are
themselves subject to social influences. As a result of these and other
processes Cowbirds reliably transmit not only species-typical song, but
also the regional song dialects typical of birds that acquire their
songs as a result of exposure to parental song. In stark contrast to
the suggestions of the philosophers discussed in Section 4.3 the
researchers conclude that asking whether Cowbird song is innate or
acquired is unhelpful because it demands that the developmental process
be assimilated to one of two prototypes, neither of which is suitable
(West, King et al. 1990).


In many species, of course, the stabilization of the parameters of
the ontogenetic niche is achieved through parental care, as we saw in
the case of the development of penile reflexes in the rat in Section
4.3. But parental care can also be used as a mechanism of adaptive
phenotypic plasticity. Michael Meaney and collaborators' account
of the role of parental care in the development of temperament in rats
is a good exemplar of this phenomenon. The BALBc strain of laboratory
rat is “highly fearful, and maze dull…these animals show
increased endocrine and behavioral responses to stress, they are
hyperactive and show profound learning and memory deficits that are
associated with, among things, impaired hippocampal development”
(Meaney, 2001, 57). Cross-fostering BALBc pups to mothers of the more
laid-back C57 strain removes the differences between the two strains.
Meaney and collaborators show how the amount of licking and arched-back
nursing which pups receive from their mother regulates gene expression
so as to direct the development of the pup's brain (Meaney,
2001). Although the phenotypes of these inbred laboratory strains are
constant, it is plausible that in wild rats maternal behavior reflects
the mother's stress levels. It may convey information to the pup
about the likely quality of its environment and ‘preset’
stress metabolism to match that environment. This work reinforces
another lesson of developmental psychobiology, which is that the
relevant aspects of the ontogenetic niche are
‘non-obvious’. We might guess that the rat pup will respond
to indicators of environmental quality, and we might guess that the
mother's behavior is a useful source of information on this
topic, but not that the information resides in whether the mother
arches her back during suckling. Non-obvious parameters are typically
overlooked in deprivation experiments designed to establish that a
trait is innate, but are often revealed by positive efforts to
understand how behaviour develops (Gottlieb 1997).


Developmental psychobiologists have an evolutionary rationale for
the existence of the ‘ontogenetic niche’. Natural selection
does not select for mechanisms which buffer traits against variation in
the environment unless variation of that kind regularly occurs in the
environments in which the species lives. In fact, any buffering
mechanism which is not actively being used will tend to decay by
mutation. One famous example is the inability of humans and their
relatives to synthesise ascorbic acid (vitamin C). The ascorbic acid
synthesis pathway was disabled by mutation during the long period in
which our fruit-eating ancestors had no chance of developing vitamin C
deficiences (Jukes and King 1975). As Terence Deacon has nicely put it,
organisms are ‘addicted to’ innumerable aspects of their
environments, from ascorbic acid, to gravity, to social interactions
(Deacon 1997). Selection will also favour behaviours that allow animals
to reliably ‘feed their addictions’.


Recent philosophical scepticism about the concept of innateness
inspired by this research tradition can be seen in the work of
Griffiths and collaborators (Griffiths 2002; Griffiths and Machery
2008; Griffiths, Machery & Linquist, forthcoming). These
researchers have argued that the idea of an innate trait is simply one
expression of a folkbiological theory of the ‘natures’ of
living things. Just as there are commonsense ideas about physical
objects and the forces acting on them (‘folk physics’), so
there are commonsense ideas about biology (‘folkbiology’
— Medin and Atran 1999). It is part of folkbiology that some
traits are expressions of the inner nature of animals and plants,
whilst other traits result from the influence of the
environment. Echoing the traditional critique of the innateness
concept in animal behaviour research, Griffiths and collaborators
argue that folkbiology conflates the issues of whether a trait is
typical of the species, whether it is part of the design of the
species, and whether its development is insensitive to the
environment. Attempts to redefine innateness in a way that stresses
just one of its many aspects and thus makes it a useful scientific
construct have been and will continue to be stymied by the fact that
the broad concept of innateness is part of our evolved psychological
equipment.
6. Conclusion


Recent philosophical discussion of the innate/acquired distinction
has been driven by the desire to make sense of innateness claims in
neo-nativist psychology. Philosophical defenders of the innate/acquired
distinction typically refer to its value for research in linguistics
and psychology, and to the success of this research. It may be that
resolving the disputes between the many competing analyses of the
innateness concept outlined in Section 4 will require taking these
claims more seriously and looking in detail at how nativist researchers
use the idea of innateness, perhaps through detailed case studies.


Philosophical scepticism about innateness draws on a longstanding
tradition of scepticism in developmental psychobiology. This research
tradition interprets many of its own results as demonstrating the
inadequacy of the innate/acquired distinction, and it is critical of
the results and interpretations of results found in neo-nativist
research. Philosophical defenders of the distinction would benefit from
looking at these cases, in which the distinction is purportedly
inapplicable or unhelpful, in addition to the cases used by
neo-nativists to exemplify the distinction.


One thing seems clear, which is that efforts to clarify the
distinction in psychology by appeal to the underlying genetics have not
been successful. The innate/acquired distinction does not seem to get
much grip on the findings of lower-level developmental sciences such as
molecular developmental biology. Once again, this suggests that the
distinction may be best understood via its actual use in psychological
research.