The Cambridge Platonists were a group of English seventeenth-century
thinkers associated with the University of Cambridge. The most
important philosophers among them were
 Henry More
(1614–1687) and
 Ralph Cudworth
 (1617–1688),
both fellows of Christ's College, Cambridge. The group also included
 Benjamin Whichcote
 (1609–1683),
 Peter Sterry
 (1613–1672),
 John Smith
 (1618–1652),
 Nathaniel Culverwell
 (1619–1651), John
Worthington (1618–1671), all one-time fellows of Emmanuel College,
Cambridge. Their younger followers included George Rust (d. 1670),
 Anne Conway
(1630–1679) and John Norris (1657–1711). In so far as they all held
the philosophy of Plato and Plotinus in high regard, the designation
‘Platonist’ is apt. However, they drew on a wide range of
philosophical sources besides Platonism. Among ancient philosophers,
they were well acquainted with Aristotle and with Stoicism. But they
were also very much abreast of new developments in philosophy and
science – with Descartes, Hobbes and Spinoza as well as Bacon, Boyle
and the Royal Society. (Smith, Culverwell, Cudworth and More were among
the first Englishmen to read Descartes). The framework within which
they read and understood ancient and modern philosophy was that of the
‘perennial philosophy’ (philosophia perennis)
proposed originally by Italian Renaissance philosophers such as
Marsilio Ficino, and Agostino Steucho, but also employed by Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz. Not only did they share the Renaissance Humanist
regard for the achievements of ancient philosophy, but like the
Humanists of the Renaissance, their interest was dictated by their
sense of the relevance of classical philosophy to contemporary life.
They also emphatically repudiated the scholasticism that prevailed in
academic philosophy and took a lively interest in the developments that
brought about the scientific revolution. They therefore form part of
the philosophical revolution of the seventeenth century, especially
since they sought an alternative philosophical foundation to
Aristotelianism which was waning fast in the face of challenges from
scepticism and competing alternative philosophies, notably those of
Hobbes and Descartes. They were the first philosophers to write
primarily and consistently in the English language.


One difference between the Cambridge Platonists and their more
famous philosophical contemporaries is that they all had a theological
background. Nevertheless, convinced of the compatibility of reason and
faith, they regarded philosophy as the legitimate concern of
theologians and are distinguished by the high value they accorded human
reason. They devoted their considerable philosophical learning to
religious and moral issues, to defending the existence of God and the
immortality of the soul, and to formulating a practical ethics for
Christian conduct. They held the eternal existence of moral principles
and of truth and that the human mind is equipped with the principles of
reason and morality. Their optimistic view of human nature is
underscored by their emphasis on the freedom of the will. Their
anti-determinism lead them to propose arguments for human autonomy.
They were all dualists for whom mind is ontologically prior to matter,
and for whom the truths of the mind are superior to sense-knowledge.
They were nevertheless moderns in natural philosophy who accepted
post-Galilean science, and propounded an atomistic theory of matter.
But they repudiated mechanistic natural philosophy in favour of the
view that spirit is the fundamental causal principle in the operations
of nature.
 
Benjamin Whichcote


Benjamin Whichcote is usually considered to be the founding father
of Cambridge Platonism, by virtue of the fact that so many of them
studied at Emmanuel College when he taught there. During the Civil War
period, Whichcote was appointed Provost of King's College, Cambridge,
and he served as Vice Chancellor of the University in 1650. However, he
was removed from his post at King's College at the Restoration in 1660.
and was obliged to seek employment elsewhere, as a clergyman in London.
The interruption to his academic career may explain why he never
published any philosophical treatises as such. The main source for his
philosophical views are his posthumously-published sermons and
aphorisms. Whichcote's tolerant, optimistic and rational outlook set
the intellectual tone for Cambridge Platonism. Whichcote's
philosophical views are grounded in his liberal theology. He held that
God being supremely perfect is necessarily good, wise and loving.
Whichcote regarded human nature as rational and perfectible, and he
believed that it is through reason as much as revelation that God
communicates with man. ‘God is the most knowable of any thing in
the world’ (Patrides, 1969, p.58). Without reason we would have
no means of demonstrating the existence of God, and no assurance that
revelation is from God. By reason Whichcote did not mean the
disputatious logic of the schools but discursive, demonstrative and
practical reason enlightened by contemplation of the divine. He held
that moral principles are immutable absolutes which exist independently of
human minds and institutions, and that virtuous conduct is grounded in
reason. Whichcote's Aphorisms amount to a manual of practical
ethics which amply illustrates his conviction that the fruit reason is
not ‘bare knowledge’ but action, or knowledge which
‘doth go forth into act’. It is through reason that we gain
knowledge of the natural world, and recognise natural phenomena as
‘the EFFECTS OF GOD’. Although Whichcote's published
writings do not discuss natural philosophy as such, his recognition of
the demonstrative value of natural philosophy for the argument from
design anticipates the use of natural philosophy in the apologetics of
Cudworth and More.
Culverwell, Smith and Sterry


Whichcote's optimism about human reason and his conviction that
philosophy properly belongs within the domain of religion, is an
outlook shared by the other Cambridge Platonists, all of whom affirmed
the compatibility of reason and faith. The fullest statement of this
position is Henry More's The Apology of Henry More (1664)
which sets out rules for the application of reason in religious
matters, stipulating the use of only those ‘Philosophick
theorems’ which are ‘solid and rational in themselves, nor
really repugnant to the word of God’. Like Whichcote, Peter
Sterry, John Smith and Nathaniel Culverwell are known only through
posthumously published writings. The first published treatise by any of
the Cambridge Platonists was Nathaniel Culverwell's An Elegant and
Learned Discourse of the Light of Nature of 1652. Like the other
Cambridge Platonists Culverwell emphasises the freedom of the will and
proposes an innatist epistemology, according to which the mind is
furnished with ‘clear and indelible Principles’ and reason
an ‘intellectual lamp’ placed in the soul by God to enable
it to understand God's will promulgated in the law of nature. These
innate principles of the mind also include moral principles. The soul is a
divine spark, which derives knowledge by inward contemplation, not
outward observation. Drawing on Suarez and Aquinas, as well as
Platonist and contemporary philosophy, Culverwell was the only
Cambridge Platonist to invoke natural law.


After studying at Emmanuel College, John Smith taught mathematics at
Queen's College until his premature death in 1652. His posthumously
published Select Discourses (1659) discusses a number of
metaphysical and epistemological issues relating to Christian belief –
the existence of God, immortality of the soul and the rationality of
religion. Smith outlines a hierarchy of four grades of cognitive
ascent from sense combined with reason, through reason in conjunction
with innate notions, and, thirdly, through disembodied,
self-reflective reason; and finally divine love.


Peter Sterry too was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. His
A Discourse of the Freedom of the Will (1675) is the most
visionary of all the writings of the Cambridge Platonists. But Sterry
was more involved with events outside Cambridge than most of the
others, on account of the fact that he was chaplain first to Lord
Brooke and then to Oliver Cromwell. After the death of Cromwell he
retired to a Christian community in East Sheen. In his
Discourse Sterry argues that freedom consists in acting in
accordance with ones nature, appropriately to ones level of being, be
that plant, animal or intellectual entity. Human liberty is grounded in
the divine essence and entails liberty of the understanding and of the
will.
Henry More


A life-long fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, Henry More was the
most prolific of the Cambridge Platonists. He was also the most
directly engaged in contemporary philosophical debate: not only did he
enter into correspondence with Descartes (between 1648 and 1649) but
he also wrote against Hobbes, and was one of the earliest English
critics of Spinoza (whom he attacks in Demonstrationem duarum
and Epistola altera both published in his Opera
omnia, 1671). Although he eventually became a critic of
Cartesianism, he initially advocated the teaching of Cartesianism in
English Universities. More's published writings included, besides
philosophy, poetry, theology and bible commentary. His main
philosophical works are his An Antidote Against Atheism
(1653), his Of the Immortality of the Soul
(1659), Enchiridion metaphysicum (1671), and
Enchiridion ethicum (1667). In these writings, More elaborated
a philosophy of spirit which explained all the phenomena of mind and of
the physical world as the activity of spiritual substance controlling
inert matter. More conceived of both spirit and body as spatially
extended, but defined spiritual substance as the obverse of material
extension: where body is inert and solid, but divisible; spirit is
active and penetrable, but indivisible. It was in his correspondence
with Descartes that he first expounded his view that all substance,
whether material or immaterial, is extended. As an example of
non-material extension he proposed space, within which material
extension is contained. He went on to argue space is infinite,
anticipating that other native of Grantham, Isaac Newton. More also
argued that God who is an infinite spirit is an extended being (res
extensa). There are, therefore, conceptual parallels between the
idea of God and the idea of space, a view which he elaborates in
Enchiridion metaphysicum, where he argues that the properties
of space are analogous to the attributes of God (infinity,
immateriality, immobility etc.).


Within the category of spiritual substance More includes not just
the souls of living creatures and God himself but the main intermediate
causal agent of the cosmos, the Spirit of Nature (or ‘Hylarchic
Principle’). According to More the Spirit of Nature is the
interface between the divine and the material. As a concept, it has
affinities with Plato's anima mundi (world soul), and the
Stoics' pneuma. The Spirit of Nature can also be understood as
encapsulating ‘certain general Modes and Lawes of Nature’
(More, A Collection, Preface, p. xvi) since it is the Spirit
of Nature that is responsible for uniting individual souls with bodies,
and for ensuring the regular operation of non-animate nature. It is a
‘Superintendant Cause’ which combines efficient and
telelological causality to ensure the smooth-running of the universe
according to God's plan. More sought, by this hypothesis, to account
for phenomena that apparently defy the laws of mechanical physics (for
example the inter-vortical trajectory of comets, the sympathetic
vibration of strings and tidal motion). More underpinned his soul-body
dualism by his theory of ‘vital congruity’ which explains
soul-body interaction as a sympathetic attraction between soul and body
engineered by the operation the Spirit of Nature.


Like the other Cambridge Platonists, More was a religious apologist
who used philosophy in defence of theism against the claims of rational
atheists. The most important statement of More's theological position
his An Explanation of the Grand Mystery of Godliness appeared
in 1664, and propounds, in opposition to Calvinist pessimistic
voluntarism, a moral, rational providentialism in which he vindicates
the goodness and justice of God by invoking the Origenist doctrine of
the pre-existence of the soul. The most consistent theme of his
philosophical writings, are arguments for demonstrating the existence
and providential nature of God. Indeed the foundation stone of More's
apologetic enterprise is his philosophy of spirit, especially his
arguments for the existence of incorporeal causal agents, that is,
souls or spirits. Furthermore, More attempted to answer materialists
like Thomas Hobbes whom he perceived as an atheist on account of his
dismissal of the idea of incorporeal substance as non-sensical. More's
strategy was to show that the same arguments that materialists use
demonstrate the existence and properties of body, also support the
obverse, the existence of incorporeal substances. In this way More
sought to demonstrate that the idea of incorporeal substance,
or spirit, was as intelligible as that of corporeal substance, i.e.
body. Like Plato (in Laws 10), More argues that the operations
of the nature cannot be explained simply in terms of the chance
collision of material particles. Rather we must posit some other source
of activity, which More identifies as ‘spirit’. It is a
short step, he argues, from grasping the concept of spirit, to
accepting the idea of an infinite spirit, namely God.


More underpins these a priori arguments for the existence of
spirit, with a wide range of a posteriori arguments, taken
from observed phenomena of nature to demonstrate the actions of
spirit.  Through this excursus into observational method he
accumulated a wide variety of data ranging from experiments conducted
by Robert Boyle and members of the Royal Society, to supernatural
effects including cases of witchcraft and demons. He was censured by
Boyle for misappropriating his experiments to endorse his hypothesis
of the Spirit of Nature. And his apparent credulity, appears
inconsistent with his otherwise rational philosophy, though it must be
said that belief in witchcraft was (a) not unusual in his time, and
(b) was entirely consistent with the theory of spirit according to
which to deny the existence of spirits good or evil, leads, logically
to the denial of the existence of God. As he put it, alluding to James
I's defence of episcopacy, “That saying is no less true in
Politicks ‘No Bishop, no King,’ than this in Metaphysicks,
‘No Spirit, no God’ ” (More,
1662, Antidote, p. 142). His most well-known fellow-believer
was Royal Society member, Joseph Glanvill (1636-1680),
whose Sadducismus triumphatus, More edited.


More also published a short treatise on ethics entitled
Enchiridion Ethicum (1667, translated as An Account of
Virtue). Indebted to Descartes' theory of the passions this argues
that knowledge of virtue is attainable by reason, and the pursuit of
virtue entails the control of the passions by the soul. Motivation to
good is supplied by rightly-directed emotion, while virtue is achieved
by the exercise free will or autoexousy (More uses the same
term as Cudworth), that is the ‘Power to act or not act within
ourselves’. Anticipating Shaftesbury's concept of moral sense
More posits a special faculty of the soul combining reason and
sensation which he calls the ‘Boniform Faculty’.


More used a number of different genres for conveying his
philosophical ideas. The most popular among these were his
Philosophical Poems (1647) and his Divine Dialogues
(1668). In Conjectura cabbalistica (1653), he presented core
themes of his philosophy in the form of an exposition of occulted
truths contained in the first book of Genesis. Subsequently he
undertook a detailed study of the Jewish kabbalah which were published
in Knorr von Rosenroth's Kabbala denudata (1679). These
studies were based on the belief, then current, that kabbalistic
writings contained, in symbolic form, original truths of philosophy, as
well as of religion. Kabbalism therefore exemplified the compatibility
of philosophy and faith. In addition to philosophy More published
several studies of biblical prophecy (e.g. Apocalypsis
apocalypseos, 1680, Paralipomena prophetica, 1685). In
1675, More prepared a Latin translation of his works, Opera
omnia which ensured his philosophy reached a European audience as
well as an English one.
Ralph Cudworth


Like his friend Henry More, Ralph Cudworth spent his entire career as
a teacher at the University of Cambridge. Educated at Emmanuel
College, in 1647, he was appointed Regius Professor of Hebrew and
Master of Clare College. In 1654 he was elected Master of Christ's
College, a post he held until his death. Cudworth published only one
major work of philosophy in his lifetime, The True Intellectual
System of the Universe (1678).  Among the papers he left at his
death, were the treatises published posthumously as A Treatise
Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality (1731) and his A
Treatise of Freewill (1848).  These papers also included two
further manuscript treatises on the topic of ‘Liberty and
Necessity’, which have never been published. Cudworth's
humanistic erudition and baroque style have occluded the originality
of his contribution to English philosophy and helped ensure to his
undeserved neglect in the annals of English philosophy.


Cudworth's True Intellectual System propounds an
anti-determinist system of philosophy grounded in his conception of God
as a fully perfect being, infinitely wise and good. The created world
reflects the perfection, wisdom and goodness of its creator. It must,
therefore be orderly, intelligible, and organised for the best. This
anti-voluntarist understanding of God's attributes is also the
foundation of epistemology and ethics, since God's wisdom and goodness
are the guarantors of truth and of moral principles. By contrast, a
philosophy founded on a voluntaristic conception of the deity would
have no ground of certainty or of morality because it would depend on
the arbitrary will of God who could, by arbitrary fiat, decree
non-sense to be true and wrong to be right. It follows that
misconceptions of God's attributes, which emphasise his power and will,
result by definition in false philosopical systems with sceptical and
atheistic implications.


Much of The True Intellectual System amounts to an extended
consensus gentium argument for the existence of a supreme
deity. By demonstrating from ancient sources that most ancient
philosophers were theists, Cudworth sought to argue that theism is
compatible with philosophy. Among the non-theists, Cudworth (1678,
p. 165) identifies four schools of atheistic philosophy, each of which
is a type of materialism: Hylopathian atheism or materialism,
‘Atomical or Democritical’ atheism, Cosmo-plastic atheism
(which makes the world-soul the highest numen), and Hylozoic atheism
(which attributes life to matter). Each of these ancient brands of
atheism has its latter-day manifestations in philosophers such as
Hobbes (an example of a Hylopathian atheist) and Spinoza (a latter-day
Hylozoist).


The true philosophy of Cudworth's intellectual system combines
mechanistic atomism with Platonic metaphysics. Cudworth conceives this
as having originated with Moses from whom it was transmitted via
Pythagoras to Greek and other philosophers. Cudworth subscribed to the
atomistic hypothesis that the created universe is constituted of
particles of inert matter – indeed he regarded Cartesian mechanical
philosophy as a recently revived variety of ancient atomism of Moses.
But, for Cudworth, as for Plato, soul is ontologically prior to the
physical world. Since motion, thought and action cannot be explained
in terms of material particles, haphazardly jolted together, there
must be some guiding originator, namely soul or spirit. Part of the
appeal to Cudworth of the new ‘mechanical’ philosophy of
Descartes was the dualism which underscored it. Cudworth interpreted
this with some latitude to explain all movement, life and action in
terms of the activity of spirits operating on inert matter. Although
he was critical of aspects of Cartesianism, he seized on its value for
religious apologetics as instrumental in persuading materialists of
the existence of spiritual agency.


In place of the mechanical explanation of the operations of nature,
he proposed his hypothesis of ‘the Plastick Life of
Nature’. Similar in conception to More's Hylarchic Principle,
Cudworth's Plastic Nature is a formative principle which acts as an
intermediary between the divine and the natural world, maintaining the
mundane operations of the physical universe. Plastic Nature, is the
means whereby God imprints His presence on his creation and makes His
wisdom and goodness manifest (and therefore intelligible) throughout
created nature. In one respect, as Cudworth points out, Plastic Nature
is a summation of all the laws of motion. At the same time he conceives
it as having substance, as being some kind of spirit which carries out
its functions unconsciously. Plastic Nature therefore has affinities
with the Platonic anima mundi. The hypothesis of Plastic
Nature also entails a teleological principle, which accounts for the
design and purpose in the natural world. Plastic nature enables
Cudworth to account for the providential ordering of the universe
without falling into the trap of occasionalism. For by it he explains
God's immanence in the world, without requiring immediate divine
intervention in the minutiae of day-to-day operations in the natural
world.


The Platonist principle that mind precedes the world lies at the
foundation of Cudworth's epistemology which is discussed in A
Treatise of Eternal and Immutable Morality. This is the most fully
developed theory of knowledge by any of the Cambridge Platonists, and
the most extensive treatment of innatism by any seventeenth-century
philosopher. For Cudworth, as for Plato, ideas and moral principles
‘are eternal and self-subsistent things’. The knowability
of the world is explained in terms of the basic Platonic principles of
archetype and ectype (form and copy). Cognition depends on the same
principles, for just as the created world is a copy of the divine
archetype, so also human minds contain the imprint of Divine wisdom and
knowledge. The ideas in each individual mind are therefore the same in
all minds. Since the human mind mirrors the mind of God, it is ready
furnished with ideas and the ability to reason. Cognition therefore
entails recollection and the ideas of things with which the mind thinks
are therefore anticipations – Cudworth adopts the Stoic term
prolepsis to denote them. But cognition is not a passive
process. Rather it entails active participation of the mind.
‘Knowledge’, writes Cudworth, ‘is not a passion from
anything without the mind, but an active exertion of the inward
strength, vigour, and power of the mind, displaying itself from
within’ (Cudworth, 1996, p. 74). Although innate knowledge is the
only true knowledge, Cudworth's epistemology does not reject sense
knowledge. On the contrary, sensory input is essential for knowledge of
the body and the external world. And the external world is,
intrinsically, intelligible, since it bears the imprint of its creator
in the order and relationship of its component parts. However, raw
sense data is not, by itself, knowledge. But it requires mental
processing in order to become knowledge. As Cudworth puts it, we cannot
understand the book of nature unless we know how to read.


Cudworth's theory of the mind as active is matched by an
anti-determinist ethics of action, according to which the soul freely
directs itself towards the good. In A Treatise Cudworth argues
not only that ideas exist independently of human minds, but also the
principles of morality are eternal and immutable. In a concerted attack
on Hobbesian moral relativism, Cudworth, argues that the criteria of
right and wrong, good and evil, justice and injustice are not a matter
of convention, but are founded in the goodness and justice of God. Like
Plato in the Euthyphro, Cudworth argues that it is not God's
will that determines goodness, but that God wills things because they
are good. The exercise of virtue is not, however, a passive process,
but requires the free exercise of the individual will. Cudworth sets
out his theory of free will in three treatises on ‘Liberty and
Necessity’, only one of which has been published, and that
posthumously – A Treatise of Freewill (1848). According to
Cudworth, the will is not a faculty of the soul, distinct from reason,
but a power of the soul which combines the functions of both reason and
will in order to direct the soul towards the good. Cudworth's use of
the terms ‘hegemonikon’ (taken from Stoicism) and
‘autexousion’ (taken from Plotinus) underlines the fact
that the exercise of will entails the power to act. It is internal
direction, not external compulsion that induces us to act either
morally or immorally. Without the freedom (and therefore power) to of
act, there would be no moral responsibility. Moral conduct is active,
not passive. Virtuous action is therefore a matter of active internal
self-determination, rather than determination from without.


According to the moral psychology outlined in A Treatise of
Freewill, the ‘hegemonikon’ has an integrative
function within the soul, combining, on the one hand, the functions of
will and reason, and, on the other the lower, animal, appetites of the
soul with the higher intellectual functions of the soul. In this way
Cudworth bridges the divide between soul and body that characterises
Cartesianism. Furthermore, Cudworth conceives of the
hegemonikon not simply as the soul but the whole person,
‘that which is properly we ourselves’ (Cudworth, 1996, p.
178). Cudworth's concept of hegemonikon lays the basis for a
concept of self identity founded in a subject that is at once thinking,
autonomous and end-directed. Cudworth did not (as far as is known)
develop a political philosophy. Nevertheless, the political
implications of his ethical theory set him against Hobbes, but also, in
many ways anticipate John Locke.
Legacy


After Hobbes and Locke, the Cambridge Platonists deserve to be
considered an important third strand in English seventeenth-century
philosophy. Their critique of Descartes, Hobbes, Spinoza has ensured
that they are never ignored in philosophical history but they have yet
to receive full recognition in their own right. Evidence from
publication and citation suggests that their philosophical influence
was more far-reaching than is normally recognised in modern histories
of philosophy. The works of Cudworth and More were available to a
European readership through Latin translation – More's Opera
omnia appeared in 1675–9, and Cudworth's entire published
works were translated into Latin by Johann Lorenz Mosheim and
published in 1733. Among the immediate philosophical heirs of the
Cambridge Platonists, mention should be made of Henry More's pupil,
 Anne Conway (1631–1679), one of the very
few female philosophers of the period. Her Principles of the Most
Ancient and Modern Philosophy (1692) includes a critique of More's
dualistic philosophy of spirit, proposing instead a metaphysical monism
that anticipates Leibniz. Another figure linked to More was John Norris
(1657–1712) who was to become the leading English exponent of the
philosophy of Malebranche. Whichcote's philosophical wisdom was admired
by Anthony Ashley Cooper, third Earl of Shaftesbury who published his
Select Sermons in 1698. Shaftesbury's tutor, John Locke was
the intimate friend of Cudworth's philosophical daughter, Damaris
Masham. The impact of Cudworth on Locke has yet to be fully
investigated. Richard Price, and Thomas Reid were both indebted to
Cudworth, whose theory of Plastic Nature was taken up in vitalist
debates in the French enlightenment. Leibniz certainly read Cudworth
and More. The intellectual legacy, the Cambridge Platonists extends not
just to philosophical debate in seventeenth-century England but into
European and Scottish Enlightenment thought and beyond.