Whereas facts about what is actual are facts about how things
are, facts about modality (i.e., what is possible, necessary,
or impossible) are facts about how things could, must, or could not
have been. For example, while there are in fact eleven players on a
soccer team, there could have been thirteen, though there
couldn’t have been zero. The first of these is a fact about what
is actual; the second is a fact about what was possible, and the third
is a fact about what is impossible. Humans are often disposed to
consider, make, and evaluate judgments about what is possible and
necessary, such as when we are motivated to make things better and
imagine how things might be. We judge that things could have been
different than they actually are, while other things could not have
been. These modal judgments and modal claims therefore play a central
role in human decision-making and in philosophical argumentation. This
entry is about the justification we have for modal judgments.

Most of the time, we encounter what might be called ordinary
modal judgments, such as the following:

Although I am a philosopher, I could have been a
musician.
Not only does 2 + 2 = 4, it is necessary that 2 + 2 =
4.
Not only is it the case that nothing is red and green all over at
the same time, it is impossible for something to be red and
green all over at the same time.
Although the table is not broken, it could have been
broken.
Even though the cup is on the left side of the table, it
could have been on the right side.


However, philosophers often, in the course of an argument, formulate
what might be called extraordinary modal judgements; these
typically are about some special philosophical concept relevant to the
discussion. Here are some examples:

St. Anselm

Necessarily: God exists.

Descartes

It is possible for the mind to exist without the body.

Berkeley

It is impossible for anything to exist unperceived.

Now a modal argument is one in which either a premise or the
conclusion is an ordinary or an extraordinary modal judgment. Thus, in
modal arguments, we reason about what is necessary, possible, or
impossible, or about what might, must, or could not be the case. Modal
arguments can therefore be found both inside and outside of philosophy
(within philosophy many important philosophical positions are in fact
modal positions). Assuming that a modal argument is valid (i.e., the
premises validly imply the conclusion), then the evaluation of a modal
argument focuses on whether the premises are justified. The question
then arises: how does one show that a modal premise of a modal
argument is justified?

Philosophers have long been interested in how a modal claim can be
known, justified, or understood. The philosophy of modality is the
area in which one studies the metaphysics, semantics, epistemology,
and logic of modal claims—that is, claims about what is
necessary, possible, contingent, essential, and accidental.
Epistemology is the general area of philosophy in which one studies
the nature of knowledge. The central questions of epistemology
concern: (i) what it is to know something, (ii) what it is to be
justified in believing something, (iii) what it is to understand
something, and (iv) what are the means by which we can come to possess
understanding, justification, or knowledge. Within the philosophy of
modality one finds the sub-discipline known as the epistemology of
modality. The central question of this field is:

How can we come to know (be justified in believing or understand)
what is necessary, possible, contingent, essential, and accidental for
the variety of entities and kinds of entities there are?


This is similar to the central questions found in the epistemology of
mathematics and morality, where one inquires into, the nature of
mathematical knowledge or moral knowledge. Special interest in modal
epistemology (another name for the epistemology of modality) often
derives from the following contrast between knowledge of the actual
and knowledge of what could have been and could not have been the
case.

In general, perception of the actual world can guide us to knowledge
of realized possibilities, possibilities that are actual. For
most philosophers hold that given that what is actual is possible,
knowledge of actuality can inform us of knowledge of some
possibilities. However, actuality appears to be an
insufficient guide to what is: (a) merely possible,
since the possibility is not realized, or (b) impossible,
since what is actually the case does not tell us what could not be
the case. To better understand this phenomenon, consider a cup,
ccc, located at LLL at time ttt. The following line of reasoning
illustrates the central question and its special interest in the case
of ordinary possibilities.

Actual world fact: ccc is at LLL at ttt, and SSS
perceives that ccc is at LLL at ttt.
Knowledge of actuality: SSS knows that ccc is at LLL, since
SSS perceives ccc at LLL and there is no reason for SSS to
believe that their perception of ccc at LLL is misguided.
Actuality-to-Possibility Principle: If PPP is actually true,
then PPP is possibly true, since realized possibilities are evidence
of possibility.
Knowledge of Realized Possibilities: SSS can know that it is
possible for ccc to be at LLL through derivation from the
actuality-to-possibility principle and perception of the actual world
fact.
Non-Actual/Unrealized Possibility Datum: ccc could have been at
L∗L∗L^*, a location distinct from LLL, at ttt.
SSS believes that ccc could have been at L∗L∗L^* at ttt, and
SSS can come to know that ccc could have been at L∗L∗L^* at
ttt.
Epistemic Question: How does SSS know that ccc could have been
at L∗L∗L^* at ttt?


With respect to the epistemic question, all of the following have been
proposed as potential answers:

 Perception: even though ccc is not at L∗L∗L^*. SSS
sees that ccc could be at L∗L∗L^*.
Intuition: even though ccc is not at L∗L∗L^*, SSS has
a non-sensory based intuition that ccc could be at L∗L∗L^* when
SSS entertains the question: could ccc have been at L∗L∗L^*?
 Conceivability: SSS can conceive of a scenario in
which ccc is at L∗L∗L^*. SSS derives justification for believing
that ccc can be at L∗L∗L^* from conceiving of it.
 Imaginability: Were SSS to imagine a process whereby
ccc moved from LLL to L∗L∗L^*, SSS would not arrive at a
contradiction. So, SSS is justified in believing that ccc could
have been at L∗L∗L^* on the basis of imagining the movement.
 Deduction: SSS can deduce from knowledge of what ccc
is fundamentally and the relevant details about location L∗L∗L^* that
ccc could have been at L∗L∗L^*, since what ccc is fundamentally is
not incompatible with it being at L∗L∗L^*.
 Theory: From SSS’s knowledge of what ccc is,
as well as the relevant facts about the location of L∗L∗L^*, SSS can
come to know that ccc could have been at L∗L∗L^*.
Similarity: From SSS’s prior observation of
objects relevantly similar to ccc, as well as their actual locations
and movement, SSS can come to know that ccc could have been at
L∗L∗L^*.


In addition to these theories, one overarching idea is that they can
either be offered as part of a uniformity account or as part of a
non-uniformity account of modal knowledge. The uniformity
view holds that there is only one single route to modal knowledge
at the most fundamental level of explanation. The
non-uniformity view maintains either that different
people can come to know the same modal truth through different routes
or that at the fundamental level of investigation there must be more
than one route to modal knowledge.

In addition to the central question there are three other main
questions of interest.

Modal Sorting:

how can we knowledgeably sort necessary truths from essential truths
and contingent truths? 

At least one point of interest in the sorting question derives from
work in the metaphysics of modality. Necessity and possibility are
interdefinable, PPP is necessary when it is not possible that
not-PPP. However, some such as Fine (1994), have argued that essence
cannot be defined in terms of necessity. This leads us to the
question: how can we sort the essential from the necessary?

Modal Skepticism:

what are the limits of modal knowledge? 

At least one point of interest in the skeptical question derives from
work on the range of modal knowledge. All theories of modal knowledge
should be able to account for ordinary cases. However, some, such as
Van Inwagen (1998), have presented skeptical arguments about extending
modal knowledge to a variety of exotic philosophical claims. 

Modal Architecture/Epistemic Priority:

given that there is a distinction between necessity, possibility, and
essence, is knowledge of one more fundamental than knowledge
of the others? For example is our knowledge of necessity more
fundamental than our knowledge of possibility and essence, and
additionally a pathway to our knowledge of both possibility and
essence? 

At least one point of interest in the architecture/epistemic priority
question derives from work on the proper route to modal knowledge. Bob
Hale (2003) has drawn an important distinction between necessity-first
and possibility-first approaches to modal knowledge. A necessity-first
approach holds that we first arrive at knowledge of necessary truths,
and then derive knowledge of possibility through compatibility with
knowledge of necessity. A possibility-first approach holds that we
first arrive at knowledge of possible truths, and then aim to
determine what necessary truths hold.

It is important to take note of two points about general inquiry in
the epistemology of modality. First, the field is typically concerned
with investigating (i) alethic modality (modality concerned with what
could have been true), as opposed to epistemic modality (modality
concerned with what might be true in an epistemic sense of
“might”) or deontic modality (modality concerned with what
might be done in some normative or evaluative sense). Second, (ii) the
investigation centers on metaphysical modality, as opposed to logical
or physical modality.

For those that accept the reality of metaphysical inquiry,
metaphysical modality is often understood as being the
modality concerned with metaphysics as opposed to logical modality,
which concerns itself with logical relations or physical modality,
which concerns itself with physical relations. In addition, on the
standard model of the relation between these kinds of
modalities the logical possibilities are the most inclusive; they
include any proposition that sheer logic leaves open, no matter how
otherwise impossible it might be. The metaphysical possibilities are
the logical possibilities that are also allowed by the natures of all
of the things that could have existed. The physical possibilities are
the logical and metaphysical possibilities that are also allowed by
the physical laws of nature. On the standard model, the following
nesting relation holds:




This entry will focus on a selection of theories in the epistemology
of modality.
 
1. Introduction
1.1 Kripke on a posteriori Necessities and The Deduction Model

Contemporary analytical debates in the epistemology of modality often
take Saul Kripke’s (1971, 1980) defense of a posteriori
necessities (necessities that are knowable only through sense
experience, and not by way of abstract reflection alone) and his
deduction model of how we arrive at knowledge of them as a point of
departure. In order to better understand what an a posteriori
necessity is, it will be important to first introduce the central
idea of possible worlds semantics (PWS). Consider the following
claims:

It is possible that P. For example, although there are 15
people in the room, it is possible that 20 are in the room.
 It is necessary that P. For example, not only are whales
mammals, it is necessary that whales are mammals.
 Now ask: under what circumstances are possibilities and
necessities like (i) and (ii) true? According to (PWS), (iii) and (iv)
provide the truth-conditions for statements of possibility and
necessity.


 “It is possible that P” is true just in case
P is true in some possible world. Thus, “it is possible
that 20 people are in the room” is true just in case in some
possible world “20 people are in the room” is
true.
 “It is necessary that P” is true just in
case P is true in all possible worlds. Thus, “it is
necessary that whales are mammals” is true just in case in
all possible worlds “whales are mammals” is
true.


Possible worlds are complete alternative realities; they are ways that
the whole of reality might have been. Philosophers have various
theories of their nature. (For more about them see the
 possible worlds entry.)
 With (PWS) in place an a posteriori necessity is a statement
that is true in all possible worlds, and what makes it a
posteriori is that it is knowable only by empirical
investigation of the actual world. The two most commonly
discussed examples are the necessity of Hesperus being identical with
Phosphorus, and the necessity of water being identical to
H2O. The former case concerns the celestial body Venus,
which is picked out by both “Hesperus” and
“Phosphorus”. The latter example has to do with
theoretical identifications in science, cases in which scientists
provide a theoretical identification of a natural kind, such as water,
gold, light, or heat by capturing its underlying nature or essence
through scientific investigation.

It is uncontroversial that we did, and could only have, come to know
that Hesperus = Phosphorus or that water is identical to
H2O through empirical discovery. However, controversially,
it is argued by Kripke that these claims involve (a) identity
statements between rigid designators (terms that pick out the
same thing in all possible worlds in which they have reference), and
(b) because they are identity statements between rigid designators,
the entities they pick out will be identical in all possible worlds in
which the terms have reference. His arguments rely in part on his
proof of the necessity of identity. Historically, a posteriori
necessities were thought to be theoretically impossible. This is
largely due to the work of Kant, in his Critique of Pure
Reason, and subsequent empiricists, such as A.J. Ayer, that
critiqued Kant’s view. Originally, Kant thought that there could
be both analytic (non-informative) and synthetic (informative) a
priori truths. Later empiricists argued that the class of
synthetic a priori truths (“synthetic” roughly in
that they are genuinely informative, not self-evident, and
“a priori” roughly in that they are known on the
basis of purely rational reflections) was incoherent. (For more about
a priori justification see the
 entry on a priori justification and knowledge).
 As a consequence of these arguments, in the mid 20th
century many philosophers thought that the following equivalences were
true:

A statement S is a priori if and only if
S is necessary.
A statement S is a posteriori if and only if
S is contingent.


Kripke’s 1970 lectures, later published as Naming and
Necessity (1980), provided a serious challenge to both (i) and
(ii). Where “□◻\Box” stands for “it is necessary
that”, in his (1971) he offered the following picture of how we
can arrive at knowledge of an a posteriori necessity:


First, it is argued that some sort of fact is necessary, if true: (P→□P)(P→◻P)(P
\rightarrow \Box P).

Second, that the relevant fact is known to be true by empirical
investigation: P.

Third, by deduction from (1) and (2) we arrive at a necessary truth,
□P◻P\Box P, that is known a posteriori because empirical
investigation is how the premise P is known.


The first premise in the deduction of an a posteriori
necessity involves some necessity-generating principle, a principle
that moves from some sort of fact, typically a non-modal fact, to the
claim that the fact is necessary. Kripke thought that these principles
were usually arrived at through a priori philosophical
reflection. Plausible, and often discussed, examples of
necessity-generating principles are:

The necessity of identity, which maintains that true identity
claims are necessary. For example, it is necessary that water =
H2O, since water = H2O, and both
“water” and “H2O” are rigid
designators.
The necessity of origins, which maintains that the originating
matter of a given kind of thing is necessary for its existence. For
example, given that a table t is wholly carved from a block
of wood m, it is necessary that t originated from
m—nothing could be t that did not originate
from m. Or, given, that Sheba originated from gamete
g, the product of sperm s and egg e,
nothing could be Sheba that did not originate from g.
The necessity of fundamental kind, which maintains that the
fundamental kind that an entity falls under is necessary for its
existence. For example, given that a particular table t is
fundamentally a material object, it could not have been non-material.
Or, given that a particular organism is a biological kind, such as
Sheba being a human being, she could not have been a non-biological
kind, and additionally could not have failed to be human.


The second premise in the deduction of an a posteriori
necessity is a specific a posteriori truth, a truth that is
discovered on the basis of empirical investigation. Given the examples
above, the relevant claims would be that, in fact: water =
H2O, t originates from m, Sheba
originates from g, t is a material object, Sheba is
a biological kind, and Sheba is a human.

From the first and second step a specific a posteriori
necessity is deduced. For example: necessarily water = H2
O, necessarily the table originates from its original wood,
necessarily Sheba originates from g, necessarily the table is
a material object, necessarily Sheba is a biological kind, and
necessarily Sheba is a human. In general, learning a conclusion by an
argument is a species of a posteriori knowledge just in case
at least one premise is known a posteriori. In sum, even
though the deduction of an a posteriori necessity involves,
as Kripke claims, an a priori known necessity generating
principle, because the important fact is known a posteriori,
the conclusion is both necessary and a posteriori.

As a generalization of Kripke’s model it should be noted that
there is no reason why one could not come to know a necessary truth
through pure a priori deduction. For example, consider the
following:

If 2 + 2 = 4, then it is necessary that 2 + 2 = 4 because
mathematical truths are necessary truths.
2 + 2 = 4.


therefore 

It is necessary that 2 + 2 = 4.


In this case, if (1) and (2) can be known a priori, the
conclusion drawn on the basis of (1) and (2), will be an a priori
necessity. 
1.2 Epistemic Issues Pertaining to Kripke’s Work

In addition to Kripke’s seminal work, there are four epistemic
issues in the epistemology of modality that are frequently discussed.
The first two are reactions to Kripke’s work, which challenge
the success of his reasoning. The latter two derive from
considerations concerning the structure of possible worlds
semantics.
1.2.1 The Problem of a posteriori Necessities

It is prima facie plausible to think that all modal knowledge
is in principle a priori, since at least perception of
actuality cannot provide one with knowledge of mere possibility and
necessity. For example, if conceivability is taken to be an a
priori exercise, and it is linked to possibility, then it is
plausible to think that a priori conceiving that P
provides one with a priori justification for believing that
P is possible. Likewise, finding P inconceivable
provides one with a priori evidence that P is
impossible. While this might seem to be the only way that
such knowledge can be discovered, this simple thought is challenged by
Kripke’s arguments for the existence of a posteriori
necessities. The problem is discussed in detail in Yablo’s
(1993): Is Conceivability a Guide to Possibility? One of the
main problems facing contemporary a priori accounts of the
epistemology of modality concerns the existence of a posteriori
necessities. Recall that an a posteriori necessity is a
statement, such as the identity statement “Water =
H2O”, that is metaphysically necessary, yet knowable
only a posteriori. As a consequence, a priori
accounts face the following potential situation:

To X it seems that P is possible on a
priori grounds, such as through conceiving of a scenario
S or imagining a situation in which P appears
true.
Q is necessary and knowable only a
posteriori.
 Q implies that P is necessarily false.


(1)–(3) forces an initial question: if there are a
posteriori necessities, how can one have a priori
knowledge of modality? Sure one might be able to have it in cases of
pure a priori reasoning, such as with respect to mathematical
knowledge. But how can one’s a priori conceiving of a
situation in which, for example, water is present without hydrogen
provide one with evidence, sufficient for knowledge, for the claim:
it is possible for water to be present without hydrogen? For
all one knows they have conceived of a situation or were able to
conceive of a situation in which P appears to hold because
they do not know the relevant facts which make P
inconceivable, since those facts are only knowable a
posteriori. Surely one can conceive of a situation in which water
does not contain hydrogen, if they simply fail to know that water is
H2O. But why consider that situation to be a situation in
which water is present, as opposed to some superficially
similar substance?

The initial question is explored in further detail in the literature
along side the following questions. Given that knowledge is distinct
from justification, and is also a stronger relation than
justification, do a posteriori necessities pose a problem for
a priori justification about modal truths or only for a
priori knowledge? Do a posteriori necessities render
a priori reasoning merely fallible or also completely
unreliable?
1.2.2 The Relevant-Depth Problem

Van Inwagen (1998), taking note of Yablo’s (1993) account of
what it is to conceive something, discusses what has come to be a
fundamental challenge for theories involving conceivability and
imaginability. The problem presented by van Inwagen is related to the
problem of a posteriori necessities. Van Inwagen’s goal
is to present a limited form of skepticism about modal knowledge. He
is not a skeptic about all modal knowledge. His position is that we
have a lot of ordinary modal knowledge concerning practical,
scientific, and mathematical matters, but perhaps limited
extraordinary modal knowledge. Extraordinary modal knowledge
concerns matters on the periphery of scientific investigation or in
the realm of metaphysical debate. He argues for his skepticism about
extraordinary modal knowledge on the basis of an analogy with
judgments of distance by the naked eye. He maintains that in a range
of cases, naked-eye judgments of distance are reliable, though
fallible; and likewise in a range of cases, modal judgments about
ordinary practical matters and scientific matters are also reliable,
though fallible. However, he argues that just as judgments of distance
by the naked eye break down in certain cases, judgments about
extraordinary modal claims based on conceiving or imagining a
situation that appears to verify a statement equally break down. The
main issue concerns how we can be confident that we have conceived
things to the relevant level of depth required for the scenario to
actually be a presentation or manifestation of a genuine
possibility.

Given a particular statement S, van Inwagen raises the
question: how does one know that the relevant depth of the scenario
they have imagined is sufficient to ground the truth of the statement
S? For example, conceiving of a situation in which
mathematicians announce that a theorem has been proved is not
sufficient for believing that the theorem is provable, since we can
easily conceive of impossibilities being announced as proven by
mathematicians. It would appear that what is required is for one to
conceive of the proof itself or something in the vicinity of it that
leads to a proof. With reference to the example of water, one might
say that the reason one found the statement water is present
without hydrogen conceivable is that one had not conceived of the
scenario in sufficient enough detail. The appearance of possibility is
explained by a failure to have the relevant depth of detail.
Conceiving of a liquid and supposing that hydrogen is not a component
of it does not constitute the relevant depth of detail. Much more
would appear to be required, such as conceiving of how the liquid
would still boil at its normal temperature without hydrogen. The
general problem of conceiving to the relevant depth is exacerbated
when our judgments concern extraordinary modal claims where we are
perhaps less confident about what relevant details would need to be in
place for a coherent scenario to reveal a genuine possibility rather
than a mere appearance of possibility. For example, what grounds our
confidence that we have conceived of a mind without a body simply by
conceiving of consciousness without a body being present? For
instance, one could imagine that someone is consciously thinking about
something while just affirming abstractly that no body is present
where the thinking occurs. But is that sufficient? Perhaps much more
detail is required to verify that we have conceived of consciousness
without materiality.

The challenge van Inwagen sets for modal epistemology is the
following: how does one know (or how can one be confident) that one
has reached sufficient detail in the scenario they have imagined so as
to have included in it the truth of the claim in question rather than
an unreliable sign of the truth? Geirsson (2005) and Hawke (2011) have
further debated the issue discussed by van Inwagen.
1.2.3 The Causal Isolation Problem

One fundamental problem in the epistemology of modality stems from
possible worlds semantics. Recall that (PWS), roughly, is the view
that the truth conditions for

It is possible that P.
It is necessary that P.


are

P is true in some possible world.
P is true in all possible worlds.


The core idea is that possibility is truth in some world while
necessity is truth in all worlds. The potential problem caused by
possible worlds semantics is the causal isolation problem.
The problem can be formulated as follows:

Realism:

Realism about possible worlds in the metaphysics of modality
maintains that (i) facts about possible worlds are the truth-makers
for modal statements, and (ii) that possible worlds are not causally
connected to the actual world, either because a possible world is a
comprehensive concrete universe that is causally isolated from our
world or because a possible world is an abstract object, and in virtue
of being an abstract object it has no causes or effects on the actual
world.

Causal Condition:

X has knowledge of P only if X bears a
causal connection to the truth-maker of P.

If one accepts Realism and Causal Condition, then
there is a prima facie question: How can we ever know
anything about metaphysical modality if we do not bear a causal
connection to the truth-makers of modal statements?

The motivation for realism about modality comes from a commitment to
the mind-independence of the truth-makers for modal claims. The core
idea is that what makes a possibility or necessity claim true is not
some fact about human minds, but some fact about the entities
themselves. “It could have been the case that Rachel has a
brother” is true not because Rachel can merely imagine it.
Rather, it is true because something independent of her mind grounds
the truth, in the case of (PWS), that independent something is part of
a possible world.

The motivation for the causal condition often comes from an
examination of cases of perception. When perception provides
knowledge, part of the explanation appears to be that a causal
connection obtains between the subject and the truth-maker of
one’s belief. For example, on some accounts of knowledge, seeing
a fish in a bowl can provide one with knowledge of the fact that there
is a fish in the bowl, partly in virtue of the fact that there is a
causal relation that obtains between a fact in the world and the
perceiver’s mind.

It is important to note that the causal condition has been
argued by some to be either categorically inappropriate or irrelevant
as a requirement on a domain that is essentially non-spatio-temporally
related to us. The general idea is that a causal condition is
appropriate for concrete objects in the spatio-temporal realm, but not
for entities outside of the spatio-temporal realm. For discussion of
this issue see Lewis (1986). The problem as debated in the
contemporary literature for the case of modality finds its most
explicit expression in Peacocke’s (1997) discussion of the
integration challenge for modality, and his landmark (1999)
work Being Known. For further discussion of Peacocke’s
solution see Roca-Royes (2010), and for critical discussion of how to
eliminate the challenge see Bueno and Shalkowski (2004, 2014).
1.2.4 Skepticism based on Evolution

A related worry to the causal isolation problem comes from
naturalistic accounts of epistemology that are grounded in the idea
that our capacities for knowledge must be consistent with evolutionary
explanations of our cognitive capacities. The arguments are aimed at
the very possibility of having justification for beliefs about
metaphysical modality. The problem is developed most directly by
Nozick (2003: Ch. 3), and depends on two claims: (i) a necessary
condition for being justified in believing that P is that a
subject have a reliable belief forming module or faculty for the
domain in question, and (ii) that evolution by natural selection
provides the best explanation for which reliable belief forming
mechanisms we possess. The Nozickian evolutionary skeptic argues as
follows:

There is no adaptive advantage to getting things right about all
possible worlds.
If there is no adaptive advantage to getting things right about
all possible worlds, then there is no module or faculty for detecting
truths about all possible worlds; and since truth in all possible
worlds is the definition of metaphysical necessity, there is no module
or faculty for detecting metaphysical necessity.
If there is no reliable module or faculty for detecting necessity,
then none of our beliefs about necessity are justified.
So, we are not justified in any of our specific beliefs to the
effect that something is metaphysically necessary.


There are three kinds of claims that the Nozickian skeptic brings
forth to establish (1):

Our ability to imagine different scenarios is constrained by how
evolution engineered our mind, and as a consequence it may not have
the power to consider all the possible scenarios.
Whenever we have an appearance of possibility or necessity, the
appearance is best explained as being about something other than
metaphysical possibility or necessity.
There may be an adaptive advantage to having appearances of
impossibility, when in actuality what appears impossible is
possible.


Although (a)–(c) are controversial. Some initial plausibility
can be given to each.

One reason to accept (a) is that there is no reason to believe that
our imagination should be able to track all possibilities. It is
likely that our imagination was engineered through evolution to deal
primarily with local possibilities in our environment, such as the
possibility of an object located in one place being located at another
place or the possibility of an object moving at one speed moving at a
much faster speed. In dealing with local possibilities, it may not
have the capacity to consider all possibilities reliably.

One reason to accept (b) is that metaphysical possibility and
necessity, as defined as truth in some possible world and truth in all
possible worlds may itself reduce either to logical possibility and
necessity or physical possibility and necessity. For our appearances
of possibility and necessity to be about metaphysical possibility and
necessity it must be the case that the best explanation is that there
is a unique kind of modality picked out by “metaphysical
modality” and that this modality is the best explanation for
what our appearances of possibility and necessity are really about. If
metaphysical modality collapses either into logical modality or
physical modality, then there is no reason to believe that our
appearances of possibility and necessity are really about metaphysical
modality.

One reason to accept (c) is by analogy. Appearances of the world often
present things to us in a way that may be better for us to process for
the purpose of survival. Take the case of perception. On one account
of perception and the world, the manifest image of the world as
containing medium-sized objects, such as tables and trees, is false.
Fundamental physics seems to be capable of complete explanations with
no need for tables and trees, so perhaps they don’t really
exist.. However, it may be that for human survival it is better for
us, in perception, such as vision, to see things as medium-sized dry
goods, such as tables and trees, since it is easier for us to navigate
and organize our lives around such macroscopic entities. In addition,
it may be that there are certain possibilities that we cannot imagine
simply because it is better for us either not to be able to see the
possibility or because the forces that drove evolution pushed our
minds to a place where taking something to be impossible was better
than revealing it to be possible.

It is important to note that Nozick’s argument depends on the
claim that if there is no reliable module or faculty for detecting
necessity, then none of our beliefs about necessity are
justified. With respect to this assumption one might argue that
although there is no specific faculty for detecting
necessity, we are capable of reasoning our way to necessity by way of
other faculties that we do have. Counterfactual theories of the
epistemology of modality typically take this approach (see
 section 3
 for discussion)
2. Rationalist Theories

Rationalist theories, in one way or another, are grounded in the idea
that despite the existence of a posteriori necessities, there
is still a great deal of modal knowledge to be gained through a
priori means. These views are often not concerned with modal
knowledge with respect to a priori matters, such as in the
case of logic and mathematics. Rather, these views are concerned with
the extent to which we can have rational modal knowledge of matters
outside of logic and mathematics, such as with respect to natural
kinds or consciousness. The views differ on how much a priori
knowledge they endorse, and how they account for it. In this section I
review David Chalmers’s Modal Rationalism, Christopher
Peacocke’s Principles of Possibility, E.J. Lowe’s
Serious Essentialism, and Bob Hale’s
Essentialism. Important rationalist accounts, not discussed
here, are: Laurence Bonjour’s (1998) In Defense of Pure
Reason, George Bealer’s (2002) The Rationalist
Renaissance, Keith Hossack’s (2007) The Metaphysics of
Knowledge, Jonathan Ichikawa and Benjamin Jarvis’s (2011)
Rational Imagination and Modal Knowledge, and Christian
Nimtz’s (2012) Conceptual Truths, Strong Possibilities, and
Metaphysical Necessity. In studying rationalist theories it is
important to note that some theories may not give an explicit answer
to the central question. Rather, they may give an account of what the
connection is between the a priori and the necessary
or between conceptual truths and necessity; or they
may give an account of how intuition is reliable, and then argue that
modal knowledge can be gained by way of intuition. The theories below
are discussed because they aim to directly address the central
question.
2.1 Modal Rationalism

In a series of papers (1996, 2002, 2010: Ch. 6) David Chalmers
articulates, defends and responds to a number of objections to the
view that conceivability entails possibility. Chalmers’s account
is not the only account of conceivability in the contemporary
literature. Both Yablo (1993) and Menzies (1998) provide important
accounts of conceivability. The main difference between their accounts
and Chalmers’s is that their views are defenses of evidential
theories as opposed to entailment theories. An evidential
account aims to show how conceivability provides evidence for
possibility. An entailment account goes further and aims to
show how in specific cases conceivability entails possibility.
Evidential accounts face the problems posed by the existence of a
posteriori necessities and the issue of conceiving to the
relevant depth of detail. By contrast, Chalmers’s Modal
Rationalism is an entailment account; and thus must go beyond what
evidential accounts offer. His main positive thesis is:

Weak Modal Rationalism (WMR):

Primary Positive Ideal Conceivability entails Primary
Possibility.

(WMR) is constructed out of three distinctions:

Prima facie vs. Ideal rational reflection.
Positive vs. Negative conceivability.
Primary vs. Secondary
conceivability/possibility.


The first distinction pertains to the issue of what kind of reasoning
has gone into what one has conceived. A prima facie
conception is just a person’s initial reaction to a scenario,
without reasoning further about the scenario. Better reasoning often
gives one reason to doubt a prima facie conception. Ideal
rational reasoning, by contrast, is reasoning that cannot be weakened
by further reasoning. When an entailment link between conceivability
and possibility is to be forged, the kind of reasoning involved has to
be ideal. This distinction is used to deal with the problem of
relevant-depth. At the level of ideal reasoning the relevant-depth of
detail in the scenario has, arguably, been reached.

The second distinction pertains to two distinct ways in which one can
engage in conceiving. Positive conceivability corresponds to actually
constructing a scenario. In such a case one constructs a story in
which a proposition can be verified to be true by the available
details given. The story need not be a complete description
of a scenario, but it must be sufficiently detailed so as to
verify the statement being considered. By contrast, negative
conceivability corresponds to not being able to rule out a
certain statement. Negative conceivability is often weaker than
positive conceivability, since it often derives from ignorance of the
relevant facts. For example, if one does not know that water is
identical to H2O, they may find the statement “water
does not contain hydrogen” conceivable because they cannot rule
out the statement “water does not contain hydrogen” as
being a priori incoherent. By contrast, conceiving of water
without hydrogen in the positive sense requires constructing a
scenario in which water is present without hydrogen at the relevant
depth of detail required to verify the claim. Arguably, that sort of
scenario cannot be constructed.

The third distinction pertains to two distinct ways in which we can
evaluate statements across possible worlds. The distinction between
primary and secondary conceivability/possibility rests on two
independent theories: Epistemic Two-Dimensional Semantics
(E2-D) and Modal Monism (MM). Each of these theories is at
the heart of Chalmers’s impressive contribution to the
epistemology of modality. For an extended discussion of each see
Chalmers (2004, 2010). For discussion of a related account of
two-dimensional semantics see Jackson (1998, 2004). For an extended
more complete discussion of Two-Dimensional Semantics see Schroeter
(2012).

The distinction between primary and secondary conceivability and
possibility is used to overcome the problem posed by the existence of
a posteriori necessities in a way that allows for an
entailment link between conceivability and possibility to be forged.
What follows first is an intuitive account, followed by a
brief technical account of Chalmers’s modal rationalism.

Consider the question: Could water have been something other than
H2O? On (E2-D) there is both a yes answer and a
no answer depending on how we read the question.

The yes answer comes from reading the question as follows:
what would our term “water” have picked out,
were we to have applied it to something that looks like water, but
has a different chemical composition? That is, we can imagine a
substance that looks like water, plays the actual world water-role,
but in fact is some other chemical substance. And, we can imagine
ourselves having used the term “water” to pick out that
substance, rather than H2O. The yes answer comes
from thinking about what “water” would have picked out in
a world where a different substance plays the water-role.

The no answer comes from reading the question as follows:
given what water actually is, what could it have been? We
used the term “water” to pick out a certain substance in
our environment that plays a certain role. Scientists have discovered
that water is identical to H2O. We also have good reason to
believe water is essentially H2O. That is, we hold
that water’s fundamental chemical nature reveals the essence of
what water is. Now if we take the essentialist claim seriously, then
we cannot imagine a world in which water is not H2O because
to imagine water is to imagine H2O. The no answer
comes from thinking about what variations water can undergo, given
what we have discovered about its essence. 

The intuitive explanation is rendered precise through the (E2-D) model
that allows for the construction of an a priori link between
conceivability and possibility by (i) making conceivability and
possibility primarily a property of statements; (ii) distinguishing
two kinds of intensions governing statements; (iii) acknowledging one
space of worlds over which statements are evaluated; and (iv)
distinguishing between two kinds of conceivability and possibility for
statements corresponding to each of the intensions. Primary
conceivability and possibility are then argued to allow for an
entailment between conceivability and possibility.

The distinction between primary and secondary intensions has undergone
several revisions and refinements since Chalmers (1996). It is a
technical distinction. For the purposes of discussion and
understanding, here, I will be presenting a brief formal account of
the distinction with respect to the core problem posed by a
posteriori necessities. Where S is a statement the
distinction between primary and secondary intensions is the
following:

 The primary intension of S is a function from scenarios
to truth-values. The primary intension of S is determined by
asking an actual world evaluation question: If the scenario
w turns out to be the actual world, what is the truth-value
of S in w?
 The secondary intension of S is a function from worlds
to truth-values. The secondary intension of S is given by
asking a counterfactual world evaluation question: Given that
w is the actual world, what is the truth-value of S
in a distinct world w*?


With the distinction in place the critical question is: how does the
distinction between primary and secondary intensions ameliorate the
problem posed by the existence of a posteriori necessities so
as to enable an entailment between conceivability and possibility? To
show how the distinction ameliorates the problem, consider the
following example concerning the identity of Hesperus and Phosphorus.
Assume, as it is actually the case, that:

“Hesperus” is a name of the planet Venus, it was
introduced by the description H1H1H_1 = the brightest star seen in the
morning. The name “Hesperus” is a rigid designator (it
picks out the same thing in all possible worlds where it has
reference).
“Phosphorus” is a name of the planet Venus, it was
introduced by the description P1P1P_1 = the brightest star seen in the
evening. The name “Phosphorus” is a rigid designator (it
picks out the same thing in all possible worlds where it has
reference).
It was an empirical discovery that Hesperus = Phosphorus.
It is metaphysically necessary that Hesperus = Phosphorus, since
an identity statement between rigid designators captures a
metaphysically necessary identity claim. In addition, this
metaphysical necessity can only be known a posteriori,
because Hesperus = Phosphorus is only knowable a
posteriori.


Now suppose a thinker that knows that Hesperus = Phosphorus aims to
conceive of a scenario SSS in which Hesperus ≠≠\neq Phosphorus in
order to determine whether it is possible that Hesperus ≠≠\neq
Phosphorus. In constructing SSS they imagine a scenario in which a
planet takes one orbital path and another planet takes a distinct
orbital path. Question: Is SSS a situation in which one has
conceived of Hesperus being non-identical to Phosphorus? According to
Kripke the answer is no, because in SSS one has simply
conceived of a scenario in which our ordinary means of access to the
referent of “Hesperus” and “Phosphorus” are
occupied by distinct planets. These two planets cannot be Hesperus and
Phosphorus, because Hesperus = Phosphorus necessarily.

By contrast, the story that weak modal rationalism offers is the
following.

When constructing SSS we have two options. We can either construct
SSS using the names “Hesperus” and
“Phosphorus” or we can use the descriptions H1H1H_1 and
P1P1P_1. If we use the names and take into consideration the fact that
Hesperus = Phosphorus, then we must come to the conclusion, as Kripke
does, that SSS is not a situation in which Hesperus ≠≠\neq
Phosphorus. However, if we use the descriptions H1H1H_1 and P1P1P_1
and ask ourselves the question “what in a given possible world
answers to these descriptions?” we may find out that H1H1H_1 and
P1P1P_1 are satisfied by two distinct planets. Why? Because it is not
necessary that H1=P1H1=P1H_1 = P_1. There are possible worlds in which the
brightest star seen in the morning is not identical to the brightest
star seen in the evening. In short, the fact that “Hesperus =
Phosphorus” is necessary and knowable only a posteriori
does not block the a priori conceivability of “Hesperus
≠≠\neq Phosphorus” when we conceive of things only using
H1H1H_1 and P1P1P_1, the descriptions we used to fix the reference of
“Hesperus” and “Phosphorus” in the actual
world. When we conceive of a scenario in which H1H1H_1 and P1P1P_1 are
satisfied by two distinct planets, we have conceived of a scenario in
which Hesperus ≠≠\neq Phosphorus. The idea is that conceiving with
primary intensions requires that we ask the question: 

could it have turned out that the brightest star seen in the
morning is not the same star as the brightest one seen in the
evening?


This question is distinct from the question: 

given that Hesperus = Phosphorus, could it have turned out that
Hesperus is not Phosphorus?


The former question concerns primary conceivability, the latter
concerns secondary conceivability. 

With the distinction between primary and secondary intensions in
place, Chalmers argues that while primary conceivability does not
entail secondary possibility because of a posteriori
necessities, primary conceivability under the right
circumstances—positive ideal rational reflection—entails
primary possibility.
2.2 Critical Questions for Conceivability

Conceivability accounts face a set of general critical questions.

The Connection Question: How is conceivability connected to
possibility? Given that modality is mind-independent and
conceivability is mind-dependent, how are the two connected such that
conceivability provides evidence of possibility? The question becomes
clear when one draws a contrast with perception. Perception, such as
vision, generally has a connection to the objects that one perceives.
And it is through the causal connection that one can argue that
perception provides one with justification for believing something
about their environment. By contrast, if possible worlds are causally
isolated from us, how does mind-dependent conceivability provide one
with justification for believing that something is mind-independently
possible?

The Dependence Question: Suppose that conceivability does
provide justification for believing that something is possible. Does
it succeed in doing so simply because one possesses a distinct kind of
modal or non-modal knowledge that allows for conceivability to operate
so as to produce justification? For example, does conceivability guide
one to the belief that a round square is impossible simply because one
knows what squares and circles are, and by examining their definition
one can arrive safely at the conclusion that such objects are
impossible? Similarly, does one simply find water in the absence of
hydrogen possible because one either suppresses the knowledge that
water contains hydrogen or one does not know that water does contain
hydrogen? The dependence question is important because part of the
epistemology of modality is concerned with the question of modal
architecture/epistemic priority: what is the source of modal
knowledge? Is conceivability an ultimate source of modal
knowledge, or is it a derivative source of modal knowledge, dependent
on another source, such as knowledge of essence and essential
properties?

The Conditions Question: suppose that conceivability does
provide justification for believing that something is possible. Does
conceivability ever entail possibility? If it does, what are the
conditions one must be in for conceivability to entail possibility? Do
humans ever instantiate those conditions? For example, in the case of
Chalmers’s weak modal rationalism one might agree that
conceivability entails possibility in the sense he defends, but
question whether humans are ever in the position of ideal rational
reflection. See Worley (2003) for discussion.

The Direction Question: There are two directions in which
conceivability can be discussed.

(CP) If PPP is
conceivable, then PPP is possible. 
(INCP) If PPP is
inconceivable, then PPP is impossible. 


It is theoretically possible that the two theses are logically
independent. And that one is more reliable than the other. For
example, one could argue that inconceivability is a reliable guide to
impossibility, while conceivability is a not a reliable guide to
possibility.

The Relational Question: what are the relations between the
epistemic domain of a priori and a posteriori
knowledge and the metaphysical domain of necessary, essential, and
contingent truths? That is, independently of human cognition, what
relations obtain between the epistemological and the metaphysical
categories?
2.3 The Principles of Possibility

Following the work of Benacerraf (1973) in the philosophy of
mathematics, Christopher Peacocke (1997, 1999) develops an
epistemology of modality aimed at solving the integration challenge
for modality. In general, for a given domain of discourse DDD the
integration challenge for DDD is the challenge of integrating the
metaphysics/semantics of DDD with an epistemology of DDD that
ratifies our knowledge of the domain. On the assumption that moderate
realism, which maintains that modal truths are mind-independent, is
true for modal claims, the integration challenge for modality is to
reconcile the mind-independence of modal claims with an epistemology
that shows how we can know modal claims even though human thinkers do
not bear causal relations to the relevant truth-makers for modal
truths. That is, Peacocke aims to solve the causal-isolation problem.
He believes that the best way to solve the problem is to adopt
moderate rationalism, which 

seeks to explain cases of a priori knowledge by appeal to the
nature of the concepts that feature in contents that are known a
priori. (Peacocke 2004: 199)


In pursuing moderate rationalism for modality Peacocke develops the
Principles of Possibility account.

The central commitment of Peacocke’s account is that for a
subject to possess the concept of metaphysical modality is for that
subject to have tacit knowledge of a specific set of Principles of
Possibility that govern their understanding and evaluation of modal
discourse. An individual thinker’s tacit knowledge of the
Principles of Possibility and the role these principles play
in their modal discourse is modeled on the way in which principles of
grammaticality govern how normal adult speakers understand and
evaluate grammaticality in their native language. The analogy is as
follows.

 Grammaticality
 i.
“Mary school
went” is ungrammatical. 
 ii.
“Jasvir drove her
car” is grammatical. 


XXX understands, evaluates, and makes grammatical claims, such as
(i) and (ii), because XXX has tacit knowledge of Principles of
Grammaticality G1…GnG1…GnG_1 \ldots G_n in virtue of which grammatical
claims, such as (i) and (ii), are understood, evaluated and hold
true.

 Modality
 iii.
It is possible for the
chair located by the wall to be located in the corner.

 iv.
It is necessary that
any specific human, such as Sheba, is a member of a biological
kind. 


XXX understands, evaluates, and is capable of making modal claims,
such as (iii) and (iv), because XXX has tacit knowledge of
Principles of Possibility in virtue of which modal claims,
such as (iii) and (iv), are understood, evaluated, and hold true.

Some central claims of the theory are:

A native adult English speaker can be said to know English
grammar, and reliably judge that a sentence SSS of English is
grammatical even though they are unable to state explicitly the rules
of English grammar that render SSS grammatical.
A plausible explanation of how a native speaker of a language can
be credited with making reliable and knowledgeable claims about the
grammaticality of sentences in their native language is in virtue of
the fact that they tacitly draw on and know the very principles of
grammar that render sentences of the language grammatical. These
principles and rules of grammar are for the most part not explicitly
expressible by the subject, but they are tacitly known.
Likewise, a person that possesses the concept of metaphysical
modality tacitly knows a set of Principles of Possibility in
virtue of which any given metaphysically modal judgment holds
true.
The Principles of Possibility are the principles that the
subject tacitly draws on in making, evaluating and understanding
metaphysically modal judgments.
The Principles of Possibility are tacitly known, rather
than explicitly known. 


Much of Peacocke’s project consists in articulating and
defending the Principles of Possibility. (For critical
discussion of the Principles of Possibility approach see the
symposium on Being Known in Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 64(3).) In general, there are two main
critical issues that surround the Principles of Possibility.
On the one hand, there are issues about circularity. It appears that
at several places the conception potentially opens itself up to a
charge of circularity in virtue of using one kind of modality to
explain another kind of modality. For example, genuine possibility is
explained via admissibility of assignment. However,
admissibility itself is a modal notion. Thus, one could
question whether the modality involved in admissibility is
problematic. Peacocke (1999) presents several responses to possible
circularity objections. On the other hand, there are issues
surrounding the kind of modality that is embraced by the approach. It
appears that Peacocke’s account acknowledges an actualist
conception of modality rather than a possibilist conception. An
actualist maintains that objects, properties and relations that
actually exist constitute the basis for the construction of all
possible worlds. A possibilist denies this, maintaining that in some
possible worlds there are objects, properties, or relations that are
not found in the actual world. One might worry that the principles
articulated in the theory limit the approach to an actualist ontology.
Peacocke (2002b) presents an extension of his view, which aims at
accounting for some possibilist claims.

More recently, Sonia Roca-Royes (2010) draws attention to a distinct
kind of circularity problem she calls the revenge of the
integration challenge. The basic problem is that on
Peacocke’s epistemology of modality our knowledge of modality is
parasitic on our knowledge of constitutive principles, whether these
principles are implicitly or explicitly known. We determine that
something is possible or necessary for an entity in part through our
knowledge of what is constitutive of the entity. That is, what it is
to be the kind of thing in question. For example, if we know that
being human is a constitutive property of a given human, such as Tom,
then we can come to know that it is impossible for Tom to be
a zebra, but that it is possible for Tom to be born somewhat
later than he was actually born. As a consequence of this relation
between the role of constitutive principles and our evaluation of
specific modal claims for the purposes of generating modal knowledge,
a comprehensive account of modal knowledge is incomplete without a
picture of how we come to know the relevant constitutive principles
involved in our evaluations of modal knowledge. Thus, the integration
challenge returns when we ask the question: how do we arrive at our
knowledge, implicit or explicit, of the constitutive principles that
play a role in explaining our modal knowledge? This question is
important because arguably in the case of grammaticality there is an
innate universal grammar that aids in the acquisition of a local
grammar, such as English; by contrast, in the case of modality it
could be that no innate universal modal principles exist. Peacocke
himself notes the worry, 


the provision of a general theory of the constitutive, as opposed to
the modal, seems to me to be an urgent task for philosophy. We
certainly do not want all the initial puzzlement about modality simply
to be transferred to the domain of the constitutive. Only a
satisfactory general theory of the constitutive, and an attendant
epistemology, can allay this concern. (Peacocke 1999: 166, fn.37)

2.4 Essentialist Deduction

E.J. Lowe (2008a, 2012) and Bob Hale (2013) have independently
developed accounts of the epistemology of modality based on
metaphysical essentialism. The two core theses of metaphysical
essentialism are: (i) entities have essential properties or
essences that are not merely dependent on language, and (ii) not all
necessary truths capture an essential truth or the essence of an
entity. Although their views differ at crucial points in the epistemic
landscape, the program they share maintains the following:

Metaphysical Grounding:

The essential properties or essences of entities are the metaphysical
ground of metaphysical modality. When we look for an explanation of
why something is metaphysically possible or necessary we ultimately
look to the essential properties or essences of the entities
involved.

Epistemic Guide:

The fundamental pathway to acquiring knowledge of metaphysical
modality derives from knowledge of essential properties or essences of
the entities involved. When we look for an explanation of how we can
know metaphysical modality we ultimately look to our knowledge of
essential properties or essences as the basis upon which we make
inferences to metaphysical modality. 

As a general point, it is important to note that both Lowe and Hale
can be taken to endorse symmetric essentialism, which is the
view that essence is both the ground and the epistemic pathway to
modal knowledge. This view is to be contrasted with asymmetric
essentialism, which holds that while essence is the ground of
modality, it is not the epistemic pathway. An asymmetric essentialist
holds that our knowledge of necessity is prior to our knowledge of
essence. And that it is through a special investigation of necessities
that we come to possess knowledge of essence by modal sorting.

From a metaphysical point of view both Lowe and Hale share the view
that the essential properties of an entity are distinct from the mere
metaphysical necessities that are true of the entity. This position is
inspired by the work of Fine (1994) on the relation between essence
and metaphysical modality. Fine argues against modal conceptions of
essence on which it is claimed that an essential property of an
object is simply any property the object has in all possible worlds in
which it exists. He offers the following argument against the
view:

Socrates is not essentially a member of the set only containing
Socrates, abbreviated as: {Socrates}. It is not part of the essence of
Socrates that he is a member of {Socrates}. What Socrates
fundamentally is does not include being a member of {Socrates} through
his real nature. Socrates’s real nature is that of being a
human. Being human, by itself, has no relation automatically to being
the only member of a certain kind of set.
In every possible world in which Socrates exists, sets also exist,
since mathematical entities exist in all possible worlds. Thus
{Socrates} exists in every possible world in which Socrates exists. As
a consequence, Socrates has the property of being a member of
{Socrates} in every possible world in which Socrates exists.
It is false that EEE is an essential property of xxx if and
only if xxx has EEE in every possible world in which xxx
exists.


Simply put, essential properties are more fine-grained than necessary
properties. As a consequence, we cannot simply take essential
properties or essences to be what an object has in every possible
world in which it exists.

From an epistemological point of view both Lowe and Hale provide a
picture of our knowledge of modality that sharply contrasts with
accounts that take conceivability or intuition to be our fundamental
source of justification for believing metaphysically modal truths. The
core contrast, for example with conceivability, is that modal
knowledge derives from essentialist knowledge, and that conceivability
is explained as being successful only in virtue of our possession of
essentialist knowledge that is unpacked in a conceivability exercise.


For the purposes of clarifying his approach, Lowe explains our
knowledge of metaphysical necessities through the following
procedure:

First, we arrive at a real definition of the entities in
question, such as ellipses and cones, or statues and lumps of clay. A
real definition of an entity or kind of entity either
specifies what the entity is or what the kind is. This can be done
either through a standard definition of the thing, or through a
generating principle. Next, from an understanding of the relevant real
definitions of the entities in question, we arrive at an understanding
of their essential properties or essences, such as the essence of an
ellipse, a cone, a statue, or a lump of clay.
Second, we reason our way to a conclusion about what is
compatible or incompatible with the relevant essential properties or
essences.
 Third, using a principle linking essential properties
and essences with metaphysical necessity and possibility, we conclude
that a certain proposition, derived from claims involving the
essential properties or essences of the relevant entities in question,
is metaphysically necessary or possible.


Both Lowe and Hale offer an account that aims to validate the
following pattern of inference:

The real definition of XXXs is CCC.


therefore

The essence of XXXs is CCC.
If the essence of XXXs is CCC, and RRR is a property
incompatible with CCC, then it is metaphysically impossible for
XXXs to have property RRR.
CCC is incompatible with RRR.


therefore

It is metaphysically impossible for XXXs to have property
RRR.


For example, the real definition of a circle is that it is a
set of points in a plane equidistant from a given point. As a
consequence, the essence of a circle is that a circle is a set of
points in a plane equidistant from a given point. The property of
being (a circle) an entity that is a set of points in a plane
equidistant from a given point is incompatible with the property of
being (a rectangle) a four-sided closed figure consisting of
four right angles. Thus, given the essence of circles, it is
metaphysically impossible for a circle to have the property
that defines rectangles.
2.5 Critical Questions for Essentialism

Essentialism faces a set of critical questions.

What is the fundamental epistemic relation that essentialism is
based on? Is it knowledge of essence, justification for beliefs about
essence, or understanding of essence that is the basic epistemic
relation?
 What is the essence of an entity? Are essences the sum of their
essential properties? Are essences distinct existences from those
things that they are essences of?
 What is an essential property, in addition to being a property
that an entity has in every possible world where it exits?
 Given that there are mathematical kinds, such as circles and
numbers, natural kinds, such as water and lightning, and social kinds,
such as chairs and paintings, how is it that we can come to know the
essence of these distinct kinds of things? Is it the same in all of
these cases?
Do all entities have exactly the same kind of essence? Do social
kinds have the same kind of real nature or essence that natural kinds
and mathematical kinds possess?
 For every entity or kind of entity are its essential properties
or essence known a priori or are some known a
posteriori?
 How is the connection or bridge principle between essence and
modality known?


These questions allow for a critical examination of essentialist type
accounts. For example, concerning (i), Vaidya (2010) defends an
understanding-based account of essence, while Lowe and Hale defend a
knowledge-based, or what is known as an essentialist-k style theory.
Concerning (vii), Horvath (2014) has argued that Lowe’s account
of essentialist-k theory suffers from a prima facie problem.
An outline of the problem is as follows:

For SSS to know that it is possible for eee to be FFF, SSS
must know: (i) either some essential properties of eee or the
essence of eee, and (ii) the bridge principle (B), that if
HHH is the essence of eee, and FFF is
incompatible with HHH, then it is impossible for eee
to be FFF.
 Assume that SSS possesses essentialist knowledge concerning
eee. Question: how can SSS know (B)?
 (B) can be known either through (i) intuition, (ii) conceptual
analysis, (iii) conceivability, or (iv) via counterfactual
imaginability.
Lowe denies that (i)–(iv) are valid ways of knowing in the
epistemology of modality. (Lowe 2012: Section 1)
Lowe argues for the no-further-entity account of essence on which
an essential property or an essence of an entity is no further entity
over and above the entity it is an essence of.
Given (3)–(5), one can argue that it is unlikely that Lowe
can provide an account of our knowledge of possibility on the basis of
our knowledge of essence.


The core problem is that by saying there is a single source for modal
knowledge—via knowledge of essence—Lowe has potentially
undermined his ability to provide an account of how one can know (B).
One route that is plausible is the following. Argue that (i)
conceptual analysis is how we come to know (B), (ii) in all cases of
modal knowledge we reason by way of essence, and (iii) as a
consequence the epistemology of modality is non-uniform. However, Lowe
cannot adopt this route, since he has ruled out knowledge of modality
by (i)–(iv). In contrast to Lowe’s account, it is possible
for Hale to offer an account of (B) through the use of conceptual
analysis or through a treatment of the real definitions of essence and
metaphysical modality.

Finally, one important issue that separates Lowe’s account from
Hale’s is Lowe’s commitment to epistemic essentialism,
which Hale does not endorse. Lowe articulates his epistemic
essentialism in his (2008a).


[E]ssence precedes existence. And by this I mean
that the former precedes the latter both ontologically and
epistemically. That is to say, on the one hand, I mean that
it is a precondition of something’s existing that its
essence—along with the essences of other existing
things—does not preclude its existence. And, on the other hand
… I mean that we can in general know the essence of
something XXX antecedently to knowing whether or not XXX exists.
Otherwise, it seems to me, we could never find out that
something exists. For how could we find out that something,
XXX, exists before knowing what XXX is—before
knowing, that is, what it is whose existence we have
supposedly discovered? (Lowe 2008a: 40)


The epistemic position can be properly captured as:

Epistemic Essentialism:

knowledge of essence must precede knowledge of existence.


And it can be contrasted with two distinct views.

Epistemic Existentialism:

knowledge of existence must precede knowledge of essence.


Epistemic Entanglement:

knowledge of essence neither necessarily precedes knowledge
of essence nor is necessarily preceded by knowledge of
existence. 
3. Counterfactual Theories
3.1 Counterfactuals and Modal Knowledge

Williamson (2005, 2007a,b), Hill (2006), Kroedel (2012), and Kment
(2014) have all offered counterfactual theories of modal knowledge.
While the four accounts share formal similarities, in this section the
focus will be on Williamson’s account. He partially describes
his project in the epistemology of metaphysical modality through
discussion of the philosophy of philosophy.

Humans evolved under no pressure to do philosophy. Presumably,
survival and reproduction in the Stone Age depended little on
philosophical prowess, dialectical skill being no more effective then
than now as a seduction technique and in any case dependent on a
hearer already equipped to recognize it. Any cognitive capacity we
have for philosophy is a more or less accidental byproduct of other
developments. Nor are psychological dispositions that are
non-cognitive outside philosophy likely suddenly to become cognitive
within it. We should expect cognitive capacities used in philosophy to
be cases of general cognitive capacities used in ordinary life,
perhaps trained, developed, and systematically applied in various
special ways, just as the cognitive capacities that we use in
mathematics and natural science are rooted in more primitive cognitive
capacities to perceive, imagine, correlate, reason, discuss… In
particular, a plausible non-skeptical epistemology of metaphysical
modality should subsume our capacity to discriminate metaphysical
possibilities from metaphysical impossibilities under more general
cognitive capacities used in general life. I will argue that the
ordinary cognitive capacity to handle counterfactual carries with it
the cognitive capacity to handle metaphysical modality. (2007b: 136)


Williamson’s counterfactual theory allows for the construction
of an abductive anti-skeptical argument against Nozick’s (2003)
evolutionary-based skepticism about our knowledge of metaphysical
modality.

Skepticism about knowledge of counterfactual conditionals is
implausible, since knowledge of counterfactuals is pervasive for human
decision-making, planning, and theory construction.
Metaphysical possibility and necessity are logically equivalent to
counterfactual conditionals. 
Skepticism about knowledge of metaphysical modality
independently of skepticism about counterfactual conditionals
is uneconomical and implausible, given that the capacity to handle
counterfactuals in reasoning brings along with it the capacity to
handle metaphysical modality.


therefore

Skepticism about knowledge of metaphysical possibility and
necessity is implausible.


The key theses of Williamson’s counterfactual theory are:

Logical Equivalence:

metaphysical possibility and necessity can be proven to be logically
equivalent to counterfactual conditionals. 

Epistemic Pathway:

counterfactual reasoning in imagination through the method of
counterfactual development can provide one with justified beliefs or
knowledge about metaphysical possibility and necessity. 

Williamson presents his proof of the logical equivalence between
counterfactuals and metaphysical modality by engaging the work of
Robert Stalnaker and David Lewis. However, he does not commit himself
to any specific account of the truth-conditions for counterfactual
conditionals. The basic idea he employs from Stalnaker and Lewis is
the following:

Where “A>BA>BA \gt B” express “If it were that AAA,
it would be that BBB”, (CC) gives the truth conditions for
subjunctive conditionals: A subjunctive conditional “A>CA>CA \gt
C” is true at a possible world www just in case either (i)
AAA is true at no possible world or (ii) some possible world at
which both AAA and CCC are true is more similar to www
than any possible world at which both AAA and ¬C¬C\neg C are true.


With (CC) and “⊥” as a symbol that stands for
contradiction, Williamson proves the following logical
equivalences between counterfactuals and metaphysical modality:

(NEC) □A◻A\Box A if and
only if (¬A>⊥)(¬A>⊥)(\neg A \gt \perp)


It is necessary that AAA if and only if were ¬A¬A\neg A true, a
contradiction would follow.

(POS) ◊A◊A\Diamond A if
and only if ¬(A>⊥)¬(A>⊥)\neg(A \gt \perp)


It is possible that AAA if and only if it is not the case that
were AAA true, a contradiction would follow.

The basic epistemic idea is that a justified belief about necessity
and possibility can be arrived at through a counterfactual
development, in imagination, of the supposition that ¬A¬A\neg A,
for the case of necessity, and the supposition that
AAA, for the case of possibility.

Consider the following example from Williamson.


Suppose that you are in the mountains. As the sun melts the ice, rocks
embedded in it are loosened and crash down the slope. You notice one
rock slide into a bush. You wonder where it would have ended if the
bush had not been there. A natural way to answer the question is by
visualizing the rock sliding without the bush there, then bouncing
down the slope into the lake at the bottom. Under suitable background
conditions, you thereby come to know the counterfactual:

(*) If the bush had not
been there, the rock would have ended in the lake. 


(2007b: 142)


According to his theory the general procedure we use to arrive at (*)
is the following:


[O]ne supposes the antecedent and develops the supposition, adding
further judgments within the supposition by reasoning, offline
predictive mechanisms, and other offline judgments. The imagining may
but need not be perceptual imagining. All of one’s background
beliefs are available from within the scope of the supposition as a
description of one’s actual circumstances for the purposes of
comparison with the counterfactual circumstances… Some but not
all of one’s background knowledge and beliefs are also available
within the scope of the supposition as a description of the
counterfactual circumstances, according to complex criteria… To
a first approximation: one asserts the counterfactual conditional if
and only if the development [of the antecedent] eventually leads one
to add the consequent. (2007b: 152–153)


From (*) and (POS), one can reason their way to the modal claim (**)
by checking whether the development of the counterfactual yields a
contradiction.

(**)It is possible for
the rock to have ended in the lake.


The counterfactual theory, thus, holds the following.

In the case of necessity: if a robust and good counterfactual
development of ¬A¬A\neg A yields a contradiction, we are justified in
asserting that AAA is necessary. And, if a robust and good
counterfactual development of ¬A¬A\neg A does not yield a
contradiction, we are justified in denying that AAA is
necessary.

In the case of possibility: we are justified in asserting
that AAA is possible when a robust and good counterfactual
development of the supposition that AAA does not yield a
contradiction. And we are justified in denying that AAA is
possible when a robust and good counterfactual development of AAA
yields a contradiction.

An important component of Williamson’s account derives from his
commentary on the traditional distinction between a priori
and a posteriori knowledge. Contemporary theorists often
maintain that what separates the a priori from the a
posteriori is that in the former case experience only plays an
enabling role—a role in enabling possession of a
concept for an individual thinker—while in the latter case
experience plays not only an enabling role, but an evidential
role—the justification for a claim involving the concept
requires appeal to experience by the thinker making the claim.
Williamson maintains that several instances of counterfactual
knowledge (the route by which we acquire modal knowledge) will be
neither a priori nor a posteriori in any deep or
insightful sense. Rather, he acknowledges an extensive category of
armchair knowledge under which many cases of our knowledge of
metaphysical modality would fall.


We may acknowledge an extensive category of armchair
knowledge, in the sense of knowledge in which experience plays no
strictly evidential role, while remembering that such knowledge may
not fit the stereotype of the a priori, because the
contribution of experience was far more than enabling. (2007b: 169)



He defines armchair knowledge as knowledge that is either
strictly a priori knowledge or not strictly a priori
or a posteriori. In the latter case, the knowledge is such
that experience plays no strictly evidential role, but at the same
time the role of experience does not fit the model of a
priori knowledge, since far too much experience played a role in
enabling concept possession and reliable use. Given Williamson’s
acknowledgement of armchair knowledge as a domain into which many
instances of modal knowledge fall, it is best to describe his view as
being an armchair account of modal knowledge, as opposed to a
strictly rationalist or non-rationalist account.
3.2 Critical Questions for Counterfactual Imaginability

There are at least four kinds of critical questions that one can ask
about counterfactual imaginability as a theory of our knowledge of
metaphysical modality.

The Question of Dependence: Does the counterfactual account
of our knowledge of metaphysical modality depend on any kind of modal
knowledge? If so, is that dependence problematic? Williamson argues
that we can come to possess modal knowledge, such as that it is
possible for a rock located at LLL to be located nearby at L∗L∗L^*.
This knowledge can be arrived at through counterfactual reasoning in
imagination. However, one might ask does this counterfactual reasoning
depend itself on any kind of modal knowledge or essentialist
knowledge? Does one need to know in some problematic sense what
essentially a rock is or what is possible for a rock, for one to
reason counterfactually and correctly to the conclusion that a rock
located at LLL could be at L∗L∗L^* without contradiction?

The Question of Imaginative Engagement: Since the
counterfactual account of our knowledge of metaphysical modality
depends on counterfactual reasoning in imagination, what are the
details of how the counterfactual imagination works? What can we learn
about the conditions under which the counterfactual imagination is
fallible or likely to be successful? What guides our counterfactual
development? Why are we prone to imagine things unfolding in one
manner rather than another? For example, when we generally imagine
where a rock would have landed had a bush not been in its path, we
don’t typically imagine that the rock would have suddenly
reversed direction from its current path. More over: what epistemic
relevance does the fact that our imagination takes certain directions
rather than others have on the epistemic status of our counterfactual
development of a subjunctive conditional?

The Question of Scope: Given that the counterfactual account
of our knowledge of metaphysical modality aims to capture metaphysical
modality, does it really do so for the wide range of metaphysically
modal claims that are known? Ordinary modal claims, such as that a
bush located at LLL, could be located at L∗L∗L^*, appear to be
non-problematic for the very reasons Williamson offers. However, can
the account also provide us with modal knowledge of extraordinary
modal claims, such as that it is possible for there to be a physical
duplicate of a human that is not conscious? If the theory can only
deliver knowledge of ordinary, as opposed to extraordinary, modal
knowledge, is this a problem?

The Question of Adequacy: Williamson’s account aims to
explain our knowledge of modality via our general capacity to handle
counterfactuals. One critical question is whether the strategy is
explanatorily adequate. For example, Malmgren (2011: 307) questions
Williamson’s assumption that we do have a general capacity to
handle counterfactuals:


Is it legitimate to suppose that we do have a general
capacity to handle counterfactuals? I will argue that it is not; more
precisely, that it is not legitimate to suppose that we have a general
capacity at the appropriate level of implementation.


Malmgren’s argument aims to show that even though there might be
good reasons to reject rationalism about knowledge of metaphysical
possibility, Williamson’s argument against rationalism fails.
The core of her argument is as follows:

Let rationalism be the view that our knowledge of
metaphysical modality is a priori and that we possess a
special faculty for acquiring knowledge of metaphysical modality.
The counterfactual theory of modal knowledge that Williamson
defends can be seen to be an attempt to explain modal knowledge in
terms of counterfactual knowledge so that there is no need to posit a
special faculty that provides us with a priori justification
for knowledge of metaphysical modality. The counterfactual theory
provides an armchair account of our knowledge of metaphysical
modality, and not a strictly rationalist account.
However, the appeal to the logical equivalence between
counterfactuals and metaphysical modality does not show that there is
no special-faculty for reasoning about metaphysical
modality at a lower level of implementation that is a
priori across a range of philosophically interesting cases
involving metaphysical modality.


therefore

The argument against rationalism, via the appeal to our general
capacity to handle counterfactuals, fails.


The core of Malmgren’s argument rests on (3). She offers several
reasons, which are paraphrased below.

There is a trivial and uncontroversial sense in which we have the
capacity to handle counterfactuals. This trivial and uncontroversial
sense does not compete with rationalist explanations of our knowledge
of metaphysical modality at the same level of explanation. (2011:
309)
 A general capacity to handle counterfactuals can be implemented
in distinct ways even within the same subject. (2011:
309–310)
 If there are multiple mechanisms and ways in which our general
capacity to handle counterfactuals can be realized, then it is
theoretically possible that in the case of metaphysical modality there
is a more specific mechanism at play, and that it provides a
priori justification over a range of philosophically interesting
cases, such as whether it is metaphysically possible for a person to
have a justified true belief without knowledge. (2011: 310)
 Most cognitive scientists working on the evaluation of
counterfactuals agree that counterfactual evaluation is far from a
unified affair—it involves many different capacities and/or
mechanisms. Which mechanism gets recruited in a specific case appears
to depend, among other things, on the content and complexity of the
given counterfactual claim, and the background beliefs of the subject.
(2011: 311)
Counterfactual judgments are heterogeneous in the following
respects. Some judgments are capable of being justified a
priori and others are capable of only being justified a
posteriori. For example: “If I had made the supper it would
have been inedible” can only be justified a posteriori,
while “If twelve people had been killed more than eleven people
would have been killed” can be justified a priori.
(2011: 315).


Malmgren’s argument questions the adequacy of whether or not a
general capacity to evaluate counterfactuals can provide a complete
explanation of our knowledge of metaphysical modality.
4. Non-Rationalist Accounts

Non-rationalist accounts of the epistemology of modality aim to
explain modal knowledge through mechanisms other than that afforded by
a priori reasoning. For example, Carrie Jenkins (2010) offers
a non-rationalist account of conceivability grounded in a theory of
concepts, and Peter Kung (2010) has developed a sensory-based theory
of imagination as a guide to possibility. In general, there are two
independent threads of thought that motivate non-rationalism about the
epistemology of modality. On the one hand, there is the perceived
failure of rationalist attempts to provide a comprehensive account of
modal knowledge. Rebecca Hanrahan (2009) and Sonia Roca-Royes (2010,
2011a,b, 2012) provide a treatment of some of the problems with modal
rationalism, moderate rationalism, and counterfactual accounts of
modal knowledge. On the other hand, some theorists have developed, in
detail, non-rationalist theories of the epistemology of modality. For
example, Crawford Elder (2005) defends an empiricist account of our
knowledge of essence through the test of flanking uniformities.
Stephen Biggs’s (2011) defends an abductive account of modality
where inference to the best explanation plays a central role in how we
acquire and account for modal knowledge. Ásta
Sveinsdóttir (2013) defends a conferralist theory of our
knowledge of essence, on which essence of an object is not
mind-independent, but rather conferred by our practices and
consideration of hypothetical scenarios. Amie Thomasson (2013)
articulates and defends modal normativism, on which modal discourse is
not to be taken as being descriptive. That is modal claims don’t
describe modal reality, rather they are normative, and about how we
are supposed to use language. Thomas Holden (2014), in articulating
Hume’s view of absolute necessity, defends a modal expressivist
reading of him. On this account modal discourse expresses the limits
of what we can find imaginable and unimaginable. Robert Fischer
(forthcoming) defends a theory-based account of the epistemology of
modality, on which our modal knowledge primarily derives from the
theories both modal and non-modal that are justified through inference
to the best explanation. In the next two sections I will discuss in
more detail the non-rationalist program known as modalism,
articulated and defended by Otávio Bueno and Scott Shalkowski,
and the similarity-based view articulated and defended by
Sonia Roca-Royes.
4.1 Modalism

Bueno and Shalkowski (2014) defend modalism about the metaphysics and
epistemology of modality. For an extended examination of modalism see
their (2009) and (2013). For the purposes of the epistemology of
modality, modalism maintains the following:

Alethic metaphysical modality is primitive.
 Modality does not reduce to quantification over possible worlds.
That is, “it is possible that PPP” does not mean that
“PPP is true in some possible world”, and “it is
necessary that PPP” does not mean that “PPP is true in
all possible worlds”.
The theory does not appeal to or use possible worlds.
An empiricist-friendly approach to the epistemology of modality
does not depend on conceivability or the postulation of possible
worlds.


The metaphysical point of departure for modalism comes from
understanding why the attempt to reduce modality to possible worlds
semantics might be unacceptable. Consider the following two claims
about the conditions under which a statement of possibility and
necessity are true:

(P) PPP is possible
when PPP is true in some world.
(N) PPP is necessary
when PPP is true in all worlds.


(P) and (N) give the wrong truth conditions when we allow worlds to
include both possible and impossible worlds. The problem is that (P)
would supposedly allow for a statement to be true even if it was only
true at an impossible world, while (N) would force it to be the case
that a statement is necessary only when it is true in all worlds, both
possible and impossible. This forces the appropriate amendment:
restrict “world” in (P) and (N) to make reference only to
possible worlds. Hold as a background assumption that there are no
impossible worlds. This yields the following result:

(P*) PPP is possible
when PPP is true in some possible world.
(N*) PPP is necessary
when PPP is true in all possible worlds.


However, one might object that an account of the truth conditions for
possibility and necessity so described is really circular or a
non-genuine reduction of modality to something genuinely non-modal.
Modalism is in part motivated by the idea that modality is primitive,
and that reasoning through such reductions as offered by (P) and (N)
to (P*) and (N*) reveals why.

Another point of departure for the modalist program in the
epistemology of modality is that because there is no postulation of
possible worlds that serve as the truth-makers for claims about
possibility and necessity there is no worry that in knowing modal
truths we must come into contact with privileged objects that are not
thought to be accessible to human minds. In sum, the causal isolation
problem is avoided, since there are no causally isolated possible
worlds upon which modal truths depend.

The epistemic component of modalism begins with:

(INC) If a set of
claims is inconsistent, then it is impossible for those claims to be
jointly satisfied.


Two basic epistemic principles are involved in the construction of the
account:

(E1) The stronger the
claim, the stronger the grounds required for rational belief in the
claim.
(E2) Any grounds
sufficient for rational belief in a claim are sufficient for rational
belief in a weaker claim entailed by the stronger claim.


Intuitively Bueno and Shalkowski hold that a claim PPP is
stronger than a claim QQQ just in case PPP says more
about the world than QQQ does. For example, “snow is white and
grass is green” is stronger than “snow is white
or grass is green”, since the former requires that two things
about the world be true, while the latter only requires that at least
one thing about the world be true. Now, since the claim that PPP is
actual is stronger than the claim that PPP is
possible, one is always in a position to from a rational
belief that PPP is possible when PPP is actual. However, this
leaves open two questions: How can we know non-actual possibilities?
How can we know necessities?

Bueno and Shalkowski describe their account of our knowledge of
non-actual possibilities as follows:

On our account, what grounds modal knowledge is ultimately our
knowledge of the relevant modal properties of the objects under
consideration. Conceivability plays no role in our
proposal…Suppose we are trying to determine whether we know
that the table Hemingway used to write on in his Key West house would
have broken had a 26, 000-pound giant African bull elephant sat on it.
We say that the table—which, despite Hemingway’s
adventures, has never encountered such an elephant—would have
broken. On our account, we know that it would have broken simply by
knowing the properties that such an elephant has and the properties
the table has, modal in character as they already are. (Bueno and
Shalkowski 2014: 4.1)


The core idea of their account is that for many cases of modal
knowledge we arrive at modal knowledge by investigating the relevant
properties and objects in question rather than turning to some special
property, such as conceivability. For example, one can know that it is
possible for a table ttt, which is unbroken, to break because ttt
is breakable. How is that we come to know this piece of ordinary modal
knowledge? We do so on the basis of our knowledge of wood, chemical
bonds, and the physical relations the table can find itself in, such
as having a giant bull elephant sit on it. As Bueno and Shalkowski
point out:

There are no bonds than which nothing can be stronger. There are no
things composed of other things that are indestructible… Claims
about the relative strengths of bonds and of both internal and
external forces suffice to warrant a belief that your standard wooden
table is breakable. This is so, even if the table before [one] is the
first ever to be constructed. (2014: 4.1)


What about necessities? To understand the case of necessity one must
ask the question: when is one epistemically entitled to believe that
something is necessary and not merely true? The central idea that
Bueno and Shalkowski develop as an answer to this question is the
following.

Let Cn+1Cn+1C_{n+1} be a claim for which one wants to add a necessity
operator to, such as through the transition from (2) to (3).

 Cn+1Cn+1C_{n+1}
 It is necessary that Cn+1Cn+1C_{n+1}.


One is entitled to make the transition from (2) to (3) in certain
cases, such as when C has been derived from assumptions/premises that
can be dispensed with. Let the general assumptions/premises from which
C follows be catalogued in (1).

C1…CnC1…CnC_1\ldots C_n


In cases of zero premise deduction, C=C1C=C1C = C_1. And in those cases,
for example, one can make the transition to (3), since any claim that
requires no premises for its proof is a claim that is true no
matter what, and thus necessary. For example the axioms of a
logical system, such as first order classical logic, may endorse the
law of excluded middle:

(LEM) (P∨¬P)(P∨¬P)(P \lor \neg
P)


(LEM) can be proved in classical first-order logic from no premises.
So, one is entitled to transition from (LEM) to the necessity of
(LEM).

(NLEM) It is necessary
that (P∨¬P)(P∨¬P)(P \lor \neg P)


In addition, given that anything that follows from something that is
necessary is itself necessary, one can also conclude that a claim is
necessary when it can be derived from a set of necessary truths. A
clear case of this occurs when one deduces a theorem from axioms of a
logical system. Given that each axiom is itself necessary, the theorem
derived only from the axioms, is itself necessary.

One of the key focal points of the approach to necessity offered by
Bueno and Shalkowski’s modalism is that one needs to pay
attention to the premises or assumptions that go into a proof of
necessity. One might characterize the approach to necessity as an
argument-based approach, upon which, endorsing a necessity
claim amounts to endorsing the premises, and being justified in
believing the conclusion requires being justified in believing the
premises.

The core idea, then, is that in so far as the premises and assumptions
in C1…Cn+1C1…Cn+1C_1\ldots C_{n+1} are non-controversial or accepted by all
parties, and as long as Cn+1Cn+1C_{n+1} can be deduced from C1…CnC1…CnC_1\ldots
C_n, all relevant parties are justified in believing Cn+1Cn+1C_{n+1} to
be necessary. Bueno and Shalkowski hold that one is justified in
believing something to be necessary when one is justified in believing
that something holds no matter what. Warranted belief in the
necessity of a claim must at least tacitly arise from warranted belief
that something holds no matter what. As a consequence, the focus of
the dispute over whether, for example, the necessity of origins holds,
amounts to dispute over the premises and assumptions used to derive
the necessity of origins.

It may turn out that the argument-based approach to necessity
deployed by modalism is limited in that many extraordinary modal
claims, claims for example about the necessity of origins, are such
that there is no secure ground for them, since they rest on
controversial metaphysical principles. By contrast the approach may
deliver many ordinary modal claims, claims that are natural extensions
of well-grounded scientific and mathematical theories.

One important critical question for the modalist view is: how much
knowledge of modal matters can we derive from non-modal knowledge?

For example, in the passage from above we learn the following:


By investigating (i) the non-modal properties of some entities, such
as the structure of a table and an elephants weight and when tables
usually break under certain kinds of force we can come to form
rational beliefs about (ii) the modal properties of certain objects,
such as the breakability of the table. However, one might question how
far this strategy can go. In what kind of cases does this approach
work? And if the approach does break down in certain cases, what
accounts for the difference between cases where the approach succeeds
and where it fails?

4.2 Similarity as a Guide to Knowledge of De re Possibility

Within metaphysics and the philosophy of modality it is standard
practice to draw two important distinctions. On the one hand, a
distinction between abstract entities and concrete
entities is drawn. Typically, the former are taken to be entities that
exist outside of space and time, and the latter are taken to be
entities that exist within space and time. For example, some claim
that numbers, such as 2, are abstract objects, while particular
plants, such as a rose, are concrete objects. On the other hand, a
distinction is drawn between de re and de dicto
modality. Although the distinction is controversial (see the
supplement to
 propositional attitude reports
 on
 the de re/de dicto distinction),
 at least on one account the distinction holds the following:


A sentence is semantically de re just in case it permits
substitution of co-designating terms without changing the truth-value
of the sentence. Otherwise, it is semantically de dicto. For
example, the sentence “Lois believes that Superman can
fly” is semantically de dicto, since if we substitute
the co-designating name “Clark Kent” for
“Superman” the sentence moves from being true to false. By
contrast, the sentence “Mark Twain is a writer” is
semantically de re, since if we substitute the co-designating
name “Samuel Clemens” for “Mark Twain” the
sentence remains true.


Sonia Roca-Royes (forthcoming) defends a similarity-based
view of how we can come to know de re possibilities for
concrete entities, such as a table. Her view is important because it
explores the area of modal epistemology that concerns de re
modality as opposed to de dicto modality. The latter has
often been the central focus point of rationalist theories in the
epistemology of modality.

The naïve starting point for her account is the following:


I know that the wooden table in my office, Messy, is not broken. How
do I know that? I see it. Although not broken, Messy can break. How do
I know that? Because the table I had before Messy, which we may call
“Twin-Messy”, was a twin-sister of Messy, and it broke;
and I know that Twin-Messy broke because I saw it. (Roca-Royes
forthcoming: 4)


The account can be unfolded as follows:

In the past SSS has seen that something is actually the case,
such as that Twin-Messy is broken. So, SSS is justified in believing
that something is the case, such as that Twin-Messy is broken, and can
break.
A group of entities, aaa and bbb, are relevantly similar, such
as that Messy and Twin- Messy are relevantly similar.
If SSS knows that aaa and bbb are relevantly similar, and
SSS knows that actually FaFaFa, then SSS can come to know that it
is possible that FbFbFb based on their knowledge of the relevant
similarity between aaa and bbb. 


therefore

SSS knows that it is possible that FbFbFb, such as that Messy
can break.


In order to better understand the approach that is taken one needs to
look carefully at steps (2) and (3). The core question is: what does
relevant similarity mean? Roca-Royes characterizes it as
follows:

 aaa and bbb are relevantly similar when aaa and bbb are
counterparts.
 The counterpart relation involved in relevant similarity is
epistemic, and not metaphysical. It is not because
Twin-Messy broke that Messy can break, it is because one knows that
Twin-Messy broke and that Twin-Messy and Messy are similar that one
can come to know that Messy can break.
 The epistemic counterpart relation has to do, to a first
approximation, with the intrinsic character of the entities involved.
For example, Messy and Twin-Messy could be thought of as two tokens of
the same IKEA style table.
 The theory requires that the uniformity of nature is true.
Otherwise, from the mere fact that Twin-Messy broke in the past one
could not infer that Messy could break, since the laws of nature could
have changed.


Three important questions for the theory are the following:

 What specific details of relevant similarity does one
need to know to be in a position to make the relevant inference? For
example, does one need to simply know that Messy and Twin-Messy are
the same kind of IKEA table? Could they know something less specific,
such as that they are both wooden tables of roughly the same
structure? Or do they need to know something more specific, such as
that they are the same IKEA table from the same year and model of
design? 
 How does the theory account for knowledge of possibility across
distinct types of entities? For example, because both Twin-Messy and
Messy are the same type of IKEA table, it is reasonable to hold that
knowledge of the fact that Twin-Messy broke can inform our knowledge
of the breakability of Messy. However, suppose one has never owned a
table before. Rather, they have only owned a bench before, and they
have seen the bench break. Can knowledge of one type of entities modal
characteristics provide us with grounds for knowledge of possibility
for another type of entity?
 How does knowledge of similarity allow us to gain knowledge of
necessity? The account provided illustrates how prior knowledge of
actuality can allow us to access knowledge of possibility. But we also
know necessary truths: how do we arrive at knowledge of
necessity?