Sense-perception has long been a preoccupation of philosophers. One
pervasive and traditional problem, sometimes called “the Problem
of Perception”, is created by the phenomena of perceptual
illusion and hallucination: if these kinds of error are possible, how
can perception be what we ordinarily understand it to be, an openness to
and awareness of the world? The present entry is about how these possibilities of error
challenge the intelligibility of the phenomenon of perception, and how
the major theories of experience in the last century are best
understood as responses to this challenge.
 
1. The Ordinary Conception of Perceptual Experience
In this section we spell out the ordinary conception of perceptual
experience. There are two central aspects to this: Openness
(§1.1) and Awareness
 (§1.2).
1.1 Openness
On our ordinary conception of perceptual experience, perceptual
experience is a form of “openness to the world” McDowell
(1994: 111). We understand this more precisely as follows:

Openness: Perceptual experience, in its character,
involves the presentation (as) of ordinary mind-independent objects to a
subject, and such objects are experienced as present or
there such that the character of experience is immediately
responsive to the character of its objects.

To clarify this, we can break it down into two components:
Mind-Independence (§1.1.1), and
Presence (§1.1.2).
1.1.1 Mind-Independence
The first component of Openness is,

Mind-Independence: perceptual experience involves the
presentation (as) of ordinary mind-independent objects.

On ‘object’: we assume a broad understanding of
‘object’ to encompass perceptible entities in
mind-independent reality including material objects, but also features
and other entities (e.g., events, quantities of
stuff). Mind-Independence is thus a claim otherwise expressed
as follows: perceptual experience is a presentation of, or is as of, a
public, mind-independent subject-matter. On
‘ordinary’: Mind-Independence concerns
familiar perceptible things, things that we admit as part of
common sense ontology.
As P.F. Strawson argued, reflection on ordinary perceptual
experience supports a characterization of it in terms of
Mind-Independence: “mature sensible experience (in
general) presents itself as, in Kantian phrase, an immediate
consciousness of the existence of things outside us” (1979:
97). Strawson begins his argument by asking how someone would
typically respond to a request for a description of their current
visual experience. He says that it is natural to give the following
kind of answer: “I see the red light of the setting sun
filtering through the black and thickly clustered branches of the
elms; I see the dappled deer grazing in groups on the vivid green
grass…” (1979: 97). There are two ideas implicit in this
answer. One is that the description talks about objects and properties
which are, on the face of it, things distinct from this particular
experience. The other is that the description is “rich”,
describing the nature of the experience in terms of concepts like deer
and elms and the setting sun. The description of the experience is not
merely in terms of simple shapes and colours; but in terms of the
things we encounter in the “lived world” in all their
complexity. As Heidegger puts it,
 We never … originally and really perceive a throng
of sensations, e.g., tones and noises, in the appearance of
things…; rather, we hear the storm whistling in the chimney, we
hear the three-engine aeroplane, we hear the Mercedes in immediate
distinction from the Volkswagen. Much closer to us than any sensations
are the things themselves. We hear the door slam in the house, and
never hear acoustic sensations or mere sounds. (Heidegger (1977: 156);
quoted in Smith (2002: 105))
It may be that descriptions of experience like this involve a
commitment to the existence of things outside the experience; but
surely it is possible to describe experience without this commitment?
So let us suppose that we ask our imagined perceiver to repeat their
description without committing themselves to the existence of things
outside their experience, but without falsifying how their experience
seems to them. Strawson claims that the best way for them to respond
is to say “I had a visual experience such as it would have been
natural to describe by saying that I saw…” and then to
add the previous description of the trees and the deer etc. We give a
description of our experience in terms of the ordinary objects of our
world. And we do this even if we are trying not to commit ourselves to
the existence of these objects.
Strawson’s claim that perceptual experience strikes us as if
it satisfies what we’re calling Mind-Independence is
not a philosophical theory, one that would (for example) refute
scepticism, the view that we cannot know anything about the
mind-independent world (see the entry on
 skepticism). Rather, it should be a starting
point for philosophical reflection on experience (1979: 94). This is
why this intuitive datum of consciousness is not supposed to rule out
idealism, the view that the objects and properties we perceive are in
fact mind-dependent (see the entry on
 idealism). The idealist need not disagree with
Strawson that reflection on ordinary experience supports
Mind-Independence. They will just hold that, for
philosophical reasons, this is not how experience really
is. Mind-Independence, they can say, is intuitively appealing
but ultimately false as a characterization of experience and its
objects.
1.1.2 Presence
The second component of Openness itself involves two
components. First, the phenomenal character of an experience has
something to do with its presented objects: experience is, in its
character, a presentation of, or as of, ordinary objects; and
second the character of perceptual experience involves the
presentation of ordinary objects as
present or there in that it is immediately
responsive to the character of its objects.

Presence: the character of perceptual experience itself
involves the presentation (as) of ordinary objects in such a way that
it is immediately responsive to the character of its presented
objects.

When we reflect upon how the phenomenal character of experience is,
and try to “turn inwards” to describe the nature of the
experience itself, the best way to do this is to describe the objects
of experience and how they seem to us. It seems a simple matter to
move to the further claim that the way these objects actually are is
part of what determines the phenomenal character of an experience.
But this is to move too fast. For what can be said here about
experience can also be said about belief: it is widely accepted that
if I want to reflect upon the nature of my beliefs, the best way to do
this is to describe the object or content of my belief: that is, what
it is in the world that my belief is about. The things my beliefs are
about can be as ‘objective’ as the things I perceive. So
what is distinctive of the dependence of perceptual experience on its
objects?
One answer is that when an object is perceptually experienced, it
is experienced as “there”, “given” or
“present to the mind” in a way in which it is not in
belief, thought and many other mental states and events. Experience
seems to involve a particular kind of “presence to the
mind”. This “presence” goes beyond the mere fact
that the objects of experience must exist in order for the experience
to be veridical. For the objects of knowledge must exist too, but
states of knowledge do not, as such, have presence in the same way as
perceptual experiences—except, of course, in the case when one
knows something is there by perceiving it. (Compare here the
phenomenon Scott Sturgeon calls “scene immediacy” (2000:
Chapter 1)).
So what is this perceptual presence? Compare perceptual experience
with pure thought. Pure thought, like experience, goes straight out to
the world itself. But a difference between them is that in the case of
thought, how the object of thought is at the moment one is thinking of
it does not in any way constrain one’s thinking of it; but in the case
of perception it does. One’s perception of a snow covered
churchyard is immediately responsive to how the churchyard is now, as
one is perceiving it. But one’s (non-perceptual) thought need
not be: in the middle of winter, one can imagine the churchyard as it
is in spring, covered in autumn leaves, and one can think of it in all
sorts of ways which are not the ways it presently is. This is not
available in perception, because perception can only confront what is
presently given: in this sense, it seems that you can only see or hear
or touch what is there. It is because of this that perception is
sometimes said to have an immediacy or vividness which thought lacks:
this vividness derives from the fact that perceived objects and their
properties are actually given to the perceiver when being perceived,
and determine the nature of the character of the experience.
Openness is the combination of Mind-Independence,
and Presence. It is most clearly understood when it applies
to those perceptual experiences involved in genuine perception (e.g.,
when one sees a snow covered churchyard for what it is). But we
understand Openness as applying more broadly to even
perceptual experiences which don’t involve perceptual contact
with the world. This is why we have formulated it in terms of the
presentation ‘(as) of’ ordinary objects. For instance,
take pure hallucinations of the sort we will consider in 
§2.2 below. Suppose one has an hallucination of a
snow covered churchyard for what it is, even when there is no such
churchyard there to be perceived. Here, Mind-Independence
characterizes one’s experience. For one’s experience is
still as of a public mind-independent scene: the
apparent objects of such hallucinatory experiences are
ordinary objects. And, in a sense, Presence holds. The
hallucination is, in its character as of the snow covered
churchyard, and the churchyard seems to be there, present to
one, such that the character of the experience is constrained by that
apparent scene.
1.1.3 Transparency
Some recent writers on perception have defended a thesis which has
become known as the transparency of experience (see Harman (1990);
Speaks (2009); Tye (1992, 1995, 2000); Thau (2002); and for critical
discussions of this idea, Martin (2002), Smith (2008), Stoljar (2004)
and Soteriou (2013)). Transparency is normally defined as the
thesis that reflection on, or introspection of, what it is like to
have an experience does not reveal that we are aware of experiences
themselves, but only of their mind-independent objects. There are two
claims here: (i) introspection reveals the mind-independent objects of
experience, and (ii) introspection does not reveal non-presentational
features of experience (that is, features of the character of
experience not traceable merely to the appearance of some object or
feature in the environment).
Transparency is similar to Openness. The latter
claim does involve something like (i). But Transparency is
not the same as Openness, for it is not obvious that (ii) is
part of our intuitive conception of experience. We do not have to hold
that the phenomenal character of experience is exhausted (or
completely determined) by the nature of the objects and qualities
which are presented in experience. This claim can be disputed. For
example, a scene can look very different when one removes one’s
glasses: one’s visual experience of the churchyard then becomes
hazy and blurred. But it can be argued that this phenomenal difference
in experience need not derive from any apparent or represented
difference in the objects of experience. Rather, it seems to be a
difference in the way in which those objects are experienced
(although see Tye (2000) for a different understanding of this
phenomenon). So there are reasons for thinking that (ii) is not part
of the common sense conception of experience. (For further discussion
on seeing blurrily see Smith (2008), Allen (2013), and French
(2014). For a different challenge to (ii) see Richardson (2010) and
Soteriou (2013: Chapter 5)).
1.2 Awareness
Openness can characterize perceptual experience which
doesn’t involve genuine perceptual contact with the world. But
it is part of our ordinary way of thinking about perceptual experience
that we sometimes make perceptual contact with the world. Thus, we
come to the second component of our ordinary conception of perceptual
experience:

Awareness: perceptual experience sometimes gives
us perceptual awareness of ordinary mind-independent
objects.

For instance, in seeing a snow covered churchyard for what it is, one
has a visual experience, and is visually aware of a snow covered
churchyard. (Here we understand perception as a conscious
state or event—as something which is or involves perceptual
experience—which is a mode of awareness).
2. The Problem of Perception
The Problem of Perception is that if illusions and
hallucinations are possible, then perception, as we ordinarily
understand it, is impossible. The Problem is animated by two
central arguments: the argument from illusion
 (§2.1) and the argument from hallucination
(§2.2). (A similar problem has also
been raised with reference to other perceptual phenomena such
as perspectival variation or conflicting appearances, on which
see Burnyeat (1979) and the entry on
 sense-data). For some classic
readings on these arguments, see Moore (1905, 1910); Russell
(1912); Price (1932); Broad (1965); and Ayer (1940), see
Swartz (1965) for a good collection of readings. And for some
fairly recent expositions see Snowdon (1992), Robinson (1994:
Chapter 2); Smith (2002: Chapters 1 and 7), and Martin
(2006).
In this section we present the arguments from illusion and
hallucination both as challenging Awareness. That’s bad
enough for our intuitive conception of perceptual experience, but it
gets worse: for later we’ll see how the arguments can be
supplemented so as they support the rejection of Openness too
(§3.1).
2.1 The Argument from Illusion
According to Awareness, we are sometimes perceptually
aware of ordinary mind-independent objects in perceptual
experience. Such awareness can come from veridical
experiences—cases in which one perceives an object for what it
is. But it can also come from illusory experiences. For we think of an
illusion as “any perceptual situation in which a physical object
is actually perceived, but in which that object perceptually appears
other than it really is” Smith (2002: 23). For example, a white
wall seen in yellow light can look yellow to one. (In such cases it is
not necessary that one is deceived into believing that things are
other than they are). The argument from illusion, in a radical form,
aims to show that we are never perceptually aware of ordinary
objects. Many things have been called “the argument from
illusion”. But the basic idea goes as follows:

In an illusory experience, one is not aware of an ordinary object.
The same account of experience must apply to both veridical and
illusory experiences.
 Therefore, one is never perceptually aware of ordinary
objects.

Four immediate comments on this are in order: First, as it stands
this is an inadequate representation of the argument as it conceals
the complex moves usually invoked by proponents and expositors, but
we’ll try to improve on this soon (in particular, a fuller
version includes a mini argument for (A)). Second, it is useful to
represent the argument in this basic form to begin with as it enables
us to highlight its two major movements; what Paul Snowdon calls the
base case, and the spreading step (Snowdon 1992). In the base case a
conclusion about just illusory experiences is sought: namely, (A). In
the spreading step, (B), this result is generalized so as to get
conclusion (C). Third, as we’re representing the argument here
it is purely negative. But many philosophers have moved from this to
the further conclusion that since we are always aware of something in
perceptual experience, what we are aware of is a
“non-ordinary” object (sometimes called a
“sense-datum”). In §3.1, we will
examine this further development. Finally, this argument is
radical in that it concludes that we are never perceptually
aware of ordinary objects. A less radical version concludes instead
that we are never directly aware of ordinary objects, but for
all that we may be indirectly aware of them. We’ll
return briefly to this less radical version of the argument in
 §3.1 below. For now we’ll set aside
complications to do with direct and indirect awareness.
 Moving beyond the simple formulation, the argument from illusion
is typically presented as involving these steps:

In an illusory experience, it seems to one that something
has a quality, F, which the ordinary object
supposedly being perceived does not actually have.
When it seems to one that something has a quality, F,
then there is something of which one is aware which does have this
quality.
Since the ordinary object in question is, by hypothesis,
not-F, then it follows that in cases of illusory experience, one
is not aware of the object after all. (A).
The same account of experience must apply to both veridical and
illusory experiences. (B).
Therefore, in cases of veridical experience, one
is not aware of the object after all.
If one is perceptually aware of an ordinary object at all, it is
in either a veridical or illusory experience.
 Therefore, one is never perceptually aware of ordinary
objects. (C).

This improves on the simple version of the argument in having both
a fuller base case stage and a fuller spreading step. That is, the
basis of premise (A) is made clear, and the spreading from (B) is
expanded.
The most controversial premise in the argument is premise (ii). The
other premises just reflect intuitive ways of thinking about
perceptual experience, and so are unlikely to be targeted by one
seeking to reject the argument from illusion. This is clear enough
with premises (i) and (vi), but what about premise (iv)? What this
means is that the account of the nature and objects of illusory and
veridical experiences must be the same. Though it may be disputed,
this premise seems plausible. For veridical and illusory experiences
both seem to be cases where one is aware of an ordinary object. The
only difference is that in the illusory case, but not in the veridical
case, the object one is aware of appears some way other than it in
fact is. 
 Premise (ii) is what Howard Robinson has usefully labelled the
“Phenomenal Principle”:
 If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something
which possesses a particular sensible quality then there is something
of which the subject is aware which does possess that sensible quality
(1994: 32). 
C.D. Broad motivates this principle on
explanatory grounds. In cases of perceptual experience things appear
some ways rather than others to us. We need to explain this. Why does
the penny one sees look elliptical to one as opposed to some other
shape? One answer is that there is something of which one is aware
which is in fact elliptical. Thus as Broad says “If, in fact,
nothing elliptical is before my mind, it is very hard to understand
why the penny should seem elliptical rather than of any other
shape.” (1923: 240). Other philosophers have simply taken the
principle to be obvious. H.H. Price, for example, says that
“When I say ‘this table appears brown to me’ it is
quite plain that I am acquainted with an actual instance of
brownness” (Price 1932: 63).
 So much for the argument’s main premises. How is it supposed
to work? Here we find the suggestion that it hinges on an application
of Leibniz’s Law of the Indiscernibility of Identicals (Robinson
(1994: 32); Smith (2002: 25)). The point is that (i) and (ii) tell us
that in an illusory experience one is aware of an F thing,
but the ordinary object supposedly being perceived is not F,
thus the F thing one is aware of and the ordinary object are
not identical, by Leibniz’s Law. On these grounds, the
conclusion of the base case stage is supposed to follow. And then the
ultimate conclusion of the argument can be derived from its further
premises. 
But as French and Walters (forthcoming) argue,
this is invalid. (i), (ii) and Leibniz’s Law entail that in an
illusory experience one is directly aware of an F thing which
is non-identical to the ordinary object supposedly being
perceived. But this doesn’t entail that in the illusion one is
not directly aware of the ordinary object. One might be aware of the
ordinary object as well as the F thing one is aware
of. We should be careful to distinguish not being (directly) aware of
the wall from being (directly) aware of something which is not the
wall. The argument is invalid in conflating these two ideas.
One option for fixing the argument is to introduce what French and
Walters call the Exclusion Assumption (cf., Snowdon (1992: 74)):
If in an illusion of an ordinary object as F one
is aware of an F thing non-identical to the ordinary object,
one is not also aware of the ordinary object. 
 This assumption bridges the gap between the conclusion actually
achieved:

(iii*) in an illusory experience one is aware of an F
thing non-identical to the ordinary object 
and the desired conclusion (iii). But whether this assumption is
defensible remains to be seen. In the remainder we leave this and the
issue of validity aside and consider responses from different theories
of experience.
2.2 The Argument from Hallucination
A hallucination is an experience which seems exactly like a
veridical perception of an ordinary object but where there is no such
object there to be perceived. Like illusions, hallucinations in this
sense do not necessarily involve deception. And nor need they be like
the real hallucinations suffered by the mentally ill, drug-users or
alcoholics. They are rather supposed to be merely possible events:
experiences which are indistinguishable for the subject from a genuine
perception of an object. For example, suppose one is now having a
veridical perception of a snow covered churchyard. The assumption that
hallucinations are possible means that one could have an experience
which is subjectively indistinguishable—that is,
indistinguishable by the subject, “from the
inside”—from a veridical perception of a snow covered
churchyard, but where there is in fact no churchyard there to be
perceived. (For more on hallucination, see the essays collected in
Macpherson and Platchias (2013)).
A radical form of the argument again challenges
Awareness:

An hallucinatory experience as of an ordinary object as F
is not a case of awareness of an ordinary object.
Veridical experiences of ordinary objects as F and their
hallucinatory counterparts are to be given the same account.  
Therefore, one is not perceptually aware of ordinary objects in
veridical experience.

What this argument shows, if it is successful, is that one is not
perceptually aware of ordinary objects in veridical experiences. The
conclusion here is not as general as the conclusion of the argument
from illusion, but the more general conclusion is surely not far off:
for it would be difficult to maintain that though one is not
perceptually aware of ordinary objects in veridical experiences, there
are other cases of experience where one is perceptually aware of
ordinary objects. So this argument supports if not
entails the rejection of our ordinary conception of
perceptual experience. Its aim is to show that an aspect of our
ordinary conception of perception is deeply problematic, if not
incoherent: perceptual experience cannot be what we intuitively think
it is. (It is essentially this problem which Valberg (1992) calls
“the puzzle of experience”.) But as with the argument from
illusion, the argument can be developed, in supplemented form, to
defend the conclusion that we only ever perceptually aware of
“non-ordinary” objects (see
 §3.1).
 Once again we can view the argument as having a base case (A) and
a spreading step (B) (Snowdon 2005). Unlike with the argument from
illusion, the base case here is less controversial: it doesn’t
rely on the Phenomenal Principle. We thus don’t need a more
complicated argument to support it. (A) simply falls out of what
hallucinations are supposed to be, and two principles: first, that
awareness of an object is a relation to an object, and second, that
relations entail the existence of their relata. For given our
principles, if an hallucination as of an ordinary object is to be a
mode of awareness of an ordinary object then there must be an ordinary
object there for one to perceive. But no such objects are there in
hallucinations, therefore, hallucinations are not cases of awareness
of ordinary objects.
Where the argument from hallucination is controversial is in the
spreading step. The spreading step here gets construed in terms of the
idea that veridical experiences and hallucinations are essentially the
same; mental events of the same fundamental kind (Martin
(2006)). (This doesn’t mean that we lose a distinction between
veridical experiences and hallucinations. It just means that the
difference between veridical experience and hallucination is not to be
found in their intrinsic natures). This claim seems plausible, as from
a subject’s perspective an hallucination cannot be told apart
from a veridical experience. Thus some will accept (B) and thus deny
that we are ever perceptually aware of ordinary objects (see
sense-datum theories §3.1), and others will
accept (B) but argue that we can still have perceptual awareness of
ordinary objects (see intentionalist theories
 §3.3). But as we’ll see, others will want
to secure perceptual awareness of ordinary objects by rejecting (B)
and holding that hallucinations and veridical experiences are
fundamentally different (see naive realist theories and disjunctivism
§3.4). 
Though it is not plausible to deny the possibility of illusory
experiences (though we may argue about how best to construe them;
Anthony (2011) and Kalderon (2011)), the claim that subjectively
indistinguishable hallucinations are possible is a little more
controversial. How do we really know that experiences like this are
possible? (Austin (1962), for instance, expresses scepticism). One way
to answer this—though certainly not the only way—is to
appeal to a broad and uncontroversial empirical fact about experience:
that it is the upshot or outcome of a causal process linking the
organs of perception with the environment, that our experiences are
the effects of things going on inside and outside our bodies. If this
is so, then we can understand why hallucinations are a
possibility. For any causal chain reaching from a cause C1
to effect E, there are intermediate causes C2,
C3 etc., such that E could have been brought about even if
C1 had not been there but one of the later causes (see the
entry on
 the metaphysics of causation). 
If this is true of causal processes in general, and
perceptual experience is the product of a causal process, then we can
see how it is possible that I could have an experience of the
churchyard which was brought about by causes “downstream”
of the actual cause (the churchyard). (This plays into the causal
argument discussed in §3.4). 
3. Theories of Experience
In this section we will consider the leading theories of experience
of the last hundred years. These theories are understood here as
responses to the Problem of Perception. (There are a number of
theories of perception which are not discussed in this entry, either
because they are not responses to this specific problem (like the
causal theory of Grice (1961) and Lewis (1988), and Burge (2010)) or
because they require an entire entry of their own (like the
phenomenology of Husserl (1900–1) and Merleau-Ponty (1945); see
the entry on phenomenology)).

 As we understand theories of experience, they operate on two
levels. On one level they tell us about the nature or structure of
experience, on another level they tell us how what is said at the
first level bears on grounding or explaining the phenomenal character
of experience. Crudely, and with details and qualifications to
explored below:

The Sense-Datum Theory: Level 1: experience is
fundamentally a relation to a non-ordinary object; a
sense-datum. Level 2: the character of experience is explained by
the real presence of sense-data and their qualities in experience
(§3.1).
The Adverbial Theory: Level 1: experience is
non-relational and fundamentally a state of mind adverbially
modified in a certain way (e.g., visually sensing brownly). Level 2:
the character of experience is explained by the intrinsic qualities
of experience which constitute the ways in which it is modified
 (§3.2).
The Intentionalist Theory: Level 1: experience is
non-relational and fundamentally a matter of representing ordinary
objects in certain ways. Level 2: the character of experience is
explain by its representational nature
 (§3.3).
The Naive Realist Theory: Level 1: experience is
fundamentally a relation to ordinary aspects of mind-independent
reality. Level 2: the character of experience is explained by the
real presence of ordinary aspects of mind-independent reality in
experience (§3.4).

 (In this exposition we do not consider much the possibility of
mixed or hybrid views).

Here is what we find: The sense-datum theorist rejects our ordinary
conception of perceptual experience. The adverbial theorist tries to
improve upon the sense-datum theory, and holds on to
Awareness. But it is unclear how they can secure
Openness. Intentionalists and naive realists hold to both
Openness and Awareness, but they do so in different
ways, and with different responses to the Problem of Perception. (The
way these positions emerge in response to the Problem of Perception is
mapped most clearly in Martin (1995, 1998, 2000)).

3.1 The Sense-Datum Theory
3.1.1 The Sense-Datum Theory and The Problem of Perception
On the sense-datum theory, a perceptual experience in which
something appears F to one consists in a relation of
perceptual awareness to something which is actually F (Level
1). So whenever a subject has a sensory experience, there is something
of which they are perceptually aware. This relational conception of
experience is sometimes called an “act-object” conception,
since it posits a distinction between the mental act of sensing, and
the object which is sensed.
 A sense-datum theorist calls the object of an experience a
sense-datum. We can thus re-formulate the Phenomenal Principle
espoused by the sense-datum theorists in these terms:

If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something
which possesses a particular sensible quality F then there is
something—a sense-datum—of which the subject is directly
aware which does possess that sensible quality. 

For the sense-datum theorist, the character of an experience is
somehow explained (at least in part) by the sensible qualities of the
sense-datum one is aware of. (Level 2). Consider an experience which
one would describe in terms of seeing a snow covered churchyard for
what it is. We can isolate certain aspects of the phenomenal character
of such an experience, such as the appearance of whiteness to one. We
want a theory of experience to explain such aspects. The sense-datum
theorist will claim that things appearing white to you consists in
your perceptual awareness of a white sense-datum. The character of
your experience is explained by an actual instance of whiteness
manifesting itself in experience.
Now ultimately the sense-datum theory opposes our
ordinary conception of experience, but it doesn’t as
we have it so far. For at the moment we have no
opposition between sense-data and ordinary objects. Suppose
that one has an experience of a churchyard as described above,
and so one is perceptually aware of a white sense-datum. Now
suppose one’s experience is veridical. Well, for all
we’ve said, the sense-datum one is aware of could be an
ordinary bit of mind-independent reality: some white
snow. This is not ruled out, for a sense-datum is just
whatever it is that one is aware of in a perceptual
experience which instantiates the sensible qualities which
characterize the phenomenology of one’s experience. All
we know about sense-data is that they must satisfy two
conditions: 

sense-data are objects of direct awareness; and
sense-data bear sensible qualities.

But these conditions don’t mark out an interesting ontological
kind (Austin (1962)). They are consistent with sense-data (sometimes)
being ordinary objects and aspects of mind-independent reality. Call
the sense-datum theory we have outlined so far a minimal
sense-datum theory.

But paradigm sense-datum theories are, in contrast,
non-minimal. And such non-minimal sense-datum theorists do
reject our ordinary conception of perceptual experience. We can make
sense of this if we move to a less minimal conception of sense-data
themselves, on which they are not ordinary aspects of mind-independent
reality. One option here is to articulate a theory of sense-experience
and sense-data independently of the problem of perception (Jackson
(1977) and Lowe (1992)). But by far the most popular approach for
sense-datum theorists has been to move to a more committed conception
of sense-data on the basis of arguments like the argument from
illusion and the argument from hallucination. How does this work? 
Take first the argument from illusion. Suppose one sees a white
wall as yellow. The sense-datum theorist accepts the base case of the
argument, along with Leibniz’s Law, and so holds that in the
illusion one is aware of a yellow sense-datum which is not the
wall. And suppose the illusion occurs in a world devoid of
ordinary objects which are in fact yellow. Thus the
sense-datum is a non-ordinary object. Suppose we accept
further that in illusions we are directly aware of such non-ordinary
sense-data instead of and not as well as the relevant
ordinary objects. So illusions are cases where one is directly aware
of just a non-ordinary sense-datum. With this the sense-datum
theorist accepts the spreading step and concludes that no perceptual
experience is a case of awareness of an ordinary object, and that
illusory and veridical experiences are cases of awareness of
non-ordinary sense-data. 
 We can run a similar line of thought with the argument from
hallucination. Suppose one has an hallucinatory experience as of a
churchyard covered in white snow. But there is no such churchyard
there to be perceived. The sense-datum theorist conceives of this
experience as a case of perceptual awareness of a white
sense-datum. Suppose the hallucination occurs in a world devoid of
ordinary white things, so the sense-datum one is aware of is
a non-ordinary sense-datum. The sense-datum theorist then
endorses the spreading step stage of argument to get the conclusion
that even in veridical experiences one is aware of just non-ordinary
sense-data. 
Initially, the arguments from illusion and hallucination were
presented as aiming for a negative claim. But what we’ve seen
here is that the minimal sense-datum theorist can supplement the
base case with further considerations so as to get not just the
negative conclusion but a positive conclusion, which is itself
generalised in the spreading step stage. That is, in combination:

Base Case: (a) illusions and hallucinations are not cases of
awareness of ordinary objects; but instead (b) are cases of awareness
of non-ordinary sense-data.
Spreading Step: veridical experiences, illusions and
hallucinations are to be given the same account.
Conclusions: (c) no perceptual experience is a case of awareness
of an ordinary object; but instead (d) all perceptual experiences are
cases of awareness of non-ordinary sense-data.

 The arguments, understood as such, are not arguments for the
minimal sense-datum theory—the arguments presuppose
such a theory. Rather, they serve as arguments for the transition from
the minimal form of the sense-datum theory to the non-minimal form
which invokes non-ordinary sense-data. 
From now on when we speak of “sense-data” we will mean
non-ordinary sense-data. Sense-datum theorists will divide over
exactly how to understand sense-data insofar as they are
non-ordinary. The early sense-datum theorists (like Moore
(1914)) considered sense-data to be mind-independent, but non-physical
objects. Later theories treat sense-data as mind-dependent entities
(Robinson (1994)), and this is how the theory is normally understood
in the second half of the twentieth century. What these different
workings out of the theory have in common, though, is that they stand
opposed to our ordinary conception of perceptual experience in both
its aspects. On the non-minimal sense-datum theory, perceptual
experiences are presentations not of ordinary objects, but of
sense-data, and the character of experience, though dependent on its
objects, is thus dependent upon non-ordinary objects. Thus
Openness is false. The sense-datum theorist need not deny
that we are presented with objects as if they are ordinary
objects. But they will insist that this is an error. (So sense-datum
theories are not simply refuted (as Harman 1990 seems to argue) by
pointing to the phenomenological fact that the objects of experience
seem to be the ordinary things around us). And in perceptual
experience we are not aware of ordinary objects but non-ordinary
sense-data. Thus Awareness is false.
3.1.2 Indirect Realism and Phenomenalism
Must a non-minimal sense-datum theorist deny Awareness? It
seems not. Some sense-datum theorists introduce a distinction between
direct and indirect awareness. With this, they don’t deny that
we are ever perceptually aware of ordinary objects, only that we are
ever directly perceptually aware of ordinary objects. The
sense-datum theorist can say that we are indirectly aware of
ordinary objects: that is, aware of them by (in virtue of) being aware
of sense-data. A sense-datum theorist who says this is known as an
indirect realist or representative realist, or as someone who holds a
representative theory of perception (see Jackson (1977), Lowe (1992);
see also the entry on
 epistemological problems of perception).
 A theorist who denies that we are aware of
mind-independent objects at all, directly or indirectly, but only of
sense-data construed as mental entities, is known as a phenomenalist
or an idealist about perception (see Foster (2000) for a recent
defence, see Crane and Farkas (2004: Section 2) for an introduction to
the subject; and the entry on
 idealism). 
On the face of it the indirect realist form of the sense-datum
theory salvages something of our ordinary conception of
perceptual experience, but securing Awareness. But this
shouldn’t be at all satisfying to one who wants to defend our
intuitive conception of perceptual experience, for two reasons. First,
Openness is still being denied. Second, once we are given the
distinction between direct and indirect perception, a defender of our
ordinary conception of perceptual experience is likely to uphold
Awareness in a more specific form, that is, as the idea that
perceptual experience sometimes gives us direct awareness of
ordinary objects. That is, the main theories of experience which
uphold our ordinary conception of perceptual
experience—intentionalism and naive realism—are both
usually regarded as versions of direct realism.
3.1.3 Objections to the Sense-Datum Theory
 The sense-datum theory was widely rejected in the second half of
the 20th century, though it still had its occasional
champions in this period (e.g., Jackson (1977), O’Shaughnessy
(1980, 2000, 2003), Lowe (1992), Robinson (1994), Foster (2000)). A
number of objections have been made to the theory. Some of these
objections are objections specifically to the indirect realist version
of the sense-datum theory: for example, the claim that the theory
gives rise to an unacceptable “veil of perception” between
the mind and the world. The idea is that the sense-data
“interpose” themselves between perceivers and the
mind-independent objects which we normally take ourselves to be
perceiving, and therefore leaves our perceptual, cognitive and
epistemic access to the world deeply problematic if not impossible. In
response to this, the indirect realist can say that sense-data are the
medium by which we perceive the mind-independent world, and no more
create a “veil of perception” than the fact that we use
words to talk about things creates a “veil of words”
between us and the things we talk about. (For recent discussion see
Silins (2011)).
A common objection in contemporary philosophy is to attack the
Phenomenal Principle (see Barnes (1944–5); Anscombe (1965)). The
objection is that the Phenomenal Principle is fallacious. It is not
built into the meaning of “something appears F to
one” that “one is aware of an F
thing”. Defenders of the sense-datum theory can respond that the
Phenomenal Principle is not supposed to be a purely logical inference;
it is not supposed to be true simply because of the logical form or
semantic structure of “appears” and similar
locutions. Rather, it is true because of specific phenomenological
facts about perceptual experience. But this just means that theorists
who reject the Phenomenal Principle are not disagreeing about whether
the Phenomenal Principle involves a fallacy or about some semantic
issue, but rather about the nature of experience itself.
 Another influential objection to sense-data comes from the
prevailing naturalism of contemporary philosophy. Naturalism (or
physicalism) says that the world is entirely physical in its nature:
everything there is supervenes on the physical, and is governed by
physical law. Many sense-datum theorists are committed to the claim
that non-ordinary sense-data are mind-dependent: objects
whose existence depends on the existence of states of mind. Is this
consistent with naturalism? If so, the challenge is to explain how an
object can be brought into existence by the existence of an
experience, and how this is supposed to be governed by physical
law.
Many contemporary sense-datum theorists, however, will not be moved
by this challenge, since they are happy to accept the rejection of
naturalism as a consequence of their sense-data theory (see Robinson
1994, Foster 2000). On the other hand, one might think that there is
no conflict here with naturalism, as long as experiences themselves
are part of the natural order. But if sense-data are non-ordinary in
being mind-independent but non-physical, then it is much less
clear how naturalism can be maintained (cf., what Martin (2004, 2006)
calls “experiential naturalism” which serves as a
constraint on theories of experience and rules out some but not all
forms of the sense-datum theory).
3.2 The Adverbial Theory
3.2.1 The Adverbial Theory and the Problem of Perception
 Some philosophers agree with the Phenomenal Principle that
whenever a sensory quality appears to be instantiated then it is
instantiated, but deny that this entails the existence of
sense-data. Rather, they hold that we should think of these qualities
as modifications of the experience itself (Level 1). Hence when
someone has an experience of something brown, something like brownness
is instantiated, but in the experience itself, not an object. This is
not to say that the experience is brown, but rather that the
experience is modified in a certain way, the way we can call
“perceiving brownly”. The canonical descriptions of
perceptual experiences, then, employ adverbial modifications of the
perceptual verbs: instead of describing an experience as
someone’s “visually sensing a brown square”, the
theory says that they are “visually sensing brownly and
squarely”. This is why this theory is called the
“adverbial theory”; but it is important to emphasise that
it is more a theory about the phenomenal character of experience
itself (Level 2) than it is a semantic analysis of sentences
describing experience.
 Part of the point of the adverbial theory, as defended by Ducasse
(1942) and Chisholm (1957) was to do justice to the phenomenology of
experience whilst avoiding the dubious metaphysical commitments the
sense-datum theorists take on in responding to the Problem of
Perception. The only entities which the adverbialist needs to
acknowledge are subjects of experience, experiences themselves, and
ways these experiences are modified. This makes the theory appear less
controversial than the sense-datum theory.
3.2.2 The Adverbial Theory and Qualia
When used in a broad way, “qualia” picks out whatever
qualities a state of mind has which constitute the state of
mind’s having the phenomenal character it has. In this broad
sense, any conscious state of mind has qualia. (This is the way the
term is used in, e.g., Chalmers (1996)) Used in a narrow way, however,
qualia are non-intentional, intrinsic properties of experience:
properties which have no intentional or representational aspects
whatsoever. To use Gilbert Harman’s apt metaphor, qualia in this
sense are “mental paint” properties (1990). Harman rejects
mental paint, the idea of experience as involving mental paint is
taken up and defended by Block (2004)).
 It is relatively uncontroversial to say that there are qualia in
the broad sense. It can be misleading, however, to use the term in
this way, since it can give rise to the illusion that the existence of
qualia is a substantial philosophical thesis when in fact it is
something which will be accepted by anyone who believes in phenomenal
character. (Hence Dennett’s (1991) denial of qualia can seem
bewildering if “qualia” is taken in the broad sense). It
is controversial to say that there are qualia in the narrow sense,
though, and those who have asserted their existence have therefore
provided arguments and thought-experiments to defend this assertion
(see Block (1997), Peacocke (1983 Chapter 1), Shoemaker (1990)). In
what follows, “qualia” will be used exclusively in the
narrow sense.
 The adverbial theory is committed to the view that experiencing
something red, for example, involves one’s experience being
modified in a certain way: experiencing redly. The most natural way to
understand this is that the experience is an event, and the
modification of it is a property of that event. Since this property is
both intrinsic (as opposed to relational or representational) and
phenomenal (that is, consciously available) then this way of
understanding the adverbial theory is committed to the existence of
qualia.
3.2.3 Objections to the Adverbial Theory
 An important objection to the adverbial theory has been proposed
by Frank Jackson (1975). Consider someone who senses a brown square
and a green triangle simultaneously. The adverbial theory will
characterise this state of mind as “sensing brownly and squarely
and greenly and triangularly”. But how can it distinguish the
state of mind it is describing in this way from that of sensing a
brown triangle and a green square? The characterisation fits that
state of mind equally well. Obviously, what is wanted is a description
according to which the brownness “goes with” the
squareness, and the greenness “goes with” the
triangularity. But how is the theory to do this without introducing
objects of experience—the things which are brown and green
respectively—or a visual field with a spatial structure? The
challenge is whether the adverbial theory can properly account for the
spatial structure and complexity in what is given in visual
experience. (See Tye (1984) for an attempt to respond to this
challenge.)
 A related objection concerns the relationship between the
adverbial theory and our ordinary conception of experience. The
adverbial theorist might admit that, in a sense, we are aware
of ordinary objects. When one “senses redly“ if this state
of mind is appropriately caused by a red thing (e.g., a tomato),
perhaps this is what being aware of such an object amounts to. And it
is not as if such awareness is indirect or mediated by
sense-data. However, it is not at all clear that the adverbialist is
in a position to secure Openness. For the adverbialist
rejects not just the idea that experience has a genuine act-object
structure, but the idea that the character of experience is even a
presentation as of ordinary things and qualities. Qualities
get into the picture, and are constitutive of phenomenal character,
but not by being presented from outside of experience as qualities of
things, as Openness would have it. How, then, can the
adverbialist account even for the appearance of an act-object
structure within experience, for Openness? It is unclear how
the adverbialist is to answer this question (see Martin (1998); Crane
(2000)). And so it is unclear how much of an improvement the adverbial
approach, and the qualia theory, is over the sense-datum theory.
3.3 The Intentionalist Theory
3.3.1 The Intentionalist Theory and the Problem of Perception 
At Level 1, the intentional theory of experience treats perceptual
experience as a form of intentionality conceived of as a form of
mental representation (hence it is also sometimes called the
representationalist theory of
experience). “Intentionality” is a term with its origins
in scholastic philosophy (see Crane 1998b), but its current use
derives from Brentano (1874), who introduced the term
“intentional inexistence” for the “mind’s
direction upon its objects”. Intentional inexistence, or
intentionality, is sometimes explained as the “aboutness”
of mental states (see the entries on
 Franz Brentano,
 representational theories of consciousness
 and
 intentionality). An intentional mental
state is normally understood, therefore, as one which is about, or
represents, something in the world.
At Level 2, this is put to work in explaining phenomenal
character. Take an experience as of a churchyard covered in white
snow. Why is this a case of things appearing white to one? Here the
intentionalist appeals to the experience’s representation of
whiteness in the environment. It is not generally true that when a
representation represents something as being F, there has to
actually be something which is F. Thus for the
intentionalist, experience is representational in a way that contrasts
with it being relational. Experience does not genuinely have an
act-object structure. This is in keeping with a standard tradition in
the theory of intentionality which treats it as non-relational (the
tradition derives from Husserl 1900/1901; for discussion see Zahavi
2003: 13–27). So intentionalism contrasts with the sense-datum
theory: since it is not of the essence of experience or its character
that it is relational, it is not of its essence that it is a relation
to a non-ordinary sense-datum.
 The intentionalist can thus reject the argument from illusion in
the form presented in §2.1 and the supplemented
form presented in §3.1.1. This is because
these arguments hinge on the minimal sense-datum theory, or the
Phenomenal Principle which the intentional theory is an alternative
to. An illusory experience in which a white wall appears yellow to one
is thus not conceived of as a case in which one is aware of a yellow
sense-datum. It is instead conceived of as a case in which a white
wall is represented as being yellow. As we’ll see, the
intentionalist can even maintain the intuitive idea that in such
illusions one is aware of the ordinary objects one seems to be aware
of—but that’s something we’ll come back to
shortly. 
What about hallucinations? Again the intentionalist can reject the
supplemented form of the argument from hallucination from
 §3.1.1 because this version of the argument
relies on the Phenomenal Principle. But what about the original form
of the argument from hallucination? This argument does not rely on the
Phenomenal Principle, yet its conclusion is that not even veridical
experiences give us direct awareness of ordinary mind-independent
objects. So how is the intentionalist to deal with this argument? The
intentionalist accepts (A) but also (B) in a specific form. That is,
they accept (B) where that is understood in terms of what Martin
(2004, 2006) has called the Common Kind Assumption, that is:

(CKA) Whatever fundamental kind of mental event occurs
when one veridically perceives, the very same kind of event could
occur were one hallucinating. 

Take a veridical perception of a white snow covered churchyard for
what it is. The experience involved in this perception, the
intentionalist thinks, is fundamentally a matter of experientially
representing the presence of a white snow covered churchyard. And this
fundamental kind of mental event is exactly what is present in the
subjectively indistinguishable hallucinatory case, for such
hallucinatory experiences have the same representational nature as
their veridical counterparts. 
But then doesn’t this mean that the intentionalist is saddled
with the conclusion of the argument from hallucination (C)? If so, the
rejection of Awareness and our ordinary conception of
perceptual experience is not far off. Since if we are not perceptually
aware of ordinary objects in veridical experiences, it is unclear how
any form of perceptual awareness of ordinary objects can be
secured.
However, the intentionalist can distinguish between two readings of
the conclusion. On the first reading, we have

(C*) veridical experiences are not fundamentally
cases of awareness of ordinary objects.
This is entailed by the argument as we have construed it. But what
is not entailed is

(C**) veridical experiences don’t give us
perceptual awareness of ordinary objects. 
As long as (C**) doesn’t follow, the intentionalist can
suggest, Awareness is secure. The intentionalist admits that
not even veridical experiences are fundamentally cases of perceptual
awareness of ordinary objects. Such experiences are fundamentally
representational in a way that contrasts with them being
relational. But that simply doesn’t mean that we can’t
come to be perceptually aware, even directly perceptually
aware, of an ordinary object by having a veridical
experience. Veridical experiences may be the occasions for such
awareness even if they are not themselves constituted by instances of
such awareness. They can be occasions for such awareness precisely
because they represent ordinary objects. In their very
character they are about, directed on, the mind-independent world (in
contrast to both sense-datum theories, and adverbialist theories). We
come to have (direct) perceptual awareness by having such experiences
when the world also plays its part: when things in the world are as
they are represented to be in the experience, and when the world is
hooked up to the experience in an appropriate way. This also helps us
to see how even illusions can give us (direct) awareness of ordinary
objects. In these cases, experience represents an ordinary object
which is there to be perceived, and it is appropriately related to
one’s experience, yet there is some misrepresentation of the
object.
Thus the intentionalist can respond to Problem of Perception: it
has solutions to both arguments which animate the Problem. And the
intentionalist response secures both aspects of our ordinary
conception of perceptual experience. The intentionalist explains how
experience satisfies Openness in terms of it having a certain
sort of representational nature. That is, a perceptual experience
involves, in its very character, the presentation of ordinary
mind-independent objects to a subject precisely because it is a matter
of perceptual representation of ordinary aspects of the
environment. And such aspects are represented as there,
present. The character of experience is immediately
responsive to the character of its objects because it is constituted,
at least in part, by the way those objects are represented, at the
time they are experienced.
3.3.2 Sources of the Intentionalist Theory
 Some of the most influential intentional theories are Anscombe
(1965), Armstrong (1968), Pitcher (1970), Peacocke (1983), Harman
(1990), Tye (1992, 1995), Dretske (1995), Lycan (1996); for more
recent accounts, see Byrne (2001), Siegel (2010), Pautz (2010) and the
entry on the contents of perception.
 Within analytic philosophy, the intentionalist theory of
perception is a generalisation of an idea presented by G.E.M. Anscombe
(1965), and the “belief theories” of D.M. Armstrong (1968)
and George Pitcher (1970). (Within the phenomenological tradition
intentionality and perception had always been discussed together: see
the entry on phenomenology.) Anscombe
had drawn attention to the fact that perceptual verbs satisfy the
tests for non-extensionality or intensionality (see the entry on
 intensional transitive verbs).
 For example, just as ‘Vladimir is thinking about
Pegasus’ is an intensional context, so ‘Vladimir has an
experience as of a pink elephant in the room’ is an intensional
context. In neither case can we infer that there exists something
Vladimir is thinking about, or that there is exists something he is
experiencing. This is the typical manifestation of
intensionality. Anscombe regarded the error of sense-data and naive
realist theories of perception as the failure to recognise this
intensionality.
 Armstrong and Pitcher argued that perception is a form of
belief. (More precisely, they argued that it is the acquisition of a
belief, since an acquisition is a conscious event, as perceiving is;
rather than a state or condition, as belief is.) Belief is an
intentional state in the sense that it represents the world to be a
certain way, and the way it represents the world to be is said to be
its intentional content. Perception, it was argued, is similarly a
representation of the world, and the way it represents the world to be
is likewise its intentional content. The fact that someone can have a
perceptual experience that a is F without there
being any thing which is F was taken as a reason for saying
that perception is just a form of belief-acquisition.
 The belief theory of perception (and related theories, like the
judgement theory of Craig (1976)) is a specific version of the
intentional theory. But it is not the most widely accepted version
(though see Glüer (2009) for a recent defence). Everyone will
agree that perception does give rise to beliefs about the
environment. But this does not mean that perception is simply the
acquisition of belief. One obvious reason why it isn’t,
discussed by Armstrong, is that one can have a perceptual illusion
that things are a certain way even when one knows they are not (this
phenomenon is sometimes called “the persistence of
illusion”). The famous Müller-Lyer illusion presents two
lines of equal length as if they were unequal. One can experience this
even if one knows (and therefore believes) that the lines are the same
length. If perception were simply the acquisition of belief, then this
would be a case of explicitly contradictory beliefs: one believes that
the lines are the same length and that they are different lengths. But
this is surely not the right way to describe this
situation. (Armstrong recognised this, and re-described perception as
a “potential belief”; this marks a significant retreat
from the original claim). The intentionalist theory is, however, not
committed to the view that perceptual experience is belief; experience
can be a sui generis kind of intentional state or event (see
Martin 1992–3).
3.3.3 The Intentional Content of Perceptual Experience
 Intentionalists hold that what is in common between perceptions
and indistinguishable hallucinations is their intentional content:
roughly speaking, how the world is represented as being by the
experiences. Many intentionalists hold that the sameness of phenomenal
character in perception and hallucination is exhausted or constituted
by this sameness in content (see Tye (2000), Byrne (2001)). But this
latter claim is not essential to intentionalism (see the discussion of
intentionalism and qualia below). What is essential is that the
intentional content of perception explains (whether wholly or partly)
its phenomenal character.
 The intentional content of perception is sometimes called
“perceptual content” (see the entry on
 the contents of perception). What
is perceptual content? A standard approach to intentionality treats
all intentional states as propositional attitudes: states which are
ascribed by sentences of the form “S ___ that p” where
‘S’ is to be replaced by a term for a subject,
‘p’ with a sentence, and the ‘___’ with a
psychological verb. The distinguishing feature of the propositional
attitudes is that their content—how they represent the world to
be—is something which is assessable as true or false. Hence the
canonical form of ascriptions of perceptual experiences is: “S
perceives/experiences that p”. Perception, on this kind of
intentionalist view, is a propositional attitude (see Byrne (2001) for
a recent defence of this idea, see also Siegel (2010)).
But intentionalism is not committed to the view that perception is
a propositional attitude. For one thing, it is controversial whether
all intentional states are propositional attitudes (see Crane (2001:
Chapter 4)). Among the intentional phenomena there are relations like
love and hate which do not have propositional content; and there are
also non-relational states expressed by the so-called
“intensional transitive” verbs like seek, fear, expect
(see the entry on
 intensional transitive verbs).
 All these states of mind have contents which
are not, on the face of it, assessable as true or false. If I am
seeking a bottle of inexpensive Burgundy, what I am seeking—the
intentional content of my seeking, or the intentional object under a
certain mode of presentation—is not something true or
false. Some argue that these intentional relations and intentional
transitives are analysable or reducible to propositional formulations
(see Larson (2003) for an attempt to defend this view of intensional
transitives; and Sainsbury (2010) for a less radical defence). But the
matter is controversial; and it is especially controversial where
perception is concerned. For we have many ways of talking about
perception which do not characterise its content in propositional
terms: for example, “Vladimir sees a snail on the grass”,
or “Vladimir is watching a snail on the grass” can be
distinguished from the propositional formulation “Vladimir sees
that there is a snail on the grass” (for an interesting recent
discussion of watching, see Crowther 2009). There are those who follow
Dretske (1969) in claiming that these semantical distinctions express
an important distinction between “epistemic” and
“non-epistemic” seeing. However, the view that perceptual
content is non-propositional is not the same as the view that it is
“non-epistemic” in Dretske’s sense. For ascriptions
of non-epistemic seeing are intended to be fully extensional in their
object positions, but not all non-propositional descriptions of
perception need be (for example, some have argued that “Macbeth
saw a dagger before him” does not entail “there is a
dagger which Macbeth saw”: cf. Anscombe (1965)). The question of
whether perception has a propositional content is far from being
settled, even for those who think it has intentional content (see
McDowell (2008); Crane (2009)).
 Another debate about the content of perceptual
experience—independent of the issue of whether it is
propositional—is whether it is singular or general in nature
(see Soteriou (2000); and for a more general discussion, see Chalmers
(2006)). A singular content is one that concerns a particular object,
and such that it cannot be the content of a state of mind unless that
object exists. Singular contents are also called
“object-dependent”. A general content is one whose ability
to be the content of any intentional state is not dependent on the
existence of any particular object. General contents are also called
“object-independent”. Those who think (like Snowdon
(1992), McDowell (1994), Brewer (2000)) that the content of perceptual
experience can be expressed by a sentence containing an irreducible
demonstrative pronoun (e.g., of the form “that F is
G’) will also argue that the content of experience is
singular; those who think (like Davies (1992) and McGinn (1989)) that
the content of experience is general (e.g., of the form, “there
is an F which is G”) are committed to its
object-independence. It might seem that an intentionalist must say
that the content of perception is wholly general. However, Burge
(1991) has argued that any genuinely perceptual episode has an
irreducibly singular element, even though the episode could share a
component of content with a numerically distinct episode. Martin
(2002) argues that the availability of this position shows that
intentionalism could deny that the content of experience is wholly
general.
 The issue about whether the content of perceptual experience is
singular or general is not simply about whether the existence of the
experience entails or presupposes the existence of its object. An
example will illustrate this. Suppose for the sake of argument that
experience essentially involves the exercise of recognitional
capacities, and I have a capacity to recognise the Queen. Let’s
suppose too that this is a general capacity which presupposes her
existence. It is consistent with this to say that I could be in the
same intentional state when I am hallucinating the Queen, as when I am
perceiving her. Although the capacity might depend for its existence
on the Queen’s existence, not every exercise of the capacity
need depend on the Queen’s presence. The capacity can
“misfire”. Hence intentionalism can hold that experiences
are the same in the hallucinatory and veridical cases, even though the
existence of the involved recognitional capacity presupposes the
existence of the object recognised.
 The objects of intentional states are sometimes called
“intentional objects” (Crane (2001: Chapter 1)). What are
the intentional objects of perceptual experience, according to
intentionalists? In the case of veridical perception, the answer is
simple: ordinary, mind-independent objects like the churchyard, the
snow (etc.) and their properties. But what should be said about the
hallucinatory case? Since this case is by definition one in which
there is no mind-independent object being perceived, how can we even
talk about something being an “object of experience” at
all here? As noted above, intentionalists say that experiences are
representations; and one can represent what does not exist (see Harman
(1990), Tye (1992)). This is certainly true; but isn’t there any
more to be said? For how does a representation of a non-existent
churchyard differ from a representation of a non-existent garbage
dump, say, when one of those is hallucinated? The states seem to have
different objects; but neither of these objects exist (see the entry
nonexistent-objects). 
 One proposal is that the objects of hallucinatory experience are
the properties which the hallucinated object is presented as having
(Johnston (2004)). Another answer is to say that these hallucinatory
states of mind have intentional objects which do not exist (Smith
(2002: Chapter 9)). Intentional objects in this sense are not supposed
to be entities or things of any kind. When we talk about perception
and its “objects” in this context, we mean the word in the
way it occurs in the phrase “object of thought” or
“object of attention” and not as it occurs in the phrase
“physical object”. An intentional object is always an
object for a subject, and this is not a way of classifying things in
reality. An intentionalist need not be committed to intentional
objects in this sense; but if they are not, then they owe an account
of the content of hallucinatory experiences.
 How does the content of perceptual experience differ from the
content of other intentional states? According to some
intentionalists, one main difference is that perception has
“non-conceptual” content. The basic idea is that
perception involves a form of mental representation which is in
certain ways less sophisticated than the representation involved in
(say) belief. For example, having the belief that the churchyard is
covered in snow requires that one have the concept of a
churchyard. This is what it means to say that belief has conceptual
content: to have the belief with the content that a is
F requires that one possess the concept a and the
concept F. So to say perception has non-conceptual content is
to say the following: to have a perception with the content that
a is F does not require that one have the concept of
a and the concept F. The idea is that one’s
perceptual experience can represent the world as being a certain
way—the “a is F” way—even if
one does not have the concepts that would be involved in believing
that a is F. (For a more detailed version of this
definition, see Crane (1998a) and Cussins (1990); for a different way
of understanding the idea of non-conceptual content, see Heck (2000)
and Speaks (2005). The idea of non-conceptual content derives from
Evans (1982); there are some similar ideas in Dretske (1981); see
Gunther (2002) for a collection of articles on this subject. Other
support for non-conceptual content can be found in Bermúdez
(1997); Peacocke (1992); Crowther (2006); for opposition see Brewer
(2000) and McDowell (1994a)).
3.3.4 Objections to the Intentionalist Theory
 Critics of the intentional theory have argued that it does not
adequately distinguish perceptual experience from other forms of
intentionality, and therefore does not manage to capture what is
distinctive about experience itself. (McDowell (1994), Martin (2002),
Robinson (1994: 164)).
 One objection of this kind is that intentionalists can give no
account of the qualitative or sensory character of perceptual
experience. Experiencing something, unlike thinking about it, has a
certain “feel” to it. Yet, the objection runs,
intentionalism has no resources to deal with this fact, since it
explains experience in terms of representation, and merely
representing something need have no particular “feel”
whatsoever. Believing that something is the case, for example, or
hoping that something is the case, are both forms of mental
representation, but neither state of mind has any “feel”
or qualitative character to call its own. (Words or images may come to
mind when mentally representing something in this way, but it is not
obvious that these are essential to the states of mind themselves.) So
the challenge is the following: if there is nothing about
representation as such which explains the “feel” of an
experience, how is experience supposed to be distinguished from mere
thought?
 There are a number of ways an intentionalist can respond. One is
simply to take it as a basic fact about perceptual intentionality that
it has a qualitative or phenomenal character (see Kriegel
(2013)). After all, this response continues, even those who believe in
qualia have to accept that some states of mind have qualia and some do
not, and that at some point the distinction between mental states
which are conscious/qualitative, and those which are not, just has to
be accepted as a brute fact.
 Another response is to say that in order to explain the phenomenal
character of perceptual experience, we need to treat perception as
involving non-intentional qualia as well as intentionality (see
Peacocke (1983: Chapter 1); Shoemaker (1993); Block (1997)). There is,
accordingly, a dispute between these intentionalists who accept qualia
(like Block and Shoemaker) and those who don’t (like Harman
(1990) or Tye (1992)). The first kind of intentionalist holds that in
addition to its intentional properties, perceptual experience also
involves qualia; the second kind denies this. (See the discussion of
“the transparency of experience” in
 §1.1.3 above; and see Spener (2003)).
 Consider the inverted spectrum argument (see the entry on
 inverted qualia). This argument is
based on an ancient speculation: that it is possible that two
people’s colour experience could vary massively and
systematically and that this difference be undetectable from the third
person perspective (see Shoemaker (1996)). For example, consider two
people Alice and Bob, whose colour perceptions are inverted relative
to one another. Whenever Alice sees something red, Bob sees something
blue and vice versa. Yet Alice and Bob each call all the same things
“red”, and arguably believe that all the same things are
red (fire engines, poppies etc.). It can further be argued that the
representational or intentional content of their belief that fire
engines are red is derived from the representational content of their
experiences of red fire engines, since this belief is a perceptual
belief. What then explains their mental difference? Defenders of
qualia say that what explains this is the difference in the qualia of
their mental states. Alice and Bob are intentionally or
representationally identical—they represent the world in the
same way—they differ in the non-representational qualia of their
experience. (Intentionalists who deny qualia will dispute this by
saying that the difference between Alice and Bob is indeed a
representational difference: see Tye (2000) and Hilbert and Kalderon
(2000). For more on the inverted spectrum, see Block (2007), Egan
(2006), Marcus (2006). For other arguments attempting to establish
qualia, see Block (1997), (2010), Peacocke (1983)).
3.4 The Naive Realist Theory
3.4.1 The Naive Realist Theory 
Consider the veridical experiences involved in cases of perception;
cases where one genuinely sees or otherwise perceives an object for
what it is. Like sense-datum theorists, and unlike intentionalists,
naive realists hold that such experiences themselves consist of
relations of awareness to objects. However, like intentionalists,
naive realists reject sense-data and appeal instead to ordinary
objects. So the naive realist holds, in contrast to both the
sense-datum theory and intentionalism (and, adverbialism), that the
veridical experiences involved in genuine cases of perception consist,
in their nature, of relations to ordinary objects (Level 1). And this
is put to work in explaining the phenomenal character of such
experiences (Level 2). Take the churchyard covered in white snow and
suppose one sees this for what it is. Why is this a case of things
appearing white to one? Here the naive realist appeals to the real
presence in the experience of the white snow itself. The character of
one’s experience is explained by an actual instance of whiteness
manifesting itself in experience.
For the naive realist, the character of the experience one has in
seeing the churchyard for what it is is constituted in part by the
whiteness of the snow itself and not by the representation of
such whiteness where representation is understood as it is by the
intentionalist: that is, where an experience’s representation of
something as white is something which doesn’t require the
presence of an actual instance of whiteness. And many naive realists
describe the relation at the heart of their view as a
non-representational relation. This means that many naive
realists think of experience and its character as non-representational
in this sense: (a) intentional content of the sort appealed to by the
intentionalists to explain character is not appealed to, and (b) what
is fundamental to experience is something which itself cannot
explained in terms of representing the world: a primitive relation of
awareness to aspects of the world. 
But care is needed here, for two reasons. First, neither (a) nor
(b) entail that experience is non-representational tout
court, that experiences don’t have representational
content. For one might think of experience as representational in a
way that is not tied to explaining phenomenal character (for instance
content might be needed to explain experience’s epistemic
role). If one thought of experience as contentful in a way that is not
tied to explaining character, that would not be to endorse
intentionalism, nor would it be to reject (a) or (b). And second,
McDowell (2013) seems to be a naive realist who rejects (b), for he
thinks that experience is relational in virtue of being contentful in
a certain way—a way which thus contrasts with the way in which
experience is contentful on non-relational views such as
intentionalism.  (For further discussion see the articles in
Brogaard (2014)). 
The most prominent form of naive realism invokes (a) and (b). Such
naive realists assign an important explanatory role to the world
itself, without the involvement of content, in explaining the
character of veridical experiences. It would be a mistake, however, to
think that such naive realists must think of veridical experiences as
consisting just in a simple two-place relation between a perceiver and
a worldly subject-matter whereby phenomenal character is constituted
entirely by the presented subject-matter. This would mean that there
could be no variation in the phenomenal character without a variation
in the presented subject-matter. But naive realists admit that even
holding fixed the presented subject-matter there can be variation in
the character of experience. This is worked out in different (but
compatible) ways by different theorists. One approach is to keep the
simple two-place view, yet note how variations in the perceiver
relatum can make for variations in the character of experience (Logue
(2012)). Another is to highlight a third-relatum which encapsulates
various conditions of perception such as one’s spatiotemporal
perspective, perceptual modality, and other conditions of perception
variation in which can make for variation in phenomenal character
(Campbell (2009), Brewer (2011)). It makes sense to suppose that if a
given experience is of a subject-matter from a certain viewpoint
(Martin (1998)), or standpoint (Campbell (2009)), then variation in
what goes into one having the particular viewpoint or standpoint one
has should make for variation in the phenomenal character. And we also
need to look at the relation of awareness itself. Many naive realists
hold that there can be variation in the way or
manner in which one is related to a subject-matter which
makes a difference to phenomenal character (Soteriou (2013), Campbell
(2014)). Thus naive realists will reject the transparency thesis as it
is discussed in §1.1.3, specifically (ii). 
Like intentionalists, naive realists want to maintain our ordinary
conception of perceptual experience. They hold to both
Awareness and Openness. Naive realists think that we
are sometimes perceptually aware of ordinary objects: that’s
what we have in veridical and illusory experiences (see
 §3.4.2). Such experiences are cases of
such awareness. And perceptual experience satisfies
Openness. In veridical and illusory experiences, the
character of experience is a presentation of ordinary objects, and is
immediately responsive to the character of such objects because such
objects are literally involved in the experience, part constitutive of
its character.


How, then, does the naive realist respond to the arguments which
animate the Problem of Perception?
3.4.2 The Naive Realist Theory and The Argument from Illusion 
There are various different approaches available to a naive realist
here (see e.g., Fish (2009: Chapter 6), Brewer (2008, 2011: Chapter
5), Kalderon (2011), Genone (2014), Campbell (2014)). But one approach
is to target the base case. Naive realists, like intentionalists, can
reject the Phenomenal Principle: in illusions it appears to one as if
something is F even though one is not aware of anything which
is F. When one sees a white wall as yellow, what one is aware
of is a white wall, and that is not yellow. So how does naive realism
differ from intentionalism about illusions? In two respects: first,
naive realists can group illusory experiences with veridical
experiences to the extent that they think of them as fundamentally
cases of non-representational relations of awareness to ordinary
objects. Second, the naive realist can explain the character of such
illusory experiences without appeal to intentional content, but
instead by appealing to ordinary objects, and their features. On this
second difference, one approach is that developed by Brewer:
visually relevant similarities are those that ground and
explain the ways that the particular physical objects that we are
acquainted with in perception look. That is to say, visually relevant
similarities are similarities by the lights of visual processing of
various kinds... very crudely, visually relevant similarities are
identities in such things as the way in which light is reflected and
transmitted from the objects in question, and the way in which the
stimuli are handled by the visual system, given its evolutionary
history and our shared training during development  (2011:
103)... in a case of visual illusion in which a mind-independent
physical object, o, looks F, although o is
not actually F, o is the direct object of visual
perception from a spatiotemporal point of view and in circumstances of
perception relative to which o has visually relevant
similarities with paradigm exemplars of F although it is not
actually an instance of F (2011: 105). 
So though o may not itself be F, it can exist in
certain conditions, C, such that it has visually relevant
similarities to paradigm F things and in that sense it will
objectively look F, or look like an F
thing—that is, it will itself have a property, a look or an
appearance, independently of anyone actually clapping their eyes upon
it (see also Martin (2010), Kalderon (2011) and Genone (2014) on
objective looks). If o is then seen in C, o
itself will look F to one in perception. Brewer spells this
all out in much more detail, and with various examples. One example is
seeing a white piece of chalk as red. The chalk is seen in abnormal
illumination conditions such that the white piece of chalk itself
looks like a paradigm red piece of chalk—it has ’visually
relevant similarities with a paradigm piece of chalk, of just that
size and shape’ (2011: 106). Given that it is seen in those
conditions, it looks red to one, even though it is not in
fact red. Here, then, we have an account of illusions in which we
appeal to objects and the ways those objects are, not the ways the are
represented to be, in explaining character.
3.4.3 The Naive Realist Theory and The Argument from Hallucination
How does the naive realist deal with the argument from
hallucination? The naive realist denies its conclusion (C) and unlike
the intentionalist wants to deny (C) read as

(C*) veridical experiences are not fundamentally cases of
perceptual awareness of ordinary objects. 
They accept (A) and so block the argument by rejecting the
spreading step (B) ((he Common Kind Assumption (CKA)). Suppose that,
as the naive realist holds, when one sees a snow covered churchyard
for what it is, one has an experience which is in its nature a
relation between oneself and ordinary objects. Whatever an
hallucinatory experience as of a snow covered churchyard is, it is not
an event with that nature. For such a hallucination could
occur quite apart from any relevant worldly items (e.g., in the lab of
a scientist manipulating your brain, in a world with no white
things). Instead of taking (B) and these facts about hallucinations as
grounds to reject the supposition of naive realism, the naive realist
instead gives up (B)/(CKA) and thinks of veridical experiences and
hallucinatory experiences as of different fundamental kinds. (For a
much more nuanced and detailed formulation of the naive realist
thinking here, see Martin (2004), (2006)).
 In blocking the argument from hallucination in this way the naive
realist takes on a disjunctive theory. The theory was first proposed
by Hinton (1973) and was later developed by P.F. Snowdon (1979, 1990),
John McDowell (1982, 1987) and M.G.F. Martin (2002, 2004,
2006). Disjunctivism is not best construed as it is by one of its
proponents, as the view “that there is nothing literally in
common” in perception and hallucination, “no identical
quality” (Putnam (1999: 152)). For both the perception of an
X and a subjectively indistinguishable hallucination of an
X are experiences which are subjectively indistinguishable
from a perception of an X. What disjunctivists deny is that
what makes it true that these two experiences are describable
in this way is the presence of the same fundamental kind of mental
state. Disjunctivists reject what J.M. Hinton calls “the
doctrine of the ‘experience’ as the common element in a
given perception” and an indistinguishable hallucination (Hinton
(1973: 71)). The most fundamental common description of both states,
then, is a merely disjunctive one: the experience is either a genuine
perception of an X or a mere hallucination of an
X. Hence the theory’s name.
But what support is there for the disjunctivist’s rejection
of (CKA)? Some defenders of disjunctivism have claimed that there is a
relatively simple argument against the (CKA). Putnam, for example, has
argued that since the common kind is defined by subjective
indistinguishability, and since subjective indistinguishability is not
transitive, then it cannot define a sufficient condition for the
identity of states of mind, since identity is transitive (Putnam
(1999: 130)). The argument that subjective indistinguishability is not
transitive derives from the so-called “phenomenal sorites”
argument: the possibility that there could be a series of (say) colour
samples, arranged in a sequence such that adjacent pairs were
subjectively indistinguishable but that the first and last members of
the series were distinguishable. Hence sample 1 could be subjectively
indistinguishable from sample 2, and so on; and sample 99 could be
subjectively indistinguishable from sample 100, but sample 1
nonetheless be subjectively distinguishable from sample 100. Those who
want to defend (CKA) need, therefore, to respond to this argument; one
way is to follow Graff (2001), and argue that the phenomenal sorites
argument is in fact fallacious. 
 Taking a different approach, Martin (2002: 421) argues that each
of the main theories of perception is an “error theory” of
perception (in J.L. Mackie’s (1977) sense). That is, each theory
convicts common sense of an error about perception: for example, the
sense-datum theory convicts common sense of making the erroneous
assumption that perception is a direct awareness of mind-independent
objects. Against this background, Martin argues that abandoning (CKA)
is the least revisionary position among all the possible responses to
the Problem of Perception, and thus follows Hinton (1973) in holding
the disjunctivist position to be the default starting point for
discussions of perception. (A further approach is to be found in
McDowell (2008) who attempts to support disjunctivism on
epistemological grounds.)
3.4.4 Objections and The Development of Disjunctivism
Naive realism avoids the argument from hallucination by denying
(CKA) and thus taking on disjunctivism. But some object to this and
try to support (CKA) with a so-called causal argument
(Robinson (1994), Martin (2004, 2006), Nudds (2009, 2013)). Why might
one think that the kind of event that occurs in a veridical experience
of a churchyard occurs in a subjectively indistinguishable
hallucination? One way to justify this is with appeal to the idea that
the type of brain state which underpins each experiential occurrence
is the same; the resulting experiences should thus be of the very same
kind. That is, we can suppose that when S sees the snow
covered churchyard for what it is, there is some proximal cause of
this experience: the experience is preceded by a certain sort of brain
state B. But now we can imagine a situation in which we bring
about B thus producing an experience in S, yet where
B is not brought about through any interaction between S
and a snow covered churchyard—e.g., in laboratory
conditions. In this scenario S has an hallucinatory
experience as of a snow covered churchyard. It is plausible to suppose
that these experiences are of the very same kind given that they have
the same proximal cause. Thus, (CKA). The point here is that (CKA)
looks like a plausible principle for causally matching
veridical and hallucinatory experiences.
This way of motivating (CKA) appeals to a same-cause, same effect
principle. That is,

Causal Principle 1: an event e1 is of the same
kind as an event e2 if event e1 is produced by the
same kind of proximate causal condition as e2 (Nudds 2009:
336).

But the naive realist should reject this principle. As Martin says
On [the naive realist] conception of experience, when one
is veridically perceiving the objects of perception are constituents
of the experiential episode. The given event could not have occurred
without these entities existing and being constituents of it; in turn,
one could not have had such a kind of event without there being
relevant candidate objects of perception to be apprehended. So, even
if those objects are implicated in the causes of the experience, they
also figure non-causally as essential constituents of it... Mere
presence of a candidate object will not be sufficient for the
perceiving of it, that is true, but its absence is sufficient for the
non-occurrence of such an event. The connection here is [one] of a
constitutive or essential condition of a kind of event. (2004:
56–57).
The naive realist may well admit the possibility of veridical
experiences and causally matching hallucinations, but they will resist
the idea that sameness of cause implies sameness of the kind of
experience involved. This is because there are non-causal
conditions constitutive conditions for the occurrence of the
veridical experience which are not satisfied in the hallucinatory
case. 
However, as Martin goes on to argue, this defence of (CKA)
doesn’t mean that the naive realist is in the clear. For the
arguer from hallucination can adopt a different strategy by adopting a
modified causal principle:

Causal Principle 2: an event e1 is of the same
kind K as an event e2 if event e1 is
produced by the same kind of proximate causal condition as e2
in circumstances that do not differ in any non-causal conditions
necessary for the occurrence of an event of kind K (Nudds
2009: 337).

(Martin’s own modified causal principle is more complicated than
this in allowing for indeterministic causation. We gloss over this
important complication here). Now the arguer from hallucination is
taking a different approach by appealing to Causal Principle 2 because
this will not allow the arguer to support (CKA). Take
N to be the fundamental kind which characterizes a veridical
experience of a snow covered churchyard. Does Causal Principle 2 allow
us to say that N is present in the causally matching
hallucinatory case, as (CKA) predicts? No. For the hallucination is
produced in circumstances that differ in non-causal conditions
necessary for the occurrence of N given how the naive
realist understands N: in the circumstances in which the
hallucination comes about there is no appropriate object of
perception and that is necessary for the occurrence of N.
So how does Causal Principle 2 help the arguer from hallucination?
We have to run an argument from hallucination in “the reverse
direction, from what must be true of cases of causally matching
hallucinations, to what must thereby be true of the veridical
perceptions they match” (Martin 2006: 368). That is, take a
hallucination as of a snow covered churchyard h, and suppose
that h is of some fundamental kind H. Now we can
apply Causal Principle 2 to show that H is present in a
causally matching veridical experience of a snow covered
churchyard, v For now v is produced by the same
kind of proximal cause in circumstances where there is no difference
in the non-causal conditions necessary for the occurrence of an event
of kind H. This is because all that is necessary for an
occurrence of H is some brain condition, which is
present in the circumstances in which v is brought
about. This reverse causal argument does not show that v
is not of fundamental kind N. What it does show,
however, is that whatever fundamental kind is present in a causally
matching hallucinatory case will also be present in a
veridical case. So even if v is fundamentally N it
is also H. That is, we have the Reverse Common Kind
Assumption:

(RCKA) Whatever fundamental kind of event occurs when one
hallucinates, the very same kind of event also occurs in a causally
matching veridical experience.
 But now we run into the screening off problem for naive
realism (Martin 2004). There is something it is like for S to
have an hallucinatory experience as of a snow covered churchyard, and
the experience seems to relate the subject to a snow covered
churchyard. This fact about the hallucinatory experience is grounded
in its being of kind H. But now if an experience of that kind
is present in the veridical case, it is difficult to see how what the
naive realist says is fundamental to that case, N, is doing
anything by way of explaining what it is like for a subject to have
the experience (Level 2). Consequently the presence of H in
the veridical case seems to make N explanatorily
redundant. That the veridical experience is H seems to screen
off its being N as what explains its phenomenal
character.
 This is not the end of the road for naive realism, and the way to
respond to this problem divides naive realists. The most prominent
view is the view of Martin (2004, 2006, 2013). On this view the
disjunctivist should conceive of H in a purely negative
epistemic way. That is, what makes it the case that one’s
hallucinatory experience is as of a snow covered churchyard, with a
certain sort of phenomenal character, is just that it is an occurrence
which is indiscriminable from—cannot be told apart,
introspectively, from—a veridical perception of a snow covered
churchyard. The particular subjective perspective that a hallucinator
has in a causally matching hallucination as of a snow covered
churchyard is explained just by the obtaining of this negative
epistemic condition. (Thus, arguably, Dancy’s (1995: 425) demand
of the disjunctivist for a positive characterization of hallucination
is misplaced, but see Hellie (2013)). 
 If this is all there is to the nature of H we can see how
it can be present in both the hallucinatory and the veridical case:
since trivially a veridical experience of a snow covered churchyard is
indiscriminable from a veridical experience of a snow covered
churchyard. But, crucially, the naive realist can deal with the
screening off problem. Does H have a nature which means that
the presence of H in the veridical case threatens the
explanatory power of N? Plausibly not, for it seems that
H’s explanatory force is parasitic on that of
N. As Martin notes with his own example:
But if that is so, then the property of being a veridical
perception of a tree never has an explanatory role, since it is never
instantiated without the property of being indiscriminable from such a
perception being instantiated as well. But if the property of being a
veridical perception lacks any explanatory role, then we can no longer
show that being indiscriminable from a veridical perception has the
explanatory properties which would screen off the property of being a
veridical perception (2004: 69).
This, in broad outline, is Martin’s approach and one of the
key ways in which disjunctivism is developed out of naive
realism. With it, we can see how the idea that subjectively
indistinguishable hallucinations satisfy Openness. They are,
in their very character, as of ordinary objects which appear
to one as there or present. It’s just that
what grounds or explains this character is a negative epistemic
fact.
Further discussion and development of Martin’s approach is to
be found in Nudds (2009, 2013). For naive realists who have different
reactions to the screening off problem and thus develop disjunctivism
in a different way see Fish (2009), Logue (2012a), and Hellie
(2013). For criticism of Martin’s approach see Hawthorne and
Kovakovich (2006), Farkas (2006), Sturgeon (2008), Siegel (2004,
2008), and Robinson (2013). See Burge (2005) for a general and
polemical attack on disjunctivism. For more on disjunctivism, see
Haddock and Macpherson (eds.) (2008), Byrne and Logue (eds.) (2009),
Macpherson and Platchias (eds.) (2013) and the entry on
 the disjunctive theory of perception. 
4. Conclusion
 The Problem of Perception has given rise to a significant ongoing
debate in the philosophy of perception: the debate between
intentionalists on the one hand, and naive realists and disjunctivists
on the other. This is the greatest chasm in the philosophy of
perception (Crane 2006). How is it that perceptual experience is an
Openness to the mind-independent world? Is it that some such
experiences are themselves in their nature non-representational
relations to ordinary objects? Or is it that they are in their
nature non-relational representations of ordinary
objects?