“Intuitionistic logic” is a term that unfortunately gains
ever greater currency; it conveys a wholly false view on
intuitionistic mathematics.
—Freudenthal 1937


Intuitionistic logic is an offshoot of L.E.J. Brouwer’s
intuitionistic mathematics. A widespread misconception has it that
intuitionistic logic is the logic underlying Brouwer’s
intuitionism; instead, the intuitionism underlies the logic, which is
construed as an application of intuitionistic mathematics to language.
Intuitionistic mathematics consists in the act of effecting mental
constructions of a certain kind. These are themselves not linguistic
in nature, but when acts of construction and their results are
described in a language, the descriptions may come to exhibit
linguistic patterns. Intuitionistic logic is the mathematical study of
these patterns, and in particular of those that characterize valid
inferences. An inference rule is valid if, whenever the statements in
the premises describe truths of intuitionistic mathematics, a
construction can be found that makes true the statement that is
obtained by applying the rule. What the principles of logic need to
preserve is therefore not, as in classical logic, mind-independent
truth, but mental constructibility. Various principles of classical
logic, most notably the Principle of the Excluded Middle, then become
insufficiently grounded, and certain classical theorems even
contradictory. The theorems in intuitionistic logic that formally
contradict classical theorems depend on elements of intuitionistic
mathematics that are incompatible with classical mathematics; this
illustrates how in intuitionism logic is based on mathematics and not
the other way around.

The systematic explanation and formalization of intuitionistic logic
was begun by Brouwer’s student Arend Heyting in 1928. An
“explanation” here is an account of what one knows when
one understands and correctly uses the logical connectives. Since the
1970s Heyting’s explanation and its variants are known as
“the Proof Interpretation”, as the role played by
mind-independent truth in explanations of classical logic is here
played by proof. For Heyting, a proof was primarily a mathematical
construction in Brouwer’s sense, and, secondarily, a linguistic
description of it. But it turned out that a Proof Interpretation can
also be based on other notions of proof. The Proof Interpretation
understood in a more general sense has found many applications outside
its historical origin, notably in other constructive but
non-intuitionistic forms of mathematics, philosophy, computer science,
and linguistics. This widening of the range of application was
possible because the original Proof Interpretation depends mostly on
the fact that the intuitionistic notion of mathematical truth is of a
verificationist nature, so that broadly verificationist theories in
other domains allow for an analogous explanation of their logic.

In this article, the principal concern is with the development of the
Proof Interpretation within its original context of intuitionistic
mathematics. Section 1 comments on terminology. Section 2 examines the
basis of Brouwer’s conception of logic in his early writings.
Section 3 presents his later refinements and also his views on
Hilbert’s Program, Gödel’s incompleteness theorems,
and the debate in the foundations of mathematics in the 1920s. Section
4 discusses formalizations of intuitionistic logic, which had begun
even before the Proof Interpretation had been made explicit, and
briefly looks at mathematical interpretations of the formalisms
obtained. The explanation of the Proof Interpretation in
Heyting’s writings from 1930 to 1956 is treated in section 5.
The sensitivity of intuitionistic logic to the exact conception of
mathematical construction was at the root of strong objections to
parts of the Proof Interpretation that arose from within intuitionism.
These are discussed in section 6. At the end, a short list is given of
topics that will be added in future updates.
 
1. Introduction
1.1 The Proof Interpretation

The standard explanation of intuitionistic logic today is the
BHK-Interpretation (for “Brouwer, Heyting, Kolmogorov”) or
Proof Interpretation as given by Troelstra and van Dalen in
Constructivism in Mathematics (Troelstra & van Dalen
1988: 9): 

(H1)A proof of A∧BA∧BA
\wedge B is given by presenting a proof of AAA and a proof of
BBB.
(H2)A proof of A∨BA∨BA \vee
B is given by presenting either a proof of AAA or a proof of BBB
(plus the stipulation that we want to regard the proof presented as
evidence for A∨BA∨BA \vee B).
(H3)A proof of A→BA→BA
\rightarrow B is a construction which permits us to transform any
proof of AAA into a proof of BBB.
(H4)Absurdity ⊥⊥\bot
(contradiction) has no proof; a proof of ¬A¬A\neg A is a construction
which transforms any hypothetical proof of AAA into a proof of a
contradiction.
(H5)A proof of
∀xA(x)∀xA(x)\forall xA(x) is a construction which transforms a proof of d∈Dd∈Dd
\in D (DDD the intended range of the variable x)x)x) into a proof
of A(d)A(d)A(d).
(H6)A proof of
∃xA(x)∃xA(x)\exists xA(x) is given by providing d∈Dd∈Dd \in D, and a proof of
A(d)A(d)A(d).


Notions such as “construction”, “presenting”
and “transformation” can be understood in different ways,
and indeed they have been. Similarly, there have been different ideas
as to how one may justify that concrete instances of clauses H3 and H4
indeed work for any (possibly hypothetical) proof of the antecedent.
Logical principles that are valid on one understanding of these
notions may not be valid on another. As Troelstra and van Dalen
indicate, it is even possible to understand these clauses in such a
way that they validate the principles of classical logic (Troelstra
& van Dalen 1988: 9, 32–33; see also Sundholm 2004 and Sato
1997). In the context of the foundational programs of intuitionism and
constructivism, all notions are of course understood to be effective;
but even then there is room for differences of understanding. Such
differences can have mathematical consequences. On some
understandings, intuitionistic logic turns out formally to be a
subsystem of classical logic (namely, classical logic without the
Principle of the Excluded Middle). But that is not the understanding
of intuitionistic mathematicians, who, in analysis, have constructed
intuitionistically valid instances of the schema ¬∀x(Px∨¬Px)¬∀x(Px∨¬Px)\neg \forall x(Px
\vee \neg Px), while classically there can be none (see the section
on
 Strong counterexamples and the Creating Subject (3.3),
 below). 

Troelstra and van Dalen specify that the clauses H1–H6 go back
to Heyting’s explanation from 1934 (hence “H”).
Heyting’s aim had been to clarify the conception of logic in
Brouwer’s foundational program in mathematics, which would
motivate adding the following clause: 

(H0) A proof of an
atomic proposition AAA is given by presenting a mathematical
construction in Brouwer’s sense that makes AAA
true.


Indeed, as we will see, a version of the Proof Interpretation is
implicit already in Brouwer’s early writings from 1907 and 1908,
and was notably used by him in his proofs of the bar theorem from 1924
and 1927, which predate Heyting’s papers on logic. We will
therefore begin our account of the historical development of
intuitionistic logic with Brouwer’s ideas, and then show how,
via Heyting and others, the modern Proof Interpretation was arrived
at. 
1.2 Interpretation, Explanation, and Names

As Sundholm (1983: 159) points out, in the terms
“BHK-Interpretation” and “Proof
Interpretation” it would be appropriate to replace
“Interpretation” by “Explanation”. For in a
logical-mathematical context, “interpretation” has come to
refer to the interpretation of one formal theory in
 another.[1]
 An interpretation of a formal system UUU in a formal system VVV
is given by a translation ′′' of formulas of UUU to formulas of
VVV that preserves
 provability:[2]
If U⊢A then V⊢A′If U⊢A then V⊢A′
\textrm{If } U \vdash A \textrm{ then } V \vdash A'


For the moment, we note that the BHK-Interpretation or Proof
Interpretation is not an interpretation in this mathematical sense,
but is rather a meaning explanation; we will come back to such
interpretations and their difference from explanations in
 section 4.5.2
 below. 

While accepting Sundholm’s point, we keep the terms themselves,
considering that they have perhaps become too common to change.
 Section 5.3
 below is the appropriate place to explain our preference for
“Proof Interpretation” over
“BHK-Interpretation”. 

The name “Proof Interpretation” for the explanation that
Heyting published in the 1930s and later seems to have made its first
appearance in print only in 1973, in papers by van Dalen and Kleene,
presented at the same conference (van Dalen 1973a; Kleene 1973).
Heyting himself spoke simply of the “interpretation”
(1958A: 107; 1974: 87) or “the intuitionistic
interpretation” (1958A: 110) of logic. 

The name “BHK-Interpretation” was coined by Troelstra
(1977: 977), where “K” initially stood for
“Kreisel” (because of Kreisel 1962), later for
“Kolmogorov”, e.g., in Troelstra 1990: 6; 
this replacement
is, in keeping with Sundholm’s point, a correction. 
2. Brouwer’s Views on Logic in 1907 and 1908
2.1 Mathematics, Language, and Logic

In his dissertation (1907), Brouwer presents his conception of the
relations between mathematics, language, and logic. Both the
intuitionistic view of logic as essentially sterile, and the existence
of results in intuitionistic logic that are incompatible with
classical logic, depend essentially on that conception. 

For Brouwer, pure mathematics consists primarily in the act of making
certain mental constructions (Brouwer 1907: 99n.1 [1975:
 61n.1).[3]
 The point of departure for these constructions is the intuition of
the flow of
 time.[4]
 This intuition, when divested from all sensuous content, allows us to
perceive the form “one thing and again a thing, and a continuum
in between”. Brouwer calls this form, which unites the discrete
and the continuous, “the empty two-ity”. It is the basic
intuition of mathematics; the discrete cannot be reduced to the
continuous, nor the continuous to the discrete (Brouwer 1907: 8 [1975:
17]). 

As time flows on, an empty two-ity can be taken as one part of a new
two-ity, and so on. The development of intuitionistic mathematics
consists in the exploration which specific constructions the empty
two-ity and its self-unfolding or iteration allows and which not: 


The only possible foundation of mathematics must be sought in this
construction under the obligation carefully to watch which
constructions intuition allows and which not. (Brouwer 1907: 77 [1975:
52])


or, in Heyting’s words, 


[Brouwer’s] construction of intuitionist mathematics is nothing
more nor less than an investigation of the utmost limits which the
intellect can attain in its self-unfolding. (Heyting 1968A: 314)


Brouwer and other intuitionists have shown how on this basis
arithmetic, real analysis, and topology can be constructed. Moreover,
Brouwer considers any exact thought that is not itself mathematics an
application of mathematics. For whenever we consciously think of two
things together while keeping them separate, we do so, according to
Brouwer, by projecting the empty two-ity on them (Brouwer 1907: 179n.1
[1975: 97n.1]). 

Brouwer takes the intuition of time to belong to pre-linguistic
consciousness. Mathematics, therefore, is essentially languageless. It
is the activity of effecting non-linguistic constructions out of
something that is not of a linguistic nature. Using language we can
describe our mathematical activities, but these activities themselves
do not depend on linguistic elements, and nothing that is true about
mathematical constructional activities owes its truth to some
linguistic fact. Linguistic objects such as axioms may serve to
describe a mental construction, but they cannot bring it into being.
For this reason, certain axioms from classical mathematics are
rejected by intuitionists, such as the completeness axiom for real
numbers, which says that if a non-empty set of real numbers has an
upper bound, then it has a least upper bound: we know of no general
method that would allow us to construct mentally the least upper bound
whose existence the axiom claims. 

As Brouwer later put it, “Formal language accompanies
mathematics as a score accompanies a symphony by Bach or an oratorio
by Handel”. (Brouwer et al. 1937: 262; translation
 mine)[5]
 Correspondingly, establishing properties of formal systems may have
many uses, but ultimately has no foundational significance for
mathematics. In a lecture from 1923, Brouwer expresses optimism about
Hilbert’s proof theory, but denies that it would have
significance for mathematics: 


We need by no means despair of reaching this goal [of a consistency
proof for formalized mathematics], but nothing of mathematical value
will thus be gained: an incorrect theory, even if it cannot be
inhibited by any contradiction that would refute it, is none the less
incorrect, just as a criminal policy is none the less criminal even if
it cannot be inhibited by any court that would curb it. (Brouwer
1924N: 3 [van Heijenoort 1967: 336])


At the same time, Brouwer was well aware of the practical need for
language, both in order to communicate mathematical results to others
and to help ourselves in remembering and reconstructing our previous
results (Brouwer 1907: 169 [1975: 92]). Only an ideal mathematician
with perfect and unlimited memory would be able to practice pure
mathematics without recourse to language (Brouwer 1933A2: 58 [van
Stigt 1990: 427]).  Clearly, given these two practical functions of
language, the more precise the language is, the better. 

Logic, in this framework, seeks and systematizes certain patterns in
the linguistic recordings of our activities of mathematical
construction. It is an application of mathematics to the language of
mathematics. Specifically, logic studies the patterns that
characterize valid inference. The aim is to establish general rules
operating on statements about mathematical constructions such that, if
the original statements (the premises) convey a mathematical truth, so
will the statement obtained by applying the rule (the conclusion;
Brouwer 1949C: 1243). What is preserved in an inference from given
premises to a conclusion is therefore not, as in classical logic, a
kind of possibly evidence-transcendent truth, but constructibility.
This view is quite explicit already in Brouwer’s dissertation
(Brouwer 1907: 125–132, 159–160 [1975: 72–75, 88]),
but a more memorable passage is in the paper from 1908: 


Can one, in the case of purely mathematical constructions and
transformations, temporarily neglect the presentation of the
mathematical system that has been erected, and move in the
accompanying linguistic building, guided by the principles of the
syllogism, of contradiction, and of tertium exclusum, always confident
that, by momentary evocation of the presentation of the mathematical
constructions suggested by this reasoning, each part of the discourse
could be justified? (Brouwer 1908C: 4 [van Atten & Sundholm 2017:
40])


(He then goes on to argue that the answer is “yes” for the
principles of the syllogism and of contradiction, but, in general,
“no” for the Principle of the Excluded Middle (PEM); more
on this below,
 section 2.4.)
 

But if a certain mathematical construction can be constructed out of
another one, this is a purely mathematical fact, and as such
independent of logic. Logic therefore is descriptive but not creative:
by the use of logic, one will never obtain mathematical truths that
are not obtainable by a direct mathematical construction (Brouwer
1949C: 1243). Hence, in the development of intuitionistic mathematics,
logic can never play an essential role. It follows from
Brouwer’s view that logic is subordinate to mathematics. The
classical view that mathematics is subordinate to logic is closely
related to the view that pure logic has no particular subject matter
or domain, and is prior to all. From that perspective, Brouwer’s
conception of logic as dependent on mathematics will seem too
restrictive. But for Brouwer logic always presupposes mathematics,
because in his view it is, like any exact thought, an application of
mathematics. 

The resulting linguistic system of logic may in turn be studied
mathematically, even independently of the mathematical activities and
their recordings that it was originally abstracted from. Iterating the
process, an infinite hierarchy arises of mathematical activities,
their linguistic recordings, and the mathematical study of these
recordings as linguistic objects independently of their original
meaning. Brouwer describes this hierarchy (in more detail than we have
done here) at the end of his dissertation (Brouwer 1907: 173ff), and
criticizes Hilbert for not respecting it. Of particular interest is
the distinction Brouwer makes between mathematics and
“mathematics of the second order” (Brouwer 1907: 99n.1,
173 [1975: 61n.1, 94]), where the latter is the mathematical study of
the language of the former in abstraction from its original meaning;
this way, Brouwer made fully explicit the distinction between
mathematics and (what became known as) metamathematics (e.g., Hilbert
1923: 153). Later, Brouwer claimed priority for this distinction,
adding in a footnote that he had explained it to Hilbert in a series
of conversations in 1909 (Brouwer 1928A2: 375 [Mancosu 1998: 44n.1]).

2.2 The Hypothetical Judgement

Brouwer realized (1907: 125–128 [1975: 72–73]) that the
hypothetical judgement seems to pose a problem for his view on logic
as described above. For what is peculiar to the hypothetical
judgement, Brouwer says, is that there the priority of mathematics
over logic seems to be reversed. Among the examples he refers to are
the proofs found in elementary geometry of the problems of Apollonius.
Here is one of them: Given three circles, defined by their centers and
their radii, construct a fourth circle that is tangent to each of the
given three. The way this is usually solved is first to assume that
such a fourth circle exists, then to set up equations that express how
it is related to the three given circles, and then, via algebraic
manipulations and logic, arrive at explicit definitions of the center
and radius of the required circle, and, from there, at corresponding
mathematical constructions. So it seems that here one first has to
assume the existence of the required circle, then use logic to make
various judgements about it, and only thereby arrives at a
mathematical construction for it. 

However, Brouwer argues, this is not what really happens. His general
interpretation of such cases is as follows. Having first remarked that
logical reasoning accompanies or mirrors mathematical activity which
is at least conceptually prior to that reasoning, Brouwer then says:



There is a special case […] which really seems to presuppose
the hypothetical judgment from logic. This occurs where a structure in
a structure is defined by some relation, without it being immediately
clear how to effect its construction. Here one seems to
assume to have effected the required construction, and to
deduce from this hypothesis a chain of hypothetical judgments. But
this is no more than apparent; what one is really doing in this case
is the following: one starts by constructing a system that fulfills
part of the required relations, and tries to deduce from these
relations, by means of tautologies, other relations, in such a way
that in the end the deduced relations, combined with those that have
not yet been used, yield a system of conditions, suitable as a
starting-point for the construction of the required system. Only by
this construction will it then have been proved that the original
conditions can indeed be satisfied. (Brouwer 1907: 126–127
[1975: 72; translation modified])


Different readings of this concise passage have been proposed.
According to one, Brouwer’s passage bears on A→BA→BA \rightarrow B
in the following way: 

(α)(α)(\alpha) Brouwer
points out in the above lines that if the conditions and
specifications for AAA are given, then we try to add more
information in such a way that, after a certain amount of
constructional activity, we can really carry out a construction of
AAA which respects the specifications. Once this is accomplished, we
can turn to the “implication” construction for BBB,
which yields the construction for BBB and to the required embedding
of the structure for AAA into the structure for BBB. (van Dalen
2004: 250–251)


According to interpretation αα\alpha, A→BA→BA \rightarrow B just means
A∧BA∧BA \wedge B with the extra information that the construction for
BBB was obtained from that for AAA. On this reading A→BA→BA
\rightarrow B can be asserted only after a construction for AAA
has been found. The idea is clear: namely, to avoid hypothetical
constructions, and the use of logic they require, by insisting that a
construction be supplied that proves the antecedent. (As will be
explained in
 section 6.2.1
 below, Freudenthal (1937b) too has suggested this strategy, albeit with a different
motivation than this passage in Brouwer’s dissertation.) But, as
van Dalen also notices, it is also in effect a rejection of the
hypothetical judgement in the general case where one does not know
whether there is a construction for AAA. 

An alternative reading is ββ\beta: 

(β)(β)(\beta) In order to
establish A→BA→BA \rightarrow B, one has to conceive of AAA and BBB
as conditions on constructions, and to show that from the conditions
specified by AAA one obtains the conditions specified by BBB,
according to transformations whose composition preserves mathematical
constructibility. (van Atten 2009: 128)


On this reading, Brouwer’s explanation of the hypothetical
judgement avoids hypothetical constructions and the concomitant use of
logic by considering conditions on constructions instead of
constructions themselves. Instead of a “chain of hypothetical
judgements” that one seems to make, one is really making a chain
of transformations in which from required relations (i.e., given
conditions) further relations are derived. It is, of course, a
requirement that these transformations preserve mathematical
constructibility, and that this preservation is itself intuitively
known. The role of conditions is explicit in a statement Brouwer made
at the other end of his publishing career: 


[T]he wording of a mathematical theorem has no sense unless it
indicates the construction either of an actual mathematical entity or
of an incompatibility (e.g., the identity of the empty two-ity with an
empty unity) out of some constructional condition imposed on a
hypothetical mathematical system. (Brouwer 1954A: 3)


Brouwer speaks not of an incompatibility constructed out of a
hypothetical mathematical system, but out of some condition on its
construction. 

Be that as it may, the preservation of constructibility from AAA to
BBB is essential to both reading αα\alpha and reading ββ\beta,
so on either it is clear that Brouwer had the Proof Interpretation of
the implication in mind already in 1907. For further discussion of
Brouwer’s passage on the hypothetical judgement and the two
readings of it mentioned here, see Kuiper 2004, van Dalen 2004, van
Atten 2009, and van Dalen 2008.
2.3 Negation

Intuitionistically, to say that a proposition AAA is true is
primarily to say that we have effected a construction that is
correctly described by AAA; the proposition AAA is made true by
the construction. Idealizing to a certain extent, we say that AAA is
true if we possess a construction method that, when effected, will
yield a construction that is correctly described by AAA. According
to Brouwer, to say that a proposition AAA is false then must mean
that it is impossible to effect an appropriate construction; notation
¬A¬A\neg A. Such an impossibility is recognized either immediately
(e.g., the impossibility to identify 1 unit and 2 units) or mediately.
In the former case, one observes directly that an intended
construction is blocked; it “does not go through” (Brouwer
1907: 127 [1975: 73]). In the latter case, one shows that a
proposition AAA is contradictory by reducing AAA to a known
falsehood, e.g., one shows that A→1=2A→1=2A \rightarrow 1=2 (Brouwer 1954A:
3). In practice, one defines ¬A:=A→1=2¬A:=A→1=2\neg A := A \rightarrow 1=2 (and
hence ¬1=2¬1=2\neg 1=2 is seen as a particular case of A→A)A→A)A \rightarrow
A). 

The notion of “negation as impossibility” is known as
“strong negation”. One speaks of the “weak
negation” of AAA to express that so far no proof of AAA has
been found. This excludes neither finding a proof of AAA nor finding
a proof of ¬A¬A\neg A later. Clearly, then, to assert the weak
negation of AAA is not to assign a truth value besides true and
false to it; Barzin and Errera’s claim (see
 section 4.3
 below) that its treatment of negation turns Brouwer’s logic
into a three-valued one is groundless. The distinction between weak
and strong negation is important for the so-called “weak
counterexamples”. 

2.4 Weak Counterexamples (“unreliability”) and Excluded Middle

As the rules of logic operate on linguistic objects, and these
linguistic objects may be considered separately from the precise
mathematical context in which they described a truth, it is possible
to apply the rules of logic and obtain new linguistic objects without
providing a precise mathematical context for the latter. In other
words, the logical principles, which can be stated without specifying
the context in which they are applied, and thereby suggest
context-independence, are for their correctness sensitive to the
context. There is no general guarantee that logical principles which
are valid in one context, will be equally valid in a different one.
This is what Brouwer means when he speaks of “the unreliability
of the logical principles”, the title and theme of his seminal
paper Brouwer 1908C; see also Brouwer 1949A: 1243. 

In that paper, Brouwer draws a consequence of his general view on
logic that he had overlooked in his dissertation: PEM, A∨¬AA∨¬AA \vee \neg
A, is not valid. Its constructive validity would mean that we have a
method that, for any AAA, either gives us a construction for AAA,
or shows that such a construction is impossible. But we do not have
such a general decision method, and there are many open problems in
mathematics. Brouwer states “Every number is finite or
infinite” as an example of a general proposition for which so
far no constructive proof has been found. As a consequence, he says,
it is at present uncertain whether problems such as the following are
solvable: 


Is there in the decimal expansion of ππ\pi a digit which occurs more
often than any other one?

Do there occur in the decimal expansion of ππ\pi infinitely many
pairs of equal consecutive digits? (Brouwer 1908C: 7 [van Atten &
Sundholm 2017: 44])


In effect, Brouwer is saying that we can assert the weak negations of
the propositions expressed in these questions; hence, these
propositions are so-called “Brouwerian counterexamples” or
“weak counterexamples” to PEM. On the constructive reading
of PEM, of course any as yet unsolved problem is a weak counterexample
to PEM. Brouwer began to publish weak counterexamples to PEM in
international journals only much later (1921A, 1924N, 1925E). 

Brouwer remarks in the 1908 paper that the fact that PEM is not valid
does not mean that it is false: ¬(A∨¬A)¬(A∨¬A)\neg(A \vee \neg A) implies ¬A∧¬¬A¬A∧¬¬A\neg
A \wedge \neg \neg A, a contradiction. In other words, ¬¬(A∨¬A)¬¬(A∨¬A)\neg \neg(A
\vee \neg A) is correct. Brouwer concludes that it is always
consistent to use PEM but that it does not always lead to truths. In
the latter case, the argument that appeals to PEM establishes not the
truth, but the consistency of its conclusion. Brouwer proposes to
divide the theorems that are usually considered as proved into the
true and the non-contradictory ones (Brouwer 1908C: 7n.2 [van Atten
& Sundholm 2017: 44n.14]). That is not a suggestion that there are
three truth values, true, non-contradictory, false; for a
non-contradictory proposition might be proved one day and thereby
become true. 

A mathematical context in which PEM is valid, Brouwer points out, is
that of the question whether a given construction of finite character
is possible in a given finite domain. In such a context there are only
finitely many possible attempts at that construction, and each will
succeed or fail in finitely many steps (for clarity, the phrasing here
is not that of Brouwer 1908C but that of Brouwer 1955). So on these
grounds A∨¬AA∨¬AA \vee \neg A holds, where AAA is the proposition
stating that the construction exists. 

Brouwer ascribed the belief in the general validity of PEM to an
unwarranted projection from such finite cases (in particular, those
arising from the application of finite mathematics to everyday
phenomena) to the
 infinite.[6]


In his dissertation of 1907, Brouwer still accepted PEM as a
tautology, understanding A∨¬AA∨¬AA \vee \neg A as ¬A→¬A¬A→¬A\neg A \rightarrow
\neg A (Brouwer 1907: 131, 160 [1975: 75,
 88]).[7]
 Curiously, he did realize at the same time that there is no evidence
for the principle that every mathematical proposition is either
provable or refutable (Brouwer 1907: 142n.3 [1975: 101]); this
principle is the constructively correct reading of PEM. In the paper
from 1908, he corrected his earlier understanding of PEM: 


Now the principium tertii exclusi: this demands that every supposition
is either correct or incorrect, mathematically: that of every supposed
fitting in a certain way of systems in one another, either the
termination or the blockage by impossibility, can be constructed.
(Brouwer 1908C: 5 [van Atten & Sundholm 2017: 42])

2.5 There Are No Absolutely Undecidable Propositions

Brouwer continues this last quotation as follows:


It follows that the question of the validity of the principium tertii
exclusi is equivalent to the question whether unsolvable mathematical
problems can exist. There is not a shred of proof for the conviction,
which has sometimes been put forward [here Brouwer refers in a
footnote to Hilbert 1900] that there exist no unsolvable mathematical
problems.


Here he seems to overlook that, constructively, there is a difference
between the claim that every mathematical problem is solvable and the
weaker claim that there are no absolutely unsolvable problems. The
former is equivalent to A∨¬AA∨¬AA \vee \neg A, the latter to ¬¬(A∨¬A)¬¬(A∨¬A)\neg \neg(A
\vee \neg A); and Brouwer had demonstrated the intuitionistic
validity of the latter in the same paper. Indeed, in the Brouwer
archive there is a note from about the same period 1907–1908 in
which the point is made explicitly: 


Can one ever demonstrate of a proposition, that it can never be
decided? No, because one would have to so by reductio ad
absurdum. So one would have to say: assume that the proposition
has been decided in sense aaa, and from that deduce a contradiction.
But then it would have been proved that not-aaa is true, and the
proposition is decided after all. (van Dalen 2001b: 174n.a; translation mine)


Brouwer never published this note. Wavre in 1926 gave the argument for
a particular case, clearly seeing the general point: 


It suffices to give an example of a number of which one does not know
whether it is algebraic or transcendent in order to give at the same
time an example of a number that, until further information comes in,
could be neither the one nor the other. But, on the other hand, it
would be in vain, it seems to me, to want to define a number that
indeed is neither algebraic nor transcendent, as the only way to show
that it is not algebraic consists in showing that it is absurd that it
would be, and then the number would be transcendent. (Wavre 1926: 66;
translation mine)


The explicit observation that ¬¬(A∨¬A)¬¬(A∨¬A)\neg \neg(A \vee \neg A) means that
no absolutely unsolvable problem can be indicated was made in Heyting
1934: 16. 
3. Brouwer’s Later Refinements and Applications, 1921–1955
3.1 The Implicit Proof Interpretation

Three examples can be given that show that by the mid-1920s, Brouwer
in practice worked with the hypothetical judgement and with the clause
for implication in the Proof Interpretation (which was published
later): an equivalence in propositional logic, the proof of the bar
theorem, and his reading of ordering axioms. 
3.1.1 An equivalence in propositional logic

In a lecture in 1923, Brouwer presented a proof of ¬¬¬A↔¬A¬¬¬A↔¬A\neg \neg \neg A
\leftrightarrow \neg A (Brouwer 1925E: 253 [Mancosu 1998:
 291]).[8]
 This equivalence is the one theorem in propositional logic that
Brouwer ever published. The argument begins by pointing out that A→BA→BA
\rightarrow B implies that ¬B→¬A¬B→¬A\neg B \rightarrow \neg A (because
¬B¬B\neg B is B→⊥B→⊥B \rightarrow \bot and the two implications can be
composed because the consequent of the one is the antecedent of the
other). It would not have been possible for Brouwer to make this
inference if at the time it would have been among his proof conditions
of an implication to have a proof of the antecedent, as then a proof
of A→BA→BA \rightarrow B would lead to a proof of BBB and thereby make
it impossible to begin establishing the second implication by proving
its antecedent ¬B¬B\neg B. 

Later, Brouwer pointed out the following consequence of the validity
of ¬¬¬A↔¬A¬¬¬A↔¬A\neg \neg \neg A \leftrightarrow \neg A: the proof method of
reductio ad absurdum can be used to establish negative
propositions ¬A¬A\neg A (Brouwer 1929A: 163 [Mancosu 1998: 52]). For
if the assumption of ¬¬A¬¬A\neg \neg A leads to a contradiction, that
is, to ¬¬¬A¬¬¬A\neg \neg \neg A, the equivalence allows one to simplify
that to ¬A¬A\neg A. On the other hand, reductio ad absurdum
in general cannot be used to establish positive propositions AAA;
the derivation of a contradiction from the assumption ¬A¬A\neg A only
leads to ¬¬A¬¬A\neg \neg A, which intuitionistically is weaker than
A.A.A. 
3.1.2 The proof of the bar theorem

Brouwer’s bar theorem is crucial to intuitionistic analysis; for
a detailed explanation of the notions involved and of Brouwer’s
proof, see Heyting 1956 (Ch. 3), Parsons 1967, and van Atten 2004b
(Ch. 4). Here we will rather be concerned with the logical aspects.


Brouwer’s proof of the bar theorem from 1924 (later versions of
the proof appeared in 1927 and in 1954) proves a statement of the form
“If AAA has been demonstrated, then BBB is
demonstrable” (Brouwer 1924D1, 1927B, 1954A). This is evidently
not the same as an implication A→BA→BA \rightarrow B understood as a
transformation of the proof conditions of AAA into those of BBB,
because in the former case there is the additional information that,
by hypothesis, AAA has been demonstrated. In other words, we have,
by hypothesis, a concrete proof of AAA at hand. (However, both are
hypothetical judgements in the sense that neither requires that we
actually have demonstrated AAA.) It may be possible to exploit this
extra information, and below it will be indicated how Brouwer did
this. (Heyting in 1956 chose to define implication in this stronger
sense; see
 section 5.4
 below.) 

The statement in question can be rendered more specifically as 


If it has been demonstrated that tree TTT contains a set of nodes
forming a bar, then it can be demonstrated that TTT contains a bar
that is
 well-ordered.[9]



Brouwer first formulates a condition for any demonstration that may be
found of the proposition “Tree TTT contains a bar”. This
condition is that any demonstration of that proposition must be
analyzable into a certain canonical form. Brouwer then gives a method
to transform any such demonstration, when analyzed into that canonical
form, into a mathematical construction that makes the proposition
“TTT contains a well-ordered bar”, true, thereby
establishing the consequent. This strategy clearly shows that
Brouwer’s operative explanation of the meaning of A→BA→BA
\rightarrow B was a version of clause (H3) of the Proof
Interpretation as formulated in the Introduction, if we understand
“proof” in that clause as “demonstration”.


A demonstration or concrete proof of the antecedent, be it an actual
or a hypothetical one, is required to obtain a canonical form. The
reason is that the existence of a canonical proof of a proposition
AAA cannot be logically derived from the mere proof conditions of
AAA, as the form such a canonical proof takes may well depend on
specific non-logical details of mathematical constructions for AAA.


In Brouwer’s proof of the bar theorem, the applicability of the
transformation method to any demonstration of the antecedent is
guaranteed by the fact that the condition on such demonstrations that
he formulates is a necessary condition. Brouwer obtained this
necessary condition by exploiting the fact that on his conception,
mathematical objects, so in particular trees and bars, are mental
objects; this opens the possibility that reflection on the way these
objects and their properties are constructed in mental acts provides
information on them that can be put to mathematical use, in particular
if this information consists in constraints on these acts of
construction. This is how Brouwer arrived at his canonical form. In
effect, Brouwer’s argument for the bar theorem is a
transcendental argument. On other conceptions of mathematics such
considerations need not be acceptable, and indeed no proofs of the
(classically valid) bar theorem are known in other varieties of
constructive mathematics (where bar induction is either accepted as an
axiom, a possibility that Brouwer had also suggested (Brouwer 1927B:
63n.7 [van Heijenoort 1967: 460n.7]), or not accepted, as in the
Markov School). 

For a more detailed discussion of this matter, see Sundholm and van
Atten 2008.
3.1.3 Ordering axioms

Around 1925, Brouwer introduced the notion of “virtual
ordering”. A (partial) ordering <<\lt is virtual if it
satisfies the following axioms (Brouwer 1926A: 453): 

The relations r=s,r<sr=s,r<sr = s, r \lt s and r>sr>sr \gt s are mutually
exclusive.
From r=u,s=vr=u,s=vr = u, s = v and r<sr<sr \lt s follows u<vu<vu \lt v.
From the simultaneous failure of the relations r>sr>sr \gt s and r=sr=sr
= s follows r<sr<sr \lt s.
From the simultaneous failure of the relations r>sr>sr \gt s and r<sr<sr
\lt s follows r=sr=sr = s.
From r<sr<sr \lt s and s<ts<ts \lt t follows r<tr<tr \lt t.


In a lecture course on Order Types in 1925, of which David van
Dantzig’s notes are preserved in the Brouwer Archive, Brouwer
commented:


The axioms II through V are to be understood in the constructive
sense: if the premisses of the axiom are satisfied, the virtually
ordered set should provide a construction for the order condition in
the conclusion. (van Dalen 2008: 19)


This is a clear instance of the clause for implication in the Proof
Interpretation. Note that Brouwer did not include this elucidation in
the published paper (1926A), nor in later presentations. 
3.2 Widening the Scope of the Weak Counterexamples

As we saw above, in the paper from 1908 Brouwer had given weak
counterexamples to PEM. In the 1920s Brouwer developed a general
technique for constructing weak counterexamples which also made it
possible to widen their scope and include principles of analysis. The
development began in 1921, when Brouwer gave a weak counterexample to
the proposition that every real number has a decimal expansion
(Brouwer 1921A). The argument proceeded by defining real numbers whose
decimal developments are dependent on specific open problems
concerning the decimal development of ππ\pi. Brouwer closed by
observing that, should these open problems be solved, then other real
numbers without decimal expansion can be defined (Brouwer 1921A: 210
[Mancosu 1998: 34]). The general technique was made explicit in a
lecture from 1923 (Brouwer 1924N: 3 and footnote 4 [van Heijenoort
1967: 337 and footnote 5]) and reached its perfection with the
“oscillatory number” method in the first Vienna lecture in
1928 (Brouwer 1929A: 161 [Mancosu 1998: 51]). The method involves the
reduction of the validity of a mathematical principle to the
solvability of an open problem of the following type: we have a
decidable property PPP (defined on the natural numbers) for which we
have as yet shown neither ∃xP(x)∃xP(x)\exists xP(x) nor ∀x¬P(x)∀x¬P(x)\forall x\neg
P(x). This reduction is carried out in such a way that it only uses
the fact that PPP induces an open problem of this type, and does not
depend on the exact definition of PPP; that is, if the open problem
is solved, one can simply replace it by another one (of the same
type), and exactly the same reduction still works. This uniformity
means that, as long as there are open problems of this type at all
(and this is practically certain at any time), there is no
intuitionistic proof of the general mathematical principle in
question. In the 1920s, Brouwer constructed weak counterexamples to
the following general mathematical propositions, among others (where
RR\mathbf{R} stands for the set of intuitionistic real numbers, and
QQ\mathbf{Q} for the set of rationals): 

The continuum is totally ordered (Brouwer 1924N)
Every set is either finite or infinite (Brouwer 1924N)
The Heine-Borel theorem (Brouwer 1924N)
∀x∈R(x∈Q∨x∉Q)∀x∈R(x∈Q∨x∉Q)\forall x \in \mathbf{R}(x \in \mathbf{Q} \vee x \not\in
\mathbf{Q}) (Brouwer 1925E)
Any two straight lines in the Euclidean plane are either parallel,
or coincide, or intersect (Brouwer 1929A)
Every infinite sequence of positive numbers either converges or
diverges (Brouwer 1929A)


3.3 Strong Counterexamples and the Creating Subject

A weak counterexample shows that we cannot at present prove some
proposition, but it does not actually refute it; in that sense, it is
not a counterexample proper. From 1928 on, Brouwer devised a number of
strong counterexamples to classically valid propositions, that is, he
showed that these propositions were contradictory. This should be
understood as follows: if one keeps to the letter of the classical
principle but in its interpretation substitutes intuitionistic notions
for their classical counterparts, one arrives at a contradiction. So
Brouwer’s strong counterexamples are no more counterexamples in
the strict sense of the word than his weak counterexamples are (but
for a different reason). One way of looking at strong counterexamples
is that they are non-interpretability results. 

That strong counterexamples to classical principles are possible at
all is explained as follows. As mentioned, on the intuitionistic
understanding, logic is subordinate to mathematics, whereas
classically it is the other way around. Hence, if intuitionistic
mathematics contains objects and principles that do not figure in
classical mathematics, it may come about that intuitionistic logic,
which then depends also on these non-classical elements, is no proper
part of classical logic. 

Brouwer’s first strong counterexample was published in Brouwer
1928A2, where he showed:
¬∀x∈R(x∈Q∨x∉Q)¬∀x∈R(x∈Q∨x∉Q)
\neg \forall x\in \mathbf{R}(x \in \mathbf{Q} \vee x \not\in \mathbf{Q})


This is a strengthening of the corresponding weak counterexample from
1923, but the argument is entirely different. The strong
counterexample depends on the theorem in intuitionistic analysis,
obtained in 1924 and improved in 1927, that all total functions
[0,1]→R[0,1]→R[0,1] \rightarrow \mathbf{R} are uniformly continuous. The
non-classical elements in that theorem are the conception of the
continuum as a spread of choice sequences, and the Bar Theorem based
on it (for further explanations of this conception, see Heyting 1956
(Ch.3) and van Atten 2004b (Chs.3 and
 4)).[10]

From 1948 on, Brouwer also published counterexamples that are based on
so-called “creating subject methods”. (He mentions in
Brouwer 1948A that he has been using this method in lectures since
1927.) Their characteristic property is that they make explicit
reference to the subject who carries out the mathematical
constructions, to the temporal structure of its activities, and the
relation of this structure to the intuitionistic notion of truth.
These methods can be used to generate weak as well as strong
counterexamples. (In the earlier “oscillatory number”
method for generating weak counterexamples, the creating subject is
not explicitly referred to.) 

Using creating subject methods, Brouwer showed, for instance,
¬∀x¬∀x∈R(¬¬x>0→x>0)∈R(x≠0→x<0∨x>0)(Brouwer 1949A)(Brouwer 1949B)¬∀x∈R(¬¬x>0→x>0)(Brouwer 1949A)¬∀x∈R(x≠0→x<0∨x>0)(Brouwer 1949B)
\begin{align*}
\neg \forall x &amp; \in \mathbf{R}(\neg \neg x \gt 0 \rightarrow x \gt 0) &amp; \textrm{(Brouwer 1949A)}\\
\neg \forall x &amp; \in \mathbf{R}(x \ne 0 \rightarrow x \lt 0 \vee x \gt 0) &amp; \textrm{(Brouwer 1949B)}
\end{align*}


The actual arguments using these methods introduce no new
logical phenomena as such—weak and strong counterexamples can
also be given by other means. For the moment, we refer
to the literature for further details: Brouwer 1949A, 1949B, 1954F;
Heyting 1956: 117–120; Myhill 1966; Dummett 2000: 244–245.
But we do note here one particular aspect of this method. It seems to
introduce a further notion of negation, by accepting that, if it is
known that the creating subject will never prove AAA, then AAA is
false. But this is actually no different from the notion of negation
as impossibility. Heuristically, this can be seen as follows: given
the freedom the creating subject has to construct whatever it can, the
only way to show that there can be no moment at which the subject
demonstrates AAA is to show that a demonstration of AAA itself is
impossible. An actual justification of the principle is this: If the
creating subject demonstrates a proposition AAA, it does so at a
particular moment nnn; so, by contraposition, if it is contradictory
that there exists a moment nnn at which the subject demonstrates
AAA, then AAA is
 contradictory.[11]

3.4 The Classification of Propositions

In Brouwer 1955, the four possible cases a proposition αα\alpha may
be in at any particular moment are made explicit: 

αα\alpha has been proved to be true;
αα\alpha has been proved to be false, i.e., absurd;
αα\alpha has neither been proved to be true nor to be absurd,
but an algorithm is known leading to a decision either that αα\alpha
is true or that αα\alpha is absurd;
αα\alpha has neither been proved to be true nor to be absurd,
nor do we know an algorithm leading to the statement either that
αα\alpha is true or that αα\alpha is absurd.


In a lecture from 1951, Brouwer lists only cases 1, 2, and 4 from the
above list, adding that case 3 “obviously is reducible to the
first and second cases” (Brouwer 1981A: 92). That remark
emphasizes an important idealization permitted in intuitionistic
mathematics: we may make the idealization that, once we have obtained
a decision method for a specific proposition, we also know its
outcome. 

Brouwer also adds that a proposition for which case 4 holds may at
some point pass to another case, either because we have in the
meantime found a decision method, or because the objects involved in
proposition αα\alpha in the meantime have acquired further
properties that permit to make the decision (as may happen for
propositions about choice sequences). 
3.5 Brouwer’s View on the Formalist Program and Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems

In 1908, Brouwer had shown that ¬¬(A∨¬A)¬¬(A∨¬A)\neg \neg(A \vee \neg A); in 1923,
when Hilbert’s program was in full swing, this result led
Brouwer to say that “We need by no means despair of reaching
this goal [of a consistency proof for formalized mathematics]”;
see section 2.1 above for the
 full quotation.
 (At the time, Brouwer suspected that ¬¬A→A¬¬A→A\neg \neg A \rightarrow A
was weaker than PEM; Bernays quickly corrected this impression in a
letter to Brouwer (Brouwer 1925E: 252n.4 [Mancosu 1998: 292n.4]).)


In 1928, he added to this the consistency of finite conjunctions of
instances of PEM, and considered these results to “offer some
encouragement” for the formalist project of a consistency proof
(Brouwer 1928A2: 377 [Mancosu 1998:
 43]).[12]
 The strongest statement based on these results he made at the end of
the first Vienna lecture from 1928: 


An appropriate mechanization of the language of this
intuitionistically non-contradictory mathematics should therefore
deliver precisely what the formalist school has set as its goal.
(Brouwer 1929A: 164; translation mine)


But, for reasons explained above, such a consistency proof would have
no mathematical value for Brouwer; and the best a classical
mathematician can be said to be doing, according to the view Brouwer
sketches, is to be giving relative consistency proofs. 

Gödel’s incompleteness theorems showed that Hilbert’s
Program, in its most ambitious form, cannot succeed. Brouwer’s
assistant Hurewicz discussed the incompleteness theorem in a seminar
(van Dalen 2005: 674n.7). There is no comment from Brouwer on
Gödel’s first theorem in print; on the other hand, he
clearly had the second theorem in mind when he wrote, in 1952, that



The hope originally fostered by the Old Formalists that mathematical
science erected according to their principles would be crowned one day
with a proof of non-contradictority, was never fulfilled, and,
nowadays, in view of the results of certain investigations of the last
few decades, has, I think, been relinquished. (Brouwer 1952B: 508)


Hao Wang reports: 


In the spring of 1961 I visited Brouwer at his home. He discoursed
widely on many subjects. Among other things he said that he did not
think G’s incompleteness results are as important as
Heyting’s formalization of intuitionistic reasoning, because to
him G’s results are obvious (obviously true). (Wang 1987:
 88)[13]


With respect to the first incompleteness theorem, Brouwer’s
reaction is readily understandable. Already in his dissertation, he
had noted that the totality of all possible mathematical constructions
is “denumerably unfinished”; by this he meant that 


we can never construct in a well-defined way more than a denumerable
subset of it, but when we have constructed such a subset, we can
immediately deduce from it, following some previously defined
mathematical process, new elements which are counted to the original
set. (Brouwer 1907: 148 [1975: 82]) 


And in one of the notebooks leading up to his dissertation, he stated
that “The totality of mathematical theorems is, among other
things, also a set which is denumerable but never
 finished”.[14]


Indeed, according to Carnap, it had been an argument of
Brouwer’s that had stimulated Gödel in finding the first
theorem. In a diary note for December 12, 1929, Carnap states that
Gödel talked to him that day 


about the inexhaustibility of mathematics (see separate sheet) He was
stimulated to this idea by Brouwer’s Vienna lecture. Mathematics
is not completely formalizable. He appears to be right. (Wang 1987:
84) 


On the “separate sheet”, Carnap wrote down what Gödel
had told him: 


We admit as legitimate mathematics certain reflections on the grammar
of a language that concerns the empirical. If one seeks to formalize
such a mathematics, then with each formalization there are problems,
which one can understand and express in ordinary language, but cannot
express in the given formalized language. It follows (Brouwer) that
mathematics is inexhaustible: one must always again draw afresh from
the “fountain of intuition”. There is, therefore, no
characteristica universalis for the whole mathematics, and no
decision procedure for the whole mathematics. In each and every
closed language there are only countably many expressions.
The continuum appears only in “the whole of
mathematics” … If we have only one language, and
can only make “elucidations” about it, then these
elucidations are inexhaustible, they always require some new intuition
again. (As quoted, in translation, in Wang 1987: 50)


This record contains in particular elements from the second of
Brouwer’s two lectures in Vienna, in which one finds the
argument that Gödel refers to: on the one hand, the full
continuum is given in a priori intuition, while on the other hand, it
cannot be exhausted by a language with countably many expressions
(Brouwer 1930A: 3, 6 [Mancosu 1998: 56, 58]). 

The second incompleteness theorem, on the other hand, must have
surprised Brouwer, given his optimism in the 1920s about the formalist
school achieving its aim of proving the consistency of formalized
classical mathematics (see the quotation at the beginning of this
subsection). 

In his final original published paper (1955), Brouwer was, in his own
way, quite positive about the study of classical logic. After showing
that various principles from the algebraic tradition in logic (e.g.,
Boole, Schröder) are intuitionistically contradictory, he
continues: 


Fortunately classical algebra of logic has its merits quite apart from
the question of its applicability to mathematics. Not only as a formal
image of the technique of common-sensical thinking has it reached a
high degree of perfection, but also in itself, as an edifice of
thought, it is a thing of exceptional harmony and beauty. Indeed, its
successor, the sumptuous symbolic logic of the twentieth century which
at present is continually raising the most captivating problems and
making the most surprising and penetrating discoveries, likewise is
for a great part cultivated for its own sake. (Brouwer 1955: 116)

3.6 Brouwer’s Logic and the Grundlagenstreit

Brouwer’s logic has played a role in the Grundlagenstreit (the
Foundational Debate) only to the extent that this logic could be seen
as a fragment of classical logic. Constructive logic in that sense was
a success, and it became fundamental to Hilbert’s Program as
well. On the other hand, phenomena specific to Brouwer’s full
conception of logic, in particular the strong counterexamples, played
no role in the Foundational Debate whatsoever. The main reason for
this may be that, in their dependence on choice sequences, they use
objects that are not acceptable in classical mathematics. (A more
subtle matter is whether they are acceptable in Hilbert’s
finitary mathematics. According to Bernays, Hilbert never took a
position on choice sequences (Gödel 2003a: 279), and more generally never
read Brouwer’s papers (van Dalen 2005:
 637).[15])
 In addition, Brouwer did not announce the existence of strong
counterexamples in a loud or polemical way; and when in 1954 he
finally did publish (in English) a paper with a polemical
title—“An example of contradictority in classical theory
of functions”—the Foundational Debate was, in the social
sense, long over. Intuitionistic logic and mathematics had been widely
accepted to the extent that they could be seen as the constructive
part of classical mathematics, while the typically intuitionistic
innovations were ignored. It is not surprising, then, that the
presentation of the strong counterexamples in the 1950s did not at all
lead to a reopening of the debate. For further discussion of this
matter, see Hesseling 2003 and van Atten 2004a. 
4. Early Partial Formalizations and Metamathematics

As Brouwer was more interested in developing pure mathematics than in
developing logic, which for him was a form of applied mathematics, he
never made an extensive study of the latter. In particular, he never
made a systematic comparison of intuitionistic logic and classical
logic as formalized, for example, in Principia Mathematica
(Whitehead & Russell 1910) or by the Hilbert school (Hilbert 1923;
Hilbert & Ackermann 1928). What motivated others to make such
comparisons was the publication by Brouwer in international journals
of weak counterexamples that showed how these also affected very
general mathematical principles such as trichotomy for real numbers
(see above,
 section 3.2).
 

Clearly, to make a systematic comparison possible, one needs a
codification of intuitionistic logic in a formal system. On the
intuitionistic view that cannot exist, as logic is as open-ended as
the mathematics it depends on. But one may formalize fragments of
intuitionistic logic. The relevant papers here are Kolmogorov 1925,
Heyting 1928 (unpublished), Glivenko 1928, Glivenko 1929, and Heyting
 1930.[16]
 But perhaps the first to give systematic thought to the matter was
Paul Bernays. In a letter to Heyting of November 5, 1930, he wrote:



The lectures that Prof. Brouwer at the time held in Göttingen
(for the first time) [1924 (van Dalen 2001: 305)], led me to the
question how a Brouwerian propositional logic could be separated out,
and I arrived at the result that this can be done by leaving out the
single formula ¬¬a⊃a¬¬a⊃a\neg \neg a \supset a (in your symbolism). I then
also wrote to Prof. Brouwer [correcting Brouwer’s impression at
the time that this formula is weaker than PEM]. (Troelstra 1990:
 8)[17]


(Bernays’ correction was included, at the proof stage, in
Brouwer’s paper (1925E: 252n.4 [Mancosu 1998: 292n.4]).)
However, Bernays did not publish his idea for a Brouwerian logic.
(Kolmogorov would publish the same idea in 1925; see below.) 

In setting up a formal system to capture, albeit necessarily only in
part, logic as it figures in Brouwer’s foundations, naturally
some priorly obtained meaning explanation is needed to serve as the
criterion for intuitionistic validity. Yet none of the papers by
Kolmogorov, Heyting, and Glivenko just mentioned made an explicit
contribution to the meaning explanation of intuitionistic logic. As we
will see, the explanations as given in the papers (which is not
necessarily all their respective authors had in mind) were too vague
for that. It is perhaps not surprising, then, that the systems were
not equivalent; notably, Kolmogorov rejected Ex Falso, while
Heyting and Glivenko accepted it. We will now discuss these papers in
turn. 
4.1 Kolmogorov 1925

In 1925, Andrei Kolmogorov, at the age of 22, published the first
(partial) formalization of intuitionistic logic, and also made an
extensive comparison with formalized classical logic, in a paper
called “On the principle of the excluded middle”. As van
Dalen has suggested (Hesseling 2003: 237), Kolmogorov probably had
come into contact with intuitionism through Alexandrov or Urysohn, who
were close friends of Brouwer’s. Kolmogorov was in any case
remarkably well-informed, citing even papers that had only appeared in
the Dutch-language “Verhandelingen” of the Dutch Academy
of Sciences (Brouwer 1918B, 1919A, 1921A).

The task Kolmogorov set himself in the paper is to explain why
“the illegitimate use of the principle of the excluded
middle” as revealed in Brouwer’s writings “has not
yet led to contradictions and also why the very illegitimacy has often
gone unnoticed” (van Heijenoort 1967: 416). In effect, as other
passages make clear (van Heijenoort 1967: 429–430), the
(unachieved) aim is to show that classical mathematics is translatable
into intuitionistic mathematics, and thereby give a consistency proof
of classical mathematics relative to intuitionistic mathematics. 

The technical result established in the paper is: Classical
propositional logic is interpretable in an intuitionistically
acceptable fragment of it. The intuitionistic fragment, called
BB\mathbf{B} (presumably for “Brouwer”) is:
A(A→(A→B))(A→(B→C))(B→C)(A→B)→(B→A)→(A→B)→(B→(A→C))→((A→B)→(A→C))→((A→¬B)→¬A)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(1)A→(B→A)(2)(A→(A→B))→(A→B)(3)(A→(B→C))→(B→(A→C))(4)(B→C)→((A→B)→(A→C))(5)(A→B)→((A→¬B)→¬A)
\begin{align}
\tag{1} A &amp; \rightarrow(B \rightarrow A)\\
\tag{2} (A \rightarrow(A \rightarrow B)) &amp; \rightarrow (A \rightarrow B)\\
\tag{3} (A \rightarrow(B \rightarrow C)) &amp; \rightarrow (B \rightarrow(A \rightarrow C))\\
\tag{4} (B \rightarrow C) &amp; \rightarrow((A \rightarrow B) \rightarrow(A \rightarrow C))\\
\tag{5} (A \rightarrow B) &amp; \rightarrow((A \rightarrow \neg B) \rightarrow \neg A)\\
\end{align}


The system HH\mathbf{H} (presumably for “Hilbert”)
consists of BB\mathbf{B} and the additional axiom 
¬¬A→A(6)(6)¬¬A→A\tag{6}
\neg \neg A \rightarrow A


In both systems, the rules are modus ponens and substitution. 

Kolmogorov then indicates and partially carries out a proof that
HH\mathbf{H} is equivalent to the system for classical propositional
logic presented by Hilbert in Hilbert 1923. Then Kolmogorov devises
the following translation ∗∗^*:
A∗F(ϕ1,ϕ2,…,ϕk)∗=¬¬A=¬¬F(ϕ∗1,ϕ∗2,…,ϕ∗k)for atomic A for composed formulasA∗=¬¬Afor atomic AF(ϕ1,ϕ2,…,ϕk)∗=¬¬F(ϕ1∗,ϕ2∗,…,ϕk∗) for composed formulas
\begin{align*}
A^* &amp; =  \neg \neg A &amp; \textrm{for atomic } A\\
F(\phi_1, \phi_2 ,\ldots ,\phi_k)^* &amp; = \neg \neg F(\phi_{1}^*, \phi_{2}^*,\ldots ,\phi_{k}^*)
&amp;  \textrm{ for composed formulas}
\end{align*}


and proves this interpretability result: 
If U⊢Hϕ then U∗⊢Bϕ∗If U⊢Hϕ then U∗⊢Bϕ∗
\textrm{If } U \vdash_{\mathbf{H}} \phi \textrm{ then } U^* \vdash_{\mathbf{B}} \phi^*


where UUU is a set of axioms of HH\mathbf{H}, and U∗U∗U^* the set
of its translations (which Kolmogorov shows to be derivable in
B)B)\mathbf{B}). 

Kolmogorov’s technical result anticipated Gödel’s and
Gentzen’s “double negation translations” for
arithmetic (see below), all the more so since he also made quite
concrete suggestions how to treat predicate logic. As Hesseling (2003:
239) points out, however, to see Kolmogorov’s result as a
translation into intuitionistic mathematics is slightly different from
his own way of seeing it. Kolmogorov saw it as a translation into a
domain of “pseudomathematics”; but although he did not
explicitly identify that as part of intuitionistic mathematics, he
could have done so. 

Kolmogorov’s strategy to obtain a (fragment) of formalized
intuitionistic logic was to start with a classical system and isolate
an intuitionistically acceptable system from it. (Note that, although
Kolmogorov refers to Principia Mathematica, he did not take
it as his point of departure.) This might (roughly) be described as
the method of crossing out, which is also what Heyting would do in
1928 (see below). Given the task Kolmogorov set himself, it is a
natural approach. Kolmogorov’s criterion whether to keep an
axiom was whether a proposition has an “intuitive
foundation” or “possesses intuitive obviousness”
(van Heijenoort 1967: 421, 422); on implication he said, 


The meaning of the symbol A→BA→BA \rightarrow B is exhausted by the fact
that, once convinced of the truth of AAA, we have to accept the
truth of BBB too. (van Heijenoort 1967: 420) 


No more precise indications are given, so in that sense the paper did
little to explain the meaning of intuitionistic logic. 

Ex Falso was excluded from this fragment: Kolmogorov said
that, just like PEM, Ex Falso “has no intuitive
foundation” (van Heijenoort 1967: 419). In particular, he says
that Ex Falso is unacceptable for the reason that it asserts
something about the consequences of something impossible (van
Heijenoort 1967: 421). Note that that is a very strong rejection: it
not only rules out Ex Falso in its full generality, but also
specific instances such as “If 3.15 is an initial segment of
ππ\pi, then 3.1 is an initial segment of ππ\pi”. It also
indicates an incoherence in Kolmogorov’s position: one cannot at
the same time accept A→(B→A)A→(B→A)A \rightarrow (B \rightarrow A) as an axiom
and deny that anything can be asserted about the consequences of an
impossible BBB. 

As van Dalen notes, it is not known whether Kolmogorov sent his paper
to Brouwer (van Dalen 2005: 555). The contents of the paper seem to
have remained largely unknown outside the Soviet Union for years.
Glivenko mentioned the paper in a letter to Heyting of October 13,
1928, as did Kolmogorov in an undated letter to Heyting of 1933 or
later (Troelstra 1990: 16); but in Heyting 1934 it is, unlike
Kolmogorov’s later paper from 1932, neither discussed nor
included in the bibliography. The volume of the Jahrbuch über
die Fortschritte der Mathematik covering 1925, which included a
very short notice on Kolmogorov 1925 by V. Smirnov (Leningrad),
wasn’t actually published until 1932 (Smirnov 1925). 
4.2 Heyting 1928

While Kolmogorov’s work remained unknown in the West, an
independent initiative towards the formalization of intuitionistic
logic and mathematics was taken in 1927, when the Dutch Mathematical
Society chose to pose the following problem for its annual contest:



By its very nature, Brouwer’s set theory cannot be identified
with the conclusions formally derivable in a certain pasigraphic
system [i.e., universal notation system]. Nevertheless certain
regularities may be observed in the language which Brouwer uses to
give expression to his mathematical intuition; these regularities may
be codified in a formal mathematical system. It is asked to

construct such a system and to indicate its deviations from
Brouwer’s theories;
to investigate whether from the system to be constructed a dual
system may be obtained by (formally) interchanging the principium
tertii exclusi and the principium contradictionis.
(Troelstra 1990: 4)



The question had been formulated by Brouwer’s friend, colleague,
and former teacher Gerrit Mannoury, who asked Brouwer’s opinion
on it beforehand in a letter (Brouwer was in
 Berlin);[18]
 unfortunately, no reply from Brouwer has been found, but the final
formulation was the same as in Mannoury’s letter. 

Brouwer’s former student Arend Heyting, who had graduated (cum
laude) in 1925 with a dissertation on intuitionistic projective
geometry, wrote what turned out to be the one submission (Hesseling
2003: 274). The original manuscript seems no longer to exist, but it
is known that its telling motto was “Stones for
 bread”.[19]
 In 1928, the jury crowned Heyting’s
 work,[20]
 stating that it was “a formalization carried out in a most
knowledgeable way and with admirable perseverance” (Hesseling
2003: 274; translation modified). 

Heyting’s essay covered propositional logic, predicate logic,
arithmetic, and Brouwerian set theory or analysis. One would think
that, to be able to achieve this, Heyting must have had quite precise
ideas on how to explain the logical connectives intuitionistically.
However, Heyting’s correspondence with Freudenthal in 1930 shows
that before 1930, Heyting had not yet arrived at the explicit
requirement of a transformation procedure in the explanation of
implication (see the
 quotation
 in
 section 5.1
 below). 

Since the original manuscript seems not to have survived, a discussion
of Heyting’s work must take the revised and published version
from 1930 as its point of departure; see below. 

Heyting sent his manuscript to Brouwer, who replied in a letter of
July 17, 1928, that he had found it “extraordinarily
interesting”, and continued: 


By now I have already begun to appreciate your work so much, that I
should like to request that you revise it in German for the
Mathematische Annalen (preferably somewhat extended rather than
 shortened).[21]


Interestingly, Brouwer also suggested (with an eye on the
formalization of the theory of choice sequences) 


And, with an eye on §13, perhaps also the notion of
“law” can be formalized.


It seems, however, that Heyting made no effort in that direction. 

Heyting’s paper would indeed be published soon after, in 1930;
not in the Mathematische Annalen, as Brouwer by then was no
longer on its editorial board, but in the proceedings of the Prussian
Academy of Sciences. However, Heyting’s work became known
already before its publication. Heyting mentioned it in correspondence
with Glivenko in 1928 (see below), Tarski and Łukasiewicz talked
about it to Bernays at the Bologna conference in 1928, and Church
mentioned it in a letter to Errera in 1929 (Hesseling 2003: 274). 
4.3 Glivenko 1928 and 1929

In reaction to Barzin and Errera, who had argued that Brouwer’s
logic was three-valued and moreover that this led to it being
inconsistent, Valerii
 Glivenko[22]
 in 1928 set out to prove them wrong by formal means. He gave the
following list of axioms for intuitionistic propositional logic: 
p(p→q)(p∧q)(p∧q)(r→p)pq(p→r)(p→q)→p→((q→r)→(p→r))→p→q→((r→q)→(r→(p∧q)))→(p∨q)→(p∨q)→((q→r)→((p∨q)→r))→((p→¬q)→¬p)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(1)p→p(2)(p→q)→((q→r)→(p→r))(3)(p∧q)→p(4)(p∧q)→q(5)(r→p)→((r→q)→(r→(p∧q)))(6)p→(p∨q)(7)q→(p∨q)(8)(p→r)→((q→r)→((p∨q)→r))(9)(p→q)→((p→¬q)→¬p)
\begin{align}
\tag{1} p &amp;\rightarrow p\\
\tag{2} (p \rightarrow q) &amp;\rightarrow((q \rightarrow r) \rightarrow(p \rightarrow r))\\
\tag{3} (p \wedge q) &amp;\rightarrow p\\
\tag{4} (p \wedge q) &amp;\rightarrow q\\
\tag{5} (r \rightarrow p) &amp;\rightarrow((r \rightarrow q) \rightarrow(r \rightarrow(p \wedge q)))\\
\tag{6} p &amp;\rightarrow(p \vee q)\\
\tag{7} q &amp;\rightarrow(p \vee q)\\
\tag{8} \label{GlivAxiom8}  (p \rightarrow r) &amp;\rightarrow ((q \rightarrow r) \rightarrow((p \vee q) \rightarrow r))\\
\tag{9} (p \rightarrow q) &amp;\rightarrow((p \rightarrow \neg q) \rightarrow \neg p)\\
\end{align}


From these axioms, he then proved 
¬¬(p∨¬p)¬¬¬p((¬p∨p)→¬q)→¬p→¬q(1)(2)(3)(1)¬¬(p∨¬p)(2)¬¬¬p→¬p(3)((¬p∨p)→¬q)→¬q
\begin{align}
\tag{1} \neg \neg(p \vee \neg p)\\
\tag{2} \neg \neg \neg p &amp; \rightarrow \neg p\\
\tag{3} ((\neg p \vee p) \rightarrow \neg q) &amp; \rightarrow \neg q\\
\end{align}


The first two had already informally been argued for by Brouwer
(1908C, 1925E); the third was new. Now suppose that in intuitionistic
logic, a proposition may be true (p(p(p holds), false (¬p(¬p(\neg p
holds), or have a third truth value (p′(p′(p' holds). Clearly, p→¬p′p→¬p′p
\rightarrow \neg p' and ¬p→¬p′¬p→¬p′\neg p \rightarrow \neg p', and
therefore (¬p∨p)→¬p′(¬p∨p)→¬p′(\neg p \vee p) \rightarrow \neg p'; but then, by the
third of the lemmata above and axiom 88\ref{GlivAxiom8} 
in the list, ¬p′¬p′\neg p'. As ppp is arbitrary, this means no
proposition has the third truth value. (In 1932, Gödel would show
that, more generally, intuitionistic propositional logic is no
nnn-valued logic for any natural number nnn; see
 section 4.5.1
 below.)

Like Kolmogorov in 1925 and, as we will see, Heyting in 1930, Glivenko
provided no detailed explanation of the intuitionistic validity of
these axioms. 

Glivenko immediately continued this line of work with a second short
paper, Glivenko 1929, in which he showed, for a richer system of
intuitionistic propositional logic:

If ppp is provable in classical propositional logic, then ¬¬p¬¬p\neg
\neg p is provable in intuitionistic propositional logic;
If ¬p¬p\neg p is provable in classical propositional logic, then
it is also provable in intuitionistic propositional logic.


The first theorem is not a translation in the usual sense (as
Kolmogorov’s is), as it does not translate subformulas of ppp;
but it is strong enough to show that the classical and intuitionistic
systems in question are equiconsistent. 

The system of intuitionistic propositional logic is richer than in
Glivenko’s previous paper, because to its axioms have now been
added the following four:
(p→(q→r))(p→(p→r))p¬q→(q→(p→r))→(p→r)→(q→p)→(q→p)(A)(B)(C)(D)(A)(p→(q→r))→(q→(p→r))(B)(p→(p→r))→(p→r)(C)p→(q→p)(D)¬q→(q→p)
\begin{align}
\tag{A} (p \rightarrow(q \rightarrow r)) &amp; \rightarrow (q \rightarrow(p \rightarrow r))\\
\tag{B} (p \rightarrow(p \rightarrow r)) &amp; \rightarrow (p \rightarrow r)\\
\tag{C} p &amp; \rightarrow(q \rightarrow p)\\
\tag{D} \neg q &amp; \rightarrow(q \rightarrow p)\\
\end{align}


Interestingly, Glivenko mentions in his paper that “It is Mr. A.
Heyting who first made me see the appropriateness of the two axioms C
and D in the Brouwerian logic” (Mancosu 1998: 304–305n.3).
The two had come into correspondence when, upon the publication of
Glivenko 1928, Heyting sent Glivenko a letter (Troelstra 1990: 11).
Kolmogorov in 1925 had explicitly rejected Ex Falso for
having no “intuitive foundation”. From Glivenko’s
letter to Heyting of October 13, 1928, we know that Glivenko was aware
of this (Troelstra 1990: 12). In his paper, however, which he finished
later, he does not mention Kolmogorov at all. Instead, he makes the
remark on Heyting just quoted and then justifies D by saying that it
is a consequence of the principle (p∨¬q)→(q→p)(p∨¬q)→(q→p)(p \vee \neg q) \rightarrow (q
\rightarrow p), the admissibility of which he considers “quite
 evident”.[23]
 From a Brouwerian point of view, however, the principle is as
objectionable as Ex
 Falso.[24]
 It is worth noting that, when Heyting gave his justification for
Ex Falso in Heyting 1956: 102, he did not appeal to the
principle Glivenko had used (nor did Kolmogorov in 1932). From
Glivenko’s letter of October 18, 1928, one gets the impression
that this principle had not been the argument Heyting had actually
given to convince him: 


I am now convinced by your reasons that intuitionistic mathematics
need not reject that axiom, so that all considerations against that
axiom might lead beyond the limits of our present subject matter.
(Troelstra 1990: 12; translation mine)


Heyting had informed Glivenko of the planned publication of his
(revised and translated) prize essay from 1928 in the
Mathematische Annalen. On October 30, 1928, Glivenko asked
Heyting if he also was going to include the result that if ppp is
provable in classical propositional logic, then ¬¬p¬¬p\neg\neg p is
provable in intuitionistic propositional logic; for if he would, then
there would be no point for Glivenko in publishing his own manuscript.
Two weeks later, Glivenko had changed his mind, writing to Heyting on
November 13 that, even though this result “is but an almost
trivial remark”, “its rigorous demonstration is a bit
long” and he wants to publish it independently of
Heyting’s paper. Indeed, Glivenko’s paper was published
first, and in it the publication of Heyting’s formalization was
announced; and when Heyting published his paper in 1930, he included a
reference to Glivenko 1929, stating its two theorems, and he also
acknowledged the use of results from Glivenko 1928. Heyting’s
note “On intuitionistic logic”, also from 1930, begins
with a reference to Glivenko’s “two excellent
articles” from 1928 and 1929. 
4.4 Heyting 1930

Heyting’s (partial) formalization of intuitionistic logic and
mathematics in Heyting 1930, Heyting 1930A, and Heyting 1930B, is
perhaps, as far as the parts on logic are concerned, the most
influential intuitionistic publication ever, together with his book
Intuitionism: An Introduction from 1956. 

Heyting’s formalization comprised intuitionistic propositional
and predicate logic, arithmetic, and analysis, all together in one big
system (with only variables for arbitrary objects). The part concerned
with analysis was, not only in its intended interpretation (involving
choice sequences) but also formally, no subsystem of its classical
counterpart; this explains why it sparked no general interest at the
time. (A consequence we noted above is that Brouwer’s strong
counterexamples never affected the debate.) Therefore this part of
Heyting’s formalization was left out of consideration by the
other participants in the Foundational
 Debate.[25]
 This was different for the parts concerned with logic and arithmetic.
Formally speaking and disregarding their intended interpretations,
from these one could distill subsystems of their classical
counterparts, from which only PEM (or double negation elimination) is
missing. No doubt this encouraged many to accord to these systems a
definitive character, which, as Heyting had remarked at the beginning
of his paper, on the intuitionistic conception of logic they cannot
have: 


Intuitionistic mathematics is a mental activity
[“Denktätigkeit”], and for it every
language, including the formalistic one, is only a tool for
communication. It is in principle impossible to set up a system of
formulas that would be equivalent to intuitionistic mathematics, for
the possibilities of thought cannot be reduced to a finite number of
rules set up in advance. Because of this, the attempt to reproduce the
most important parts of formal language is justified exclusively by
the greater conciseness and determinateness of the latter
vis-à-vis ordinary language; and these are properties that
facilitate the penetration into the intuitionistic concepts and the
use of these concepts in research. (Heyting 1930: 42 [Mancosu 1998:
311])


However, Heyting himself, however, wrote some five decades later, 


I regret that my name is known to-day mainly in connection with these
papers [Heyting 1930, 1930A, 1930B], which were very imperfect and
contained many mistakes. They were of little help in the struggle to
which I devoted my life, namely a better understanding and
appreciation of Brouwer’s ideas. They diverted the attention
from the underlying ideas to the formal system itself. (Heyting 1978:
15)


The fear that the attention might be thus diverted had indeed been
expressed in the first of the three papers themselves: 


Section 4 [on negation] departs substantially from classical logic.
Here I could not avoid giving the impression that the differences that
come to the fore in this section constitute the most important point
of conflict between intuitionists and formalists (a claim that is
already refuted by the remark made at the beginning [quoted above]);
this impression arises because the formalism is unfit to express the
more fundamental points of conflict. (Heyting 1930: 44 [Mancosu 1998:
313])


For the full system, including predicate logic and analysis, the
reader is referred to Heyting’s original papers. Heyting’s
axioms for intuitionistic propositional logic were: 
a(a∧b)(a→b)((a→b)∧(b→c))b(a∧(a→b))a(a∨b)((a→c)∧(b→c))¬a((a→b)∧(a→¬b))→(a∧a)→(b∧a)→((a∧c)→(b∧c))→(a→c)→(a→b)→b→(a∨b)→(b∨a)→((a∨b)→c)→(a→b)→¬a(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11)(1)a→(a∧a)(2)(a∧b)→(b∧a)(3)(a→b)→((a∧c)→(b∧c))(4)((a→b)∧(b→c))→(a→c)(5)b→(a→b)(6)(a∧(a→b))→b(7)a→(a∨b)(8)(a∨b)→(b∨a)(9)((a→c)∧(b→c))→((a∨b)→c)(10)¬a→(a→b)(11)((a→b)∧(a→¬b))→¬a
\begin{align}
\tag{1} a &amp;\rightarrow(a \wedge a)\\
\tag{2} (a \wedge b) &amp;\rightarrow(b \wedge a)\\
\tag{3} (a \rightarrow b) &amp;\rightarrow((a \wedge c)\rightarrow(b \wedge c))\\
\tag{4} ((a \rightarrow b) \wedge(b \rightarrow c)) &amp;\rightarrow(a \rightarrow c)\\
\tag{5} \label{HeytingAxiom5} b &amp;\rightarrow(a \rightarrow b)\\
\tag{6} (a \wedge(a \rightarrow b)) &amp;\rightarrow b\\
\tag{7} a &amp;\rightarrow(a \vee b)\\
\tag{8} (a \vee b) &amp;\rightarrow(b \vee a)\\
\tag{9} ((a \rightarrow c) \wedge(b \rightarrow c)) &amp;\rightarrow((a \vee b) \rightarrow c)\\
\tag{10} \label{HeytingAxiom10} \neg a &amp;\rightarrow(a \rightarrow b)\\
\tag{11} ((a \rightarrow b) \wedge(a \rightarrow \neg b)) &amp;\rightarrow \neg a\\
\end{align}


In a letter to Oskar Becker, Heyting described the approach used to
obtain these axioms, as well as those for predicate logic, as follows:



I sifted the axioms and theorems of Principia Mathematica
and, on the basis of those that were found to be admissible, looked
for a system of independent axioms. Given the relative completeness of
Principia, this to my mind ensures the completeness of my system in
the best possible way. Indeed, as a matter of principle, it is
impossible to be certain that one has captured all admissible
modes of inference in one formal system. (Heyting to Becker, September
23, 1933 (draft) [van Atten 2005: 129], original italics, translation
mine)


As Heyting emphasizes here, the theorems of Principia
Mathematica also had to be looked at, for a theorem might be
intuitionistically acceptable even when a classical proof given for it
is
 not.[26]
 It is worth noting that Heyting used this method of crossing out, as
also Kolmogorov had, instead of determining the logic directly from
general considerations on mathematical constructions in
Brouwer’s sense. (To some extent, Kreisel tried to do that
systematically in the 1960s.) 
In his dissertation on intuitionistic
axiomatization of projective geometry, Heyting had already gained
experience with developing an intuitionistic system by taking a
classical axiomatic system as guideline and then adjusting
 it.[27]


In Mints 2006 (section 2) it has been observed that Russell 1903
(section 18) anticipated intuitionistic propositional logic by
identifying Peirce’s law and using it to separate out the
principles that imply PEM. It seems that Heyting did not realize this
at the time; among the references given in Heyting 1930,
Russell’s book does not appear. 

Heyting shows the independence of his axioms using a method given by
Bernays (1926); this use of a non-intended interpretation for
metamathematical purposes Heyting accepted without hesitation, but he
remarked that such metamathematics is “less important for us
[intuitionists]” than the approach where all formulas are
considered to be meaningful propositions (Heyting 1930: 43 [Mancosu
1998: 312]). 

Heyting states Glivenko’s two theorems from 1929, without giving
proofs. 

Unlike Kolmogorov, but like Glivenko (who had been convinced by
Heyting), Heyting accepted Ex Falso (axiom
1010\ref{HeytingAxiom10} above). He was somewhat more elaborate on this
point than they had been: 


The formula a→ba→ba \rightarrow b generally means: “If aaa is
correct, then bbb is correct too”. This proposition is
meaningful if aaa and bbb are constant propositions about whose
correctness nothing need be known … The case if conceivable
that after the statement a→ba→ba \rightarrow b has been proved in the
sense specified, it turns out that bbb is always correct. Once
accepted, the formula a→ba→ba \rightarrow b then has to remain correct;
that is, we must attribute a meaning to the sign →→\rightarrow such
that a→ba→ba \rightarrow b still holds. The same can be remarked in the
case where it later turns out that aaa is always false. For these
reasons, the formulas [55\ref{HeytingAxiom5}] and [1010\ref{HeytingAxiom10}]
are accepted. (Heyting 1930: 44 [Mancosu 1998: 313])


The argument is, however, incomplete. It is uncontroversial that, once
a→ba→ba \rightarrow b has been proved, it should remain so when
afterward ¬a¬a\neg a is proved. But why should a→ba→ba \rightarrow b, if
it has not yet been proved, become provable just by establishing
¬a¬a\neg a? (Johansson asked this in a letter to Heyting in
 1935;[28]
 see
 section 6.1
 below). Clearly, then, further work needed to be done on the
explanation of intuitionistic logic. 
4.5 The Turn to Heyting’s Formalized Logic and Arithmetic

After the publication of Heyting’s series of papers, three roads
could be taken, and indeed were (cf. Posy 1992): 

to explicate and develop the meaning explanation that had given
rise to Heyting’s system; 
to engage in metamathematical study of the formal systems
distilled from Heyting’s system; 
to find alternative motivations for (parts of) Heyting’s
system that are independent from the intuitionists’, yet also in
some sense constructive (e.g., Lorenzen’s dialogue semantics)



By and large, these three roads lead to very different areas, with
correspondingly divergent histories, of which no unified account can
be expected. (However, in the Dialectica Interpretation, as proposed
and understood by Gödel (1958, 1970, 1972), they came close to
one another.) 
In accordance with the main theme of the present account, in
the remaining sections we will be concerned with the historical
development of the meaning explanations. But a number of early
highlights of the formal turn must be mentioned here. 
4.5.1 Some early results



Intuitionistic propositional logic is not a finitely valued logic.
Gödel (1932) showed that Heyting’s system for
intuitionistic propositional logic cannot be conceived of as a
finitely many-valued logic. Apparently unbeknown to Gödel, this
confirmed a conjecture of Oskar Becker (1927: 775–777).
Gödel’s result, which came soon after his incompleteness
theorem, led Heyting to write to him, 


It is as if you had a malicious pleasure in showing the
purposelessness of others’ investigations … In the sense
of economy of thought this work is certainly useful, and in addition
to that comes the particular beauty of your short proof.
[Heyting to Gödel, letter dated 24 and 26 November 1932.
(Gödel 2003a: 67)
 


Peano Arithmetic is translatable into Heyting Arithmetic. A seminal
theorem was obtained independently by Gödel (1933e) and by
Gentzen (withdrawn upon learning of Gödel’s paper): There
is a translation ′′' from PA to HA
such that
PA⊢A⇔HA⊢A′PA⊢A⇔HA⊢A′\textbf{PA} \vdash A \Leftrightarrow \textbf{HA} \vdash A'

(Gödel and Gentzen actually used Herbrand’s axioms for the
natural numbers (Herbrand 1931), but that is immaterial here.) The
same proofs serve to show that the same result holds for pure
predicate logic. This completes and generalizes Kolmogorov’s
result from 1925, which at the time was known to neither Gentzen nor
Gödel (Gödel does cite Glivenko 1929). Gödel concluded
that 


the system of intuitionistic arithmetic and number theory is only
apparently narrower than the classical one, and in truth contains it,
albeit with a somewhat deviant interpretation. (Gödel 1933e: 37
[1986: 295]) 


Heyting replied that “for the intuitionist, the interpretation
is what is essential” (Heyting 1934: 18; translation mine).
Later Gödel became, as Kreisel put it, “supersensitive
about differences in meaning” (Kreisel 1987a: 82). The
Gödel-Gentzen translation had an immediate application to the
foundational debate, in which besides the notion of existence the
status of PEM had been the main issue (Hesseling 2003): the embedding
of PA into HA shows that
PA is consistent if and only if HA
is. As Gödel observed,


The above considerations, of course, provide an intuitionistic
consistency proof for classical arithmetic and number theory. This
proof, however, is not “finitary” in the sense in which
Herbrand, following Hilbert, used the term. (Gödel 1933e:
37–38 [1986:
 295])[29]


Indeed, according to Bernays (1967: 502), it was this fact that made
it clear that intuitionism is stronger than Hilbert’s
finitism. 


Interpreting intuitionistic logic in a classical provability logic,
Gödel (1933f) presented a mapping ′′' of intuitionistic
propositional logic PC to classical modal logic
S4 such that
IPC⊢A⇒S4⊢A′IPC⊢A⇒S4⊢A′
\textbf{IPC} \vdash A \Rightarrow \textbf{S4} \vdash A'


For more details on this result, see the section
Gödel’s Work in Intuitionistic Logic and
Arithmetic of Kennedy 2007, as well as Artemov 2001.

As pointed out by Troelstra (Gödel 1986: 299), at the time
Gödel certainly knew the content of Heyting 1931. He had attended
the Königsberg conference (where Heyting had presented that
paper) and had published a review (Gödel 1932f) of the printed
version. In that paper, Heyting had introduced a provability operator,
but considered it redundant given the intuitionistic conception of
truth as provability (see below,
 section 5.1).[30]

Consider the following two properties:


the Disjunction Property (DP): if ⊢A∨B⊢A∨B\vdash A \vee B, then
⊢A⊢A\vdash A or ⊢B⊢B\vdash B;
the Explicit Definability property (EP): if ⊢∃xP(x)⊢∃xP(x)\vdash \exists x
P(x), then ⊢P(t)⊢P(t)\vdash P(t) for some term ttt
 DP for intuitionistic propositional calculus was stated by
Gödel (1932: 66 [1986: 225]), who did not give a proof. A proof
was given for intuitionistic predicate logic by Gentzen (1934). As
Troelstra and van Dalen (1988: 175) observe, the same method
(cut-elimination) yields ED for intuitionistic predicate calculus. For
Heyting Arithmetic, see Kleene 1945 (section 8) and Kleene 1952
(theorem 62b).
The intuitionistic connectives are not interdefinable: none of
→,∧,∨,¬→,∧,∨,¬\rightarrow , \wedge , \vee , \neg can be defined in terms of the
others. Heyting had stated this in Heyting 1930: 44 [Mancosu 1998:
312], but without giving a proof. A proof was published by Wajsberg
(1938) and (independently and by different methods) by McKinsey
(1939). 

4.5.2 Mathematical interpretations and model-theoretic semantics

Various mathematical interpretations (in the sense explained in
 section 1.2)
 of formalized intuitionistic logic and arithmetic have been proposed.
Above we saw Gödel’s translation of intuitionistic
propositional logic into the classical modal logic S4
from 1933; further examples are Kleene’s realizability (Kleene
1945), and Gödel’s Dialectica Interpretation (Gödel
1958, 1970, 1972). 


Such mathematical interpretations are not meaning explanations. There
are two arguments. The first is that, in a context where formal
systems are arithmetized, interpretability results are established
wholly within mathematics (e.g., Joosten 2004). But then no contact at
all is made with the concepts that figure in meaning explanations,
which have to do with our cognitive capacities, such as those of
effecting mathematical constructions or those of understanding,
learning, and using a language. The second, more general argument is
due to Sundholm (1983: 159). Here we consider AAA and its
interpretation A′A′A' not as syntactical objects but as meaningful
propositions. Then the argument is that, by whatever means one
correlates a mathematical proposition A′A′A' to a mathematical
proposition AAA, it makes sense to ask whether the propositions
AAA and A′A′A' are equivalent. On the other hand, it does not make
sense to ask whether the proposition AAA is equivalent to a
specification of what one has to know in order to understand AAA and
use it correctly; for example, that specification remains the same
whether AAA is true, false, or undecided. But then A′A′A' cannot be
a meaning explanation of AAA. 

It would therefore be a mistake to see in mathematical interpretations
of intuitionistic systems ways to make the Proof Interpretation
“rigorous” or “precise”. The difference is not
one of degree but of
 kind.[31]
 The point is general, and it makes no difference if the interpreting
theory VVV is
 intuitionistic.[32]
 On the other hand, it is not at all ruled out that for an
interpreting theory VVV itself an explanation can be given that is
arguably superior to the Proof Interpretation in some respect; this
was Gödel’s philosophical aim for his Dialectica
Interpretation. 


A related point can be made about model-theoretic semantics for a(ny)
logic (Dummett 1973: 293–294): these map formulas to
mathematical objects, without there being an intrinsic connection
between those objects and the concepts related to our understanding
and use of a language. By itself, therefore, such a semantics does not
contribute to a meaning explanation. (The first argument on
mathematical interpretations, above, is essentially the same as this
one.) But for metamathematical purposes, such model-theoretic
semantics have proved extremely valuable. Note that Heyting (1930)
used model-theoretic semantics to show the independence of his axioms
for propositional logic. A wide variety of model-theoretic semantics
for intuitionistic systems has been developed since, beginning with
the topological ones of Stone (1937) and Tarski (1938). Of the
remaining ones, among the best known are Beth models (Beth 1956),
Kripke models (Kripke 1965), and topos models. For Kripke models, see
the section Kripke semantics for intuitionistic logic of
Moschovakis 2007; for other models and further references, see Kleene
and Vesley 1965: 6 and Artemov 2001. 
5. The Proof Interpretation Made Explicit
5.1 Heyting 1930, 1931

Heyting told van Dalen that he had the notion of (intuitionistic)
construction in mind to guide him in devising his formalization of
intuitionistic logic and mathematics in 1927. In the published version
of his formalization, he did not elaborate much on the meaning of the
connectives; all he explained there about the general meaning of a→ba→ba
\rightarrow b was that “If aaa is correct, then bbb is
correct too” (Heyting 1930: 44 [Mancosu 1998: 313]).
Correspondence between Heyting and Freudenthal in 1930 shows that
Heyting up till then did not have a more refined explanation at hand;
we will come back to this later in this section. 

Heyting began to expound on the meaning of the connectives in print in
two papers written in 1930. The first, Heyting 1930C, was published
that same year, the second, the text of his lecture at Königsberg
in September 1930, was published the next year (Heyting 1931). 

The first paper was a reaction to Barzin and Errera’s claim that
Brouwer’s logic is three-valued (Barzin & Errera 1927). The
relevant points for the explanation of the meaning of the connectives
in Heyting’s paper are the following. First, an explanation is
given of assertion: 


Here, then, is the Brouwerian assertion of ppp: It is
known how to prove p. We will denote this by ⊢p⊢p\vdash p. The
words “to prove” must be taken in the sense of “to
prove by construction”. [original italics](Heyting 1930C: 959
[Mancosu 1998: 307])


And then of intuitionistic negation: 


⊢¬p⊢¬p\vdash \neg p will mean: “It is known how to reduce ppp to
a contradiction”. (Heyting 1930C: 960 [Mancosu 1998: 307])


Heyting goes on to explain that, although on these explanations there
is a third case beside ⊢p⊢p\vdash p and ⊢¬p⊢¬p\vdash \neg p, namely the
case where one knows neither how to prove ppp nor how to refute it,
this does not mean there is a third truth value: 


This case could be denoted by p′p′p', but it must be realized that
p′p′p' will hardly ever be a definitive statement, since it is
necessary to take into account the possibility that the proof of
either ppp or ¬p¬p\neg p might one day succeed. If one does not wish
to risk having to retract what one has said, in the case p′p′p' one
should not state anything at all. (Heyting 1930C: 960 [Mancosu 1998:
307])


This refutes the contention of Barzin and Errera. Note that these
points are all in Brouwer’s writings, too. Indeed, Heyting
(1932: 121) objects to Barzin and Errera’s term
“Heyting’s logic”, saying that “all the
fundamental ideas of that logic come from Brouwer” (translation
mine). But Heyting’s papers will have found a wider audience
than Brouwer’s. Brouwer, in turn, was very positive about the
paper Heyting 1930C, and wrote to the editor of the journal in which
it appeared (Brouwer to de Donder, October 9, 1930): 


While preparing a note on intuitionism for the Bulletin de
l’Académie Royale de
 Belgique,[33]
 I was pleasantly surprised to see the publication of a note by my
student Mr. Heyting, which elucidates in a magisterial manner the
points that I wanted to shed light upon myself. I believe that after
Heyting’s note little remains to be said. (van Dalen 2005:
676)


Heyting also proposes a provability operator +, where +p+p+p means
“ppp is provable”. The distinction between ppp and
+p+p+p is relevant if one believes that (at least some) propositions
are true or false independently of our mathematical activity. In that
case one can go on and develop a provability logic, as for example
Gödel did (see
 section 4.5.1
 above). That is not the intuitionistic conception, and Heyting
remarks that, if the fulfillment of ppp requires a construction,
then there is no difference between ppp and +p+p+p. He adds that, on
the intuitionistic explanation of negation, there is indeed no
difference between ¬p¬p\neg p and +¬p+¬p+\neg p, as a proof of ¬p¬p\neg
p is defined as a construction that reduces ppp to a
contradiction. But Heyting does not generalize this remark to all of
intuitionistic logic. The final section of the paper is a further
discussion of the logic of the provability operator, in particular its
interaction with negation (e.g., ⊢¬+p⊢¬+p\vdash \neg +p is the assertion
that ppp is unprovable). But Heyting ends by saying that, as the
intuitionists’ task is the reconstruction of all mathematics,
while at the same time no examples of propositions have been found so
far for which this provability operator would be necessary to express
their status (e.g., to express absolute undecidability), it cannot be
asked of intuitionists that they develop this logic (Heyting 1930C:
963 [Mancosu 1998: 309–310])

The Königsberg lecture, given in 1930 and published in 1931,
specifies the meanings of p,¬pp,¬pp, \neg p, and p∨qp∨qp \vee q. This time
Heyting makes an explicit connection to phenomenology: 


We here distinguish between propositions [Aussagen] and
assertions [Sätze]. An assertion is the affirmation of a
proposition. A mathematical proposition expresses a certain
expectation. For example, the proposition, “Euler’s
constant CCC is rational”, expresses the expectation that we
could find two integers aaa and bbb such that C=a/bC=a/bC = a / b.
Perhaps the word “intention”, coined by the
phenomenologists, expresses even better what is meant here …
The affirmation of a proposition means the fulfillment of an
intention. (Heyting 1931: 113 [Benacerraf & Putnam 1983:
58–59])


Compared to the earlier paper written in 1930, the point about the
provability operator is amplified: 


The distinction between ppp and +p+p+p vanishes as soon a
construction is intended in ppp itself, for the possibility of a
construction can be proved only by its actual execution. If we limit
ourselves to those propositions which require a construction, the
logical function of provability does not arise at all. We can impose
this restriction by treating only propositions of the form
“ppp is provable”, or, to put it another way, by
regarding every intention as having the intention of a construction
for its fulfillment added to it. It is in this sense that
intuitionistic logic, insofar as it has been developed up to now
without using the function +, must be understood. (Heyting 1931: 115
[Benacerraf & Putnam 1983: 60; translation modified])


The explanation of disjunction in the Königsberg lecture is: 


“p∨qp∨qp \vee q” signifies that intention which is fulfilled
if and only if at least one of the intentions ppp and qqq is
fulfilled. (Heyting 1931: 114 [Benacerraf & Putnam 1983: 59])


And of negation: 


Becker, following Husserl, has described its meaning very clearly. For
him negation is something thoroughly positive, viz., the intention of
a contradiction contained in the original intention. The proposition
“CCC is not rational”, therefore, signifies the
expectation that one can derive a contradiction from the assumption
[Annahme] that CCC is rational. It is important to note
that the negation of a proposition always refers to a proof procedure
which leads to the contradiction, even if the original proposition
mentions no proof procedure. (Heyting 1931: 113 [Benacerraf &
Putnam 1983: 59])


Heyting pointed out that these explanations for disjunction and
negation, taken together, are an immediate argument against the
acceptability of PEM, for which a general method would be needed that,
applied to any given proposition ppp, produces either a proof of
ppp or a proof of ¬p¬p\neg p. What Heyting did not do here was to
generalize this explanation of negation to one for implication. Also,
note that the procedure does not operate on proofs of ppp, but
starts from merely the assumption that ppp, which in general gives
less information. Both points were taken care of shortly afterward. In
a letter to Freudenthal dated October 25, 1930, shortly after the
Königsberg lecture, Heyting wrote: 


From your remarks it has become clear to me that the simple
explanation of a→ba→ba \rightarrow b by “When I think aaa, I
must think bbb” is untenable; this idea is in any case too
indeterminate to be able to serve as the foundation for a logic. But
also your formulation: “When aaa has been proved, so has
bbb”, is not wholly satisfactory to me; when I ask myself what
you may mean by that, I believe that also a→ba→ba \rightarrow b, like
the negation, should refer to a proof procedure: “I possess a
construction that derives from every proof of aaa a proof of
bbb”. In the following, I will keep to this interpretation.
There is therefore no difference between a→ba→ba \rightarrow b and +a→+b+a→+b+a
\rightarrow +b. (Troelstra 1983: 206–207; translation
mine)


This explanation of implication, which is the one that became
standard, would be introduced in print only in Heyting 1934: 14; in
his paper 1932C, Heyting used the explanation given in Kolmogorov 1932
instead (see below). 

Neither of these two papers by Heyting contained an argument for the
validity of Ex Falso. 
5.2 Influences on Heyting

A number of influences (or possible influences) on Heyting’s
arriving at the Proof Interpretation can be suggested. The following
are publications Heyting had all seen by 1927, for he refers to them
in his dissertation (1925: 93–94): 

Brouwer 1907 (Ch. 3) and Brouwer 1908C, which forcefully made the
point that intuitionistic logic is concerned with the preservation of
constructibility; 
Brouwer’s proof of the bar theorem from 1924, handed in on
March 29, 1924 (Brouwer 1924D1: 189 [Mancosu 1998: 36]), and perhaps
also the later version from 1927, of which the manuscript was handed
in on April 28, 1926 (Brouwer 1927B: 75 [van Heijenoort 1967: 446]);
both show how to operate mathematically on demonstrations as objects.

Weyl 1921, where universal and existential theorems are considered
to be not genuine judgements at all, but
“Urteilsanweisungen” (judgement instructions) and
“Urteilsabstrakte” (judgement abstracts), thus
emphasizing that such theorems for their justification need to be
backed up by a construction method. Brouwer, in a note on Weyl’s
paper, agreed, saying “This is only a matter of name and
certainly does not reflect any lacking insight on my part”
(Mancosu 1998: 122). 


A further likely influence is Brouwer’s unpublished elucidation
of the virtual ordering axioms (see
 section 3.1.3
 above). Dirk van Dalen (personal communication) suspects that,
although Heyting was probably not present at this lecture course, he
heard Brouwer make a similar comment on another occasion (for example
during the years 1922–1925, when Heyting was working on his
dissertation under Brouwer, for that work also considers
intuitionistic orderings). 
5.3 Kolmogorov 1932 and Heyting 1934

In 1932, Kolmogorov presented a logic of problems and their solutions,
and pointed out that the logic this explanation validates is formally
equivalent to the intuitionistic propositional and predicate logic
presented by Heyting in 1930. Moreover, he suggests that this provides
a better interpretation than Heyting’s. 

Kolmogorov’s idea is this:


If aaa and bbb are two problems, then a∧ba∧ba \wedge b designates
the problem “to solve both problems aaa and bbb”,
while a∨ba∨ba \vee b designates the problem “to solve at least one
of the problems aaa and bbb”. Furthermore, a⊃ba⊃ba \supset b
is the problem “to solve bbb provided that the solution for
aaa is given” or, equivalently, “to reduce the solution
of bbb to the solution of aaa” …¬a…¬a\ldots \neg a designates
the problem “to obtain a contradiction provided that the
solution of aaa is given” …(x)a(x)…(x)a(x)\ldots(x)a(x) stands in general
for the problem “to give a general method for the solution of
a(x)a(x)a(x) for every single value of xxx”. (Kolmogorov 1932: 59
[Mancosu 1998: 329])


He then lists Heyting’s axioms for propositional logic (with
Heyting’s numbering) and, by discussing an example, makes it
clear that these all hold when interpreted as statements about
problems and their solutions. He also points out that a∨¬aa∨¬aa \vee \neg
a is the problem 


to give a general method that allows, for every problem aaa, either
to find a solution for aaa, or to infer a contradiction from the
existence of a solution for aaa!

In particular, if the problem aaa consists in the proof of a
proposition, then one must possess a general method either to prove or
to reduce to a contradiction any proposition. (Kolmogorov 1932: 63
[Mancosu 1998: 332]).


In the second part of his paper, Kolmogorov argues that, given the
epistemological tenets of intuitionism, 


intuitionistic logic should be replaced by the calculus of problems,
for its objects are in reality not theoretical propositions but rather
problems. (Kolmogorov 1932: 58 [Mancosu 1998: 328]) 


That he considers his interpretation an alternative to
Heyting’s, and a preferable one, is again emphasized in a note
added in proof: 


This interpretation of intuitionistic logic is closely connected with
the ideas Mr. Heyting has developed in the last volume of
Erkenntnis 2, 1931: 106 [Heyting 1931]; yet in Heyting a
clear distinction between propositions and problems is missing.
(Kolmogorov 1932: 65 [Mancosu 1998: 334])


But it is not at all clear that Heyting would want to make that
distinction. If the notion of proposition is understood in such a way
that a proposition is true or false independently of our knowledge of
this fact, then Heyting would readily agree with Kolmogorov that a
proposition is different from a problem; but as soon as one adopts the
view that propositions express intentions that are fulfilled (i.e.,
made true) or disappointed (made false) by our mathematical
constructions, which is the view that Heyting actually held, then
there would seem to be no essential difference between propositions
and problems. Kolmogorov himself had already indicated that a problem
may consist in finding the proof of a proposition; exploiting this,
one can argue that the following two notions of proposition coincide:


propositions express intentions towards constructions 
propositions pose problems which are solved by carrying out
constructions 


The basic idea is that a proposition in sense 1 gives rise to the
problem of finding a construction that fulfills the expressed
intention, and that a solution to a problem posed in a proposition in
sense 2 also serves to fulfill the intention towards constructions
that solve that problem; this is made fully explicit in a little
argument due to Martin-Löf, given in detail in Sundholm 1983:
158–159. 

In a letter to Heyting of October 12, 1931, Kolmogorov in effect
agrees that the difference between Heyting and him is mainly a
terminological matter (Troelstra 1990: 15). 

Heyting later claimed that Kolmogorov’s meaning explanation and
his own amounted to the same (Heyting 1958C: 107). By 1937, Kolmogorov
seems to have come to believe the same, as in a review in the
Zentralblatt of an exchange between Freudenthal and Heyting
(discussed in
 section 6.1
 below), he consistently speaks of “intention or problem”
(Kolmogorov 1937). In that exchange itself, Freudenthal (1937:
114) had said that
between Heyting’s and Kolmogorov’s explanations there was
“no essential difference”. Finally, Oskar Becker, in a
letter to Heyting of September 1934, had remarked that Heyting’s
interpretation is a generalization of Kolmogorov’s, as a
“problem” and its “solution” are special cases
of an intention and its fulfillment. “Intuitionistic logic is
therefore a ‘calculus of
 intentions’”.[34]


However, a complication for the identification of Heyting’s and
Kolmogorov’s explanations of logic is introduced by
Kolmogorov’s also accepting, in a particular case, solutions
that do not consist in a carrying out a concrete construction.
Kolmogorov said that “As soon as ¬a¬a\neg a is solved, then the
solution of aaa is impossible and the problem a→ba→ba \rightarrow b is
without content” (Kolmogorov 1932: 62 [Mancosu 1998: 331]), and
proposed that “The proof that a problem is without content
[owing to an impossible assumption] will always be considered as its
solution” (Kolmogorov 1932: 59: [Mancosu 1998: 329]). Taken
together, this yields a justification of Ex Falso, ¬a→(a→b)¬a→(a→b)\neg a
\rightarrow(a \rightarrow b). 

It seems not altogether unreasonable to extend the meaning of the term
“solution” this way, for, just like a concrete solution,
an impossibility proof also provides what might be called
“epistemic closure”: like a concrete solution, it provides
a completely convincing reason to stop working on a certain problem.
(This kind of “higher-order” solution is also familiar
from Hilbert’s Program, e.g., Hilbert 1900: 51.) Note that this
justification of Ex Falso makes no attempt to describe a
counterfactual mathematical construction process; thus,
Kolmogorov’s justification from 1932 is not incompatible with
the ground for his rejection of Ex Falso in 1925, namely,
that one cannot constructively assert consequences of something
impossible. Rather, the solution from 1932 introduces a stipulation to
achieve completion of the logical theory for its own sake. 

On the other hand, although Kolmogorov’s stipulation is neither
unreasonable nor unmotivated, on Brouwer’s descriptive
conception of logic there is of course no place for stipulation. For
this reason, “Proof Interpretation” seems to be a more
appropriate name for an explanation of Brouwerian logic than
“BHK Interpretation”. 

On Heyting’s explanation, however, a justification of Ex
Falso parallel to Kolmogorov’s would seem to be impossible:
while a problem may find a “higher-order” solution when it
is shown that a solution is impossible, it makes no sense to say that
an intention finds “higher-order” fulfillment when it is
shown that it cannot be fulfilled. The notion of a solution seems to
permit a reasonable extension that the notion of fulfillment does not.
In his book from 1934, Heyting explains Ex Falso in
Kolmogorov’s terms, not his own. After stating the axiom ¬a⊃(a⊃b)¬a⊃(a⊃b)\neg
a \supset (a \supset b), he says: 


It is appropriate to interpret the notion of “reducing” in
such a way, that the proof of the impossibility of solving aaa at
the same time reduces the solution of any problem whatsoever to that
of aaa. (Heyting 1934: 15; translation mine)


Clearly there is a difference between Kolmogorov’s own
explanation and Heyting’s explanation in Kolmogorov’s
terms. Where Heyting says that a proof of ¬a¬a\neg a establishes a
reduction of the solution of any problem to that of aaa, Kolmogorov
had said that it established that the problem of reducing the solution
of any problem to that of aaa has become without content. One has
the impression that Heyting in his explanation of Ex Falso
tries to approximate as closely as possible the explanation for
ordinary implications in terms of a concrete constructive connection
between antecedent and consequent; this is even clearer in the
explanation he would give of Ex Falso in 1956 (see
 section 5.4
 below). (Note that neither Heyting nor Kolmogorov ever justified
Ex Falso by giving the traditional argument (based on the
disjunctive syllogism) also stated in Glivenko’s paper from
1929; see
 section 4.3
 above.) 

More generally, the explanation of logic in Heyting 1934 is for the
most part given Kolmogorov style, and not Heyting’s own in terms
of intentions and their fulfillment. (The latter is only mentioned for
its explanation of the implication (Heyting 1934: 14).) Perhaps the
reason for this is that Heyting (1934: 14) agrees with Kolmogorov
(1932: 58) that the interpretation in terms of problems and solutions
provides a useful interpretation Heyting’s formal system also
for non-intuitionists (while for intuitionists they come to the same
thing). In his short note 1932C, titled “The application of
intuitionistic logic to the definition of completeness of a logical
calculus”, Heyting uses Kolmogorov’s interpretation
instead of his own. Given the subject matter, that is what one might
expect. 
5.4 Heyting 1956

In his influential book Intuitionism. An introduction from
1956, Heyting explains the logical connectives as follows
(97–98, 102): 

“A mathematical proposition ppp always demands a
mathematical construction with certain given properties; it can be
asserted as soon as such a construction has been carried
out”.
“p∧qp∧qp \wedge q can be asserted if and only if both ppp
and qqq can be asserted”.
“p∨qp∨qp \vee q can be asserted if and only if at least one of
the propositions ppp and qqq can be asserted”.
“¬p¬p\neg p can be asserted if and only if we possess a
construction which from the supposition that a construction ppp were
carried out, leads to a contradiction”.
“The implication p→qp→qp \rightarrow q can be asserted, if and
only if we possess a construction rrr, which, joined to any
construction proving ppp (supposing that the latter be effected),
would automatically effect a construction proving qqq”.
“⊢(∀x)p(x)⊢(∀x)p(x)\vdash(\forall x)p(x) means that p(x)p(x)p(x) is true for
every xxx in QQQ [over which xxx ranges]; in other words, we
possess a general method of construction which, if any element aaa
of QQQ is chosen, yields by specialization the construction
p(a)p(a)p(a)”.
“(∃x)p(x)(∃x)p(x)(\exists x)p(x) will be true if and only if an element
aaa of QQQ for which p(a)p(a)p(a) is true has actually been
constructed”.


Note that these explanations are not in terms of proof conditions, but
of assertion conditions. This may make a difference in particular for
the explanation of implication, where, instead of only the information
under what condition something counts as a proof of ppp, we now can
also take into consideration that, by hypothesis, a concrete
construction for ppp has been effected. As we saw in
 section 3.1.2,
 the possibility to do so is crucial for Brouwer’s proof of the
Bar Theorem. 

In the same pages, Heyting also gave the following justification of
Ex Falso: 


Axiom X [¬p→(p→q)¬p→(p→q)\neg p \rightarrow(p \rightarrow q)] may not seem
intuitively clear. As a matter of fact, it adds to the precision of
the definition of implication. You remember that p→qp→qp \rightarrow q
can be asserted if and only if we possess a construction which, joined
to the construction ppp, would prove qqq. Now suppose that
⊢¬p⊢¬p\vdash \neg p, that is, we have deduced a contradiction from the
supposition that ppp were carried out. Then, in a sense, this can be
considered as a construction, which, joined to a proof of ppp (which
cannot exist) leads to a proof of qqq. (Heyting 1956: 102)


One easily recognizes Heyting’s effort to explain Ex
Falso as much as possible along the same lines as other
implications, namely, by providing a concrete construction that leads
from the antecedent to the consequent. In its attempt to provide,
“in a sense”, a construction, the explanation is clearly
not of the same kind as Kolmogorov’s stipulation from 1932. But
it does not fit into Heyting’s original interpretation of logic
in terms of intentions directed at constructions and the fulfillment
of such intentions either. For to fulfill an intention directed toward
a particular construction we will have to exhibit that construction;
we will have to exhibit a construction that transforms any proof of
ppp into one of qqq. But how can a construction that from the
assumption ppp arrives at a contradiction, and therefore generally
speaking not at qqq, lead to qqq? It will not do to say that such
a construction exists “in a sense”. A construction that is
a construction “in a sense”, as Heyting helps himself to
here, is no construction. 
6. Objections to the Proof Interpretation

As the Proof Interpretation became known, through personal exchanges
and in print, a number of objections were made to it:

Its explanation of implication is not strict enough (Johansson)

Its explanation of implication depends on hypothetical
constructions, which are not in intuition (Freudenthal, Griss)
Its explanation of implication is circular (Gentzen)
Its explanation of implication is impredicative (Gödel, Kuroda, Kreisel)
 These criticisms also targeted the universal quantifier and
negation, which are both closely related to implication. Whether the
criticisms are justified or not, they inspired important innovations:


 Normalization for first-order intuitionistic predicate logic
(Gentzen)
 Minimal logic (Johansson)
 Functional interpretations (Gödel)
 Negationless mathematics (Griss)
 Thematically, the objections of Johansson, Freudenthal, and
Griss are closely related, as are those of Gentzen and Gödel, 
Kuroda, and Kreisel. In
a discussion of the Proof Interpretation as a codification of
Brouwer’s explanation of logic, the former three are potentially
the strongest ones as they were formulated from a point of view that
was either avowedly intuitionistic (Freudenthal, Griss), or close
enough to be interpreted that way (Johansson). That was less the case
for Gentzen, and certainly less for Gödel; on the other hand,
their objections have had a much wider influence, corresponding to the
fact that intuitionism has remained a minority view. 
For the moment, we will discuss the first group.

6.1 Implication is Not Strict Enough (Johansson 1935–1937)

As mentioned in
 section 4.4
 above, Heyting’s axiomatization of implication was soon questioned
by Johansson. Ingebrigt Johansson (1904–1987) was a Norwegian
mathematician working mostly in geometry and topology. He had found a
reference to Heyting’s “Die formalen Regeln” (Heyting
1930) by
 accident.[35]
 “Having studied it carefully, I have become able to understand
works by Brouwer to some extent; before, that was impossible for
me” (Johansson to Heyting, August 29, 1935; translation mine).
His concern over the acceptability of Ex Falso 
(axiom 1010\ref{HeytingAxiom10} above)
led to a short correspondence from later 1935 to early
 1936,[36]
 and resulted in the publication of “Der Minimalkalkül, ein
reduzierter intuitionistischer Formalismus” (Johansson 1937) in
Brouwer’s Compositio Mathematica. Here I will only discuss
Johansson’s direct criticism of the Proof Interpretation; evidently,
this does not do much justice to his ideas that allowed him not only
to criticize the Proof Interpretation but to turn that criticism into
the positive development of Minimal Logic. 

Johansson announces his disapproval of the inclusion of Ex
Falso in the opening letter but first formulates a precise
criticism in his second: 


I have not been able to make my peace with Axiom 4.1. You say that
when a→ba→ba \rightarrow b has been proved, and later ¬a¬a\neg a is
proved, then a→ba→ba \rightarrow b should remain correct.
Indeed; but ⊢¬a→⋅a→b⊢¬a→⋅a→b\vdash \neg a \rightarrow \cdot a \rightarrow b means
that when ¬a¬a\neg a has been proved, bbb at once becomes
derivable from aaa, even when this had not been proved before. And
that contradicts my intuition in the most violent way. (Johansson to
Heyting, September 23, 1935; translation mine)
 And later that year:



My being unwilling to accept 4.1 is in the end simply based on the
circumstance that I prefer to work with a more strict
implication. My Minimal Logic shows, however, that a more strict
implication really is possible. (November 15, 1935; translation
mine):


(The phrase “strict implication” is a reference to Lewis
1914, which Johansson will cite in his article of 1937.)

In a note for his reply (and presumably also in the letter actually
sent) Heyting explained: 


I interpret a→ba→ba \rightarrow b as “to reduce the solution of
bbb to that of aaa, or to show the impossibility of solving
aaa”. This interpretation is appropriate. (Note by Heyting to
Johansson’s letter of September 23, 1935; translation
 mine)[37]


This of course is Kolmogorov’s interpretation of 1932 (see
 section 5.3
 above). 

In 1955, in the French translation of his book
Grundlagenforschung of 1934, Heyting adds a note saying that
Johansson’s interpretation of the implication is different from
his own (Heyting 1955: 19). But the discussion seems to have had an
effect on Heyting. The second thoughts that Heyting seems to have
developed about Kolmogorov’s interpretation as applied to Ex
Falso are probably related to Johansson’s insistence that
¬a→⋅a→b¬a→⋅a→b\neg a \rightarrow \cdot a \rightarrow b can only be accepted if a
construction can be indicated that, on the assumption that ¬a¬a\neg a
has been proved, transforms proofs of aaa into proofs of bbb. For
in the justification of Ex Falso that Heyting went on to give
in his book of 1956, Intuitionism. An introduction, he tried
to make the case that there indeed is a construction that will do just
that; see the discussion in
 section 5.4
 above. 

Formalized intuitionistic logic with Ex Falso is
interpretable in Minimal Logic (Prawitz & Malmnäs 1968: 219,
221, 224–225). In this translation, ⊥⊥\bot is replaced by an
arbitrary proposition letter that does not occur in the original
proof. From a contentual point of view, the problem of finding an
acceptable meaning for the formulas containing that proposition letter
would of course remain. 

However, for the specific systems of formalized primitive recursive
arithmetic (PRA) and Heyting Arithmetic (HA) there is a result that is
more satisfying from the contentual point of view. Defining ⊥⊥\bot
as 0=10=10=1 enables one formally to derive ⊥→A⊥→A\bot \rightarrow A for
any AAA in the language of the system. The demonstration of this
fact (Troelstra & van Dalen 1988: 126–127) does not depend
on knowing that there is no proof of 0=10=10=1, and the demonstration
makes it easy to see how in these systems from a formal proof of
0=10=10=1 one would obtain a formal proof of any given AAA. 

For a discussion of other logical aspects of the Heyting-Johansson
correspondence, see van der Molen 2016. On negation in Minimal Logic,
see Hazen 1995. Relations between the logic of Kolmogorov 1925 and
Minimal Logic are discussed in Plisko 1988. Proof-theoretical aspects
of Minimal Logic are treated in Prawitz 1965 and Prawitz &
Malmnäs 1968; model-theory in Fitting 1969: 40, Georgacarakos
1982, and Mendez 1988; an algebraic approach in Rasiowa 1974: chapter
11. Weakenings of Minimal Logic are the subject of Colacito, de Jongh,
& Vargas 2017. 
6.2 Hypothetical Constructions Are Not in Intuition (Freudenthal 1937, Griss 1941–1951)

To have a genuine implication (and hence also a genuine universal
quantification) it must be possible to make hypotheses; that this is
possible in intuitionism was contested by the intuitionists
Freudenthal and Griss. They did not comment directly on the passage in
Brouwer’s dissertation discussed above in section
 section 2.2,
 in which Brouwer argues that arguments that seem to involve
hypothetical constructions in reality do not. Both Freudenthal and
Griss must have known that argument. Conversely, although Brouwer did
react in print to both (see below), this regrettably did not include
an explicit philosophical engagement with their views. He did express
himself at a meeting of the Dutch Mathematical Society at the
Krasnapolsky Hotel in Amsterdam in 1947, as remembered by Korevaar:



That day G.F.C. Griss (mathematics teacher in Gouda) spoke about what
he called his negationless mathematics. That was even more strict than
Brouwer’s intuitionism. […] Afterwards there was an extended
discussion at the blackboard. First between Griss and, among others,
van Dantzig, who evoked his affirmative mathematics. I think that
Freudenthal was there, too. Then it was Heyting’s turn; he tried to
explain what Brouwer had meant. Finally, and unexpectedly, Brouwer
himself appeared, from the back of the room; no one had noticed that
he had arrived. Brouwer came forward running, his coat-tails flapping.
And he cried: “You have all misunderstood!” (Korevaar
2016: 248; translation mine)


Unfortunately, no report seems to exist on the content of the
discussion. 

Two years later the Belgian philosopher S.I. Dockx hoped to organize a
meeting on negationless logic with Brouwer, Griss, Freudenthal,
Heyting, and van Dantzig. Brouwer made it clear, however, that he did
not want to participate in an event together with Freudenthal (letter
of Beth to Dockx of July 8, 1949, in van Dalen 2011: Online
Supplement, 2446; for Brouwer’s conflict with Freudenthal see van
Dalen 2005: 721–728, 753–757, and 794–799). In the
end, a colloquium was indeed held in Brussels in 1949, with as
speakers Beth, Destouches-Février, Feys, Freudenthal, Griss and
van Dantzig (Chronique générale 1949:
 435).[38]
 As is the case for the meeting in Amsterdam in 1947, there seems to
exist no report on the content of the discussions; and Heyting’s
absence from the list of speakers is as yet unaccounted for. 
6.2.1 Freudenthal 1937

Hans Freudenthal (1905–1990) was an intellectually omnivorous
German-Dutch mathematician, who took his PhD in Berlin in 1930 with a
thesis in topology directed by Brouwer’s friends Hopf and
Bieberbach. He came to know Brouwer when the latter lectured in Berlin
in 1927, and made a favorable impression on him because of the
good questions he asked (van Dalen 2005: 546). In 1930 he moved to
Amsterdam to become one of Brouwer’s assistants and, from 1931,
also lecturer. At the same time he continued his research in
avant-garde topology. After the Second World War, Freudenthal became
full professor in Utrecht, and mostly did important work in the
history and didactics of mathematics. (In the preface to
Mathematics as an Educational Task he wrote “My
educational interpretation of mathematics betrays the influence of
L.E.J. Brouwer’s view on mathematics (though not on
education)”, Freudenthal 1973, ix.) He also edited the second
volume of Brouwer’s Collected Works, which contains in
particular the papers on topology (Brouwer 1977). 

In 1937 Freudenthal formulated two objections to explanations of
implication such as Heyting’s and Kolmogorov’s. One is that a
hypothetical construction of the antecedent provides no actual
construction material at all, so that, if the idea of a construction
that proves a⊃ba⊃ba \supset b is to make intuitionistic sense, this
could only be done by giving a proof of bbb via a proof of
aaa. The second objection is that, moreover, the antecedent aaa
cannot even be given a definite meaning without thereby proving it; so
that 


in the Heyting-Kolmogorov explanation the value of implication becomes
illusory, as the hypothesis, in its quality as hypothesis, immediately
eliminates itself. (Freudenthal 1937b: 115) 


Freudenthal arrives at this point because of his view that, more
generally, a proof is precisely what gives a statement its definite
meaning: 


It lies close to hand to explain a statement as the establishing of a
fact, of the obtaining of which one has convinced oneself by a
proof, i.e., by bringing about the relation expressed in the
statement. But this explanation can only be given cautiously, because
once a statement is the establishing of a fact, there is no
justification anymore of the separation of statement and proof. When I
say, for example, that the sequence aνaνa_{\nu} converges positively
to aaa, this is only an abbreviated way of stating the fact that for
every nnn an NNN can be determined such that a−aνa−aνa-a_{\nu} ≤
1/nnn for νν\nu ≥ NNN. That for every nnn an NNN with
this property can be determined, is a statement that has
intuitionistic sense only if one has a computation method that
generates the NNN from each nnn, a computation method that can
roughly be represented by a formula into which aνaνa_{\nu} and aaa
enter in some way. This example shows that each statement, once one
formulates it in an intuitionistically unobjectionable way,
automatically contains its full proof. (Freudenthal 1937b: 112;
translation mine)


Behind the example Freudenthal gives here is the general
intuitionistic idea that mathematical facts can only consist in the
existence of constructions and proofs (which are themselves special
constructions), so that spelling out a mathematical fact amounts to
specifying the constructions that bring it about; but that is also,
Freudenthal points out, what a proof is. Absent a proof, a statement
has at most a heuristic or provisional meaning. 

Negative statements are no exception according to Freudenthal, because
their meaning is that all attempts at a construction with certain
properties fail to achieve their aim, and a survey of these failings
(which may depend on complete induction) constitutes the proof of the
negative statement. Note that, as a consequence, meaning would not be
compositional: The unnegated statement has no non-heuristic meaning of
its own. This notion of heuristic meaning, which is the only kind of
meaning an unnegated statement can have until the survey of attempts
at constructions for it has been completed, must still be sufficiently
precise if it is to serve as the basis of a mathematical proof of a
negated statement. This goes in the direction of reading ββ\beta of
implications in
 section 2.2
 above; perhaps the difference with Brouwer is not so great on this
point. 

Freudenthal accepts a special but important case of implication, the
kind that is implicit in general statements such as “A total
function on [0,1] is uniformly continuous”. In general
statements


the subject is the function, finitary set, number (as element of a
set), understood in their wholly free growth. Neither specific nor all
specific elements of a whole are meant, but the function,
the finitary set, the element of a set, an
individual therefore, albeit a peculiar individual, a true Proteus,
very peculiar in this respect, that it may arrive that one is
considering two different exemplars of this individual. (Freudenthal
1937b: 115; translation mine)


The assertion then is understood as of a relation between two
predications of one specific subject, The example is then understood
as the subject being the function and the predicates
“being restricted in its free growth to being total on
[0,1]” and “being restricted in its free growth to being
uniformly continuous” (Freudenthal 1937b: 115). 

Freudenthal acknowledges the alternative of reading it as asserting
the containment of the species of total functions in the species of
uniformly continuous ones, but finds a reading in terms of a freely
growing object “intuitionistically more sympathetic”
(Freudenthal 1937b: 116). He comments without further explanation that
this is “so to speak a cataloguing of the species”
(Freudenthal 1937b: 116). This remark in fact draws on his other
publication in that issue of Compositio Mathematica, on
intuitionistic topology. There he gives a definition of which the
relevant part is this:
 [39]


A sequence of things An(n=1,2,…)An(n=1,2,…)A_n (n=1,2,\ldots) is called
catalogued, if to every AnAnA_n is assigned the expression
≠0≠0\ne 0 and to each Aμ1Aμ2…AμkAμ1Aμ2…AμkA_{\mu_1}A_{\mu_2} \ldots A_{\mu_k} the
expression =0=0= 0 or ≠0≠0\ne 0 (but never both expressions)
(Freudenthal 1937a: 84; translation mine)


In a footnote, it is added that the sequence of things AnAnA_n need
not be lawlike, but may be growing in more or less freedom. Among the
conditions on these assignments is specified that of extensibility:



If Aμ1Aμ2…Aμk≠0Aμ1Aμ2…Aμk≠0A_{\mu_1}A_{\mu_2}\ldots A_{\mu_{ k} } \ne 0, an m≠μ1,μ2,…,μkm≠μ1,μ2,…,μkm \ne \mu_1,
\mu_2,\ldots,\mu_k can be indicated such that
Aμ1Aμ2…AμkAμm≠0Aμ1Aμ2…AμkAμm≠0A_{\mu_1}A_{\mu_2}\ldots A_{\mu_{ k} }A_{\mu_m} \ne 0 (Freudenthal
1937a: 84; translation mine)


In these terms, the content of the example theorem, “A total
function on [0,1] is uniformly continuous”, may be stated as
follows. To a species one assigns the expression ≠0≠0\ne 0 if a freely
growing object can be restricted so as to have the corresponding
property; and to a sequence of species the expression ≠0≠0\ne 0 if a
freely growing object can be restricted to have all the corresponding
properties, and 0 if it cannot. Then a sequence of species ≠0≠0\ne 0
containing the species of functions that are total on [0,1] may always
be extended with the species of functions that are uniformly
continuous. 

That Freudenthal finds this reading “intuitionistically more
sympathetic” is probably because it is more transparently
related to the intuitionistic idea that, on the hand, when we set out
to construct an object we set out to construct an object of a certain
type, and on the other hand that object will acquire properties in
acts of construction over time. Freudenthal’s Protean
individuals are rather suggestive of the later idea, from computer
science, of generic prototype objects in certain programming languages
(on the latter see e.g., Blaschek 1994). These can indeed be treated
as individuals that have multiple instantiations, and properties can
be added to them over time. 


Freudenthal acknowledges that it remains to be seen whether his
proposal can be carried out. De Iongh (1949) comments that Freudenthal
in effect accepts Russell’s notion of formal implication (Russell
1903: section 12) as a primitive (Freudenthal does not mention
Russell). In fact, Russell does not merely find the understanding of
general implication as a containment relation less sympathetic, but
mistaken (Russell 1903: section 77). On the other hand,
Russell’s formal implication is construed as a relation between
two propositional functions, and owes its generality to the fact that
these take as arguments any value in the domain, whereas
Freudenthal’s implication is a relation between two predications
of an individual, and owes its generality to the fact that the
individual in question is not any specific function but “the
function in its free growth”. 

As on this construal a proof of a general statement is in fact a proof
for one peculiar individual, each instantiation of the general
statement for another, normal individual needs its own proof (which
will proceed along the exact same lines). Freudenthal accepts this:



The general proof, given once, serves us no more than a map, which
indeed facilitates the ascent of a mountain for us, but does not spare
it. (Freudenthal 1937b: 116; translation mine) 


This is also the case when an appeal is made to lemmas that are stated
schematically, such as m+n=n+mm+n=n+mm+n = n+m. Freudenthal readily acknowledges
that in linguistic representations of proof one will not do this, but
considers this a way in which a linguistic representation fails to
capture what a proof is. 

Freudenthal’s paper was followed by comments from
 Heyting.[40]
 Heyting agrees with Freudenthal’s thesis that if a mathematical
statement is explained as the linguistic expression of a fact, then
the meaning of the statement is given by its
 proof.[41]


But at the same time he holds that posing a mathematical problem is
not the same as making a mathematical assertion, and that this
difference allows for an understanding of implications whose
antecedent has not been established. An example he gives is that it is
obviously correct to say that if ππ\pi contains the sequence
0123456789, then it contains the sequence 012345678 (Heyting 1937:
117). (At the time there was no proof of the antecedent. In 1997 a
computer program calculated that at the 17,387,594,880th digit after
the decimal point in ππ\pi, a sequence 0123456789 begins (Borwein
1998). One easily modifies Heyting’s example appropriately.)
This is so, because we know how to turn solutions of the problem of
finding a sequence 0123456789 into solutions of the problem of finding
a sequence 012345678. 

Furthermore, Heyting doubts that Freudenthal’s notion of an
individual of which there may exist different exemplars clarifies
matters. In his view, one would have to represent the collection of
proper individuals by elements of a spread, so as to be able to
explain universal quantification over these individuals in terms of
the continuity principle for choice sequences applied to the sequences
in the representing spread. But he observes that in that case
Brouwer’s theorem that all total functions on the unit continuum
are continuous cannot be reconstructed: The continuity of these
functions is in fact a condition of the possibility of their
representation in a spread. Brouwer published the proof of this
representation theorem in his 1942B, to which the reader is referred
for further details. That publication was clearly occasioned by a
renewed interest on Brouwer’s part in the Freudenthal-Heyting
exchange (see the opening lines of Brouwer 1942A). 

Freudenthal (1937c) replied to Heyting in turn, but most briefly. He
denies that with a reading in terms of problems and solutions the
proper intuitionistic meaning, that is, one that does not depend on
language and is not heuristic, has been found; and he considers it
improbable that intuitionistic predicate calculus applies only to
spreads, not to species. 

The referee for the journal Compositio Mathematica, in which
this exchange between Freudenthal and Heyting appeared, was Brouwer.
His report read: 


Interesting discussion on the sense of one sentence being implied by
another, when nothing is known about the correctness of the latter
sentence. (As quoted and translated in Sundholm & van Atten 2008:
70)


One would have hoped to see Brouwer’s actual thoughts on the
matter. On the other hand, as pointed out by van Dalen and Remmert
(2007: 183), Brouwer was here playing both the role of referee and of
editor in chief, so the only person meant actually to read this report
was he. 

To the extent that Freudenthal’s rejection of implication
implies a rejection of negation defined as A→⊥A→⊥A \rightarrow \bot,
whatever momentum Freudenthal’s objection may have had was taken
over a few years later by the work of Griss; it seems that Griss was
not aware of Freudenthal’s paper of 1937. Freudenthal’s
proposed explanation of universal quantification seems not to have
been developed any further within the tradition. 
6.2.2 Griss 1941–1951

Starting in 1941, Georg François Cornelis Griss argued that
negation, and hence a whole class of implications, should be banished
from intuitionism. Griss (1898–1953) had received his PhD in
Amsterdam in 1925 for a thesis in differential geometry supervised by
Weitzenböck, but had attended courses by Brouwer and was very
sympathetic to intuitionism. (Most biographical details in this
section come from van Rootselaar 1953–1954 and Pos
1953–1954.) 

In a letter to Brouwer of April 19, 1941, he stated the point of
departure for his negationless mathematics as follows: 


Showing that something is not true, i.e., showing the incorrectness of
a hypothesis, is not an intuitively clear act. Of a hypothesis, which
later turns out to be even wrong, one cannot possibly have an
intuitively clear representation. One must maintain the demand that
only building things up from the foundations makes sense in
intuitionistic mathematics. (van Dalen 2011: Online Supplement, 2142;
translation mine)


Insisting on intuitively clear representations throughout, Griss also
holds that “to define is to construct” (Griss 1947: 69): a
definition is meaningful only if it specifies a construction of the
object defined. 

Thus the notion of negation, understood as implication of a falsehood,
is rejected. In Idealistische Filosofie (1947: 24), Griss
repeats the above passage and points out this is in accord with
criticism of negation by Bergson in L’Évolution
créatrice (Bergson, 298–322); a rare occasion on
which a Brouwerian intuitionist refers to the French philosopher of
intuition. (Brouwer never discussed Bergson; see van Stigt 1990:
152–153 and 324 for differences between their conceptions, and
also Hesseling 2003: sections 6.3.1–6.3.6.) 

The fundamental point of agreement Griss finds with Bergson is that
the only meaningful construal of negation consists in the positive
notion of distinguishability. For example, the distinguishability of 1
and 2 is not defined as pure negation of their identity, but is an
intuitive given based on their generation from the basic intuition of
two-ity. For other objects, such as rational numbers and real numbers,
the notion of distinguishability may be defined in terms of that of
the natural numbers. With the rejection of negation also came a
rejection of empty species, so that the intersection of two species
exists only if they have an element in common. Griss is surprised to
report that he has encountered more opposition against the rejection
of empty species than against the avoidance of negation. (Griss 1951a:
45) 

Griss acknowledges a role for problems and solutions in research (in
terms of which Kolmogorov and Heyting understood logic, including
negation); but he does not consider these to belong to mathematics
proper: 


To negationless intuitionistic mathematics belong only constructions
and properties in relation to those constructions. Posing problems and
asking for solutions are premathematical activities. It goes without
saying that in those premathematical investigations negation may be
used just as well as all kinds of other means, like the principle of
the excluded middle or even a physical experiment. (Griss 1948a: 72;
translation mine)


Presumably, then, this would have determined his reply if Heyting had
leveled the same objection to Griss’ position as he had done to
Freudenthal’s, the objection that it is obviously correct to say
that if ππ\pi contains the sequence 0123456789, then it contains the
sequence 012345678. 

Indeed, it is clear that Griss’ conception has much in common
with that of Freudenthal. At the same time, Griss’ notion of the
“premathematical” seems to be much wider than
Freudenthal’s of the “heuristic”. After all, for
Freudenthal it was possible mathematically to prove a negative
statement by showing that all ways to make the unnegated statement
true by supplying an appropriate construction must fail. For Griss
this is clearly excluded. (It seems Freudenthal and Griss never
commented in print on each other’s positions. Note also that
Griss, in his long letter to Brouwer of 1941 mentioned above that
launched his program, does not refer to Freudenthal.) 

Since negationless mathematics accepts only true propositions, its
propositional logic contains only conjunction &, with implication
as a special case: “The implication p→qp→qp \rightarrow q will
have its natural meaning: qqq follows from ppp, ppp is true, so
qqq is also true” (Griss 1951a: 41). However, an
interpretation of Heyting’s propositional logic in this logic of
& and →→\rightarrow becomes possible by construing it as a logic
of classes or species (Griss 1948b, 1951a). A basic species, for
example that of the natural numbers, is taken as given, and all others
will be constructed as subspecies of it. Then ¬a¬a\neg a can be
defined as the complement of a relative to the basic species and a∨ba∨ba
\vee b is the union of aaa and bbb. Thus, Griss (1951a) applied
the strategy Heyting had used in 1928 to Heyting’s own
formalization and deleted the parts that are not acceptable in
negationless mathematics (while adding axioms and conditions to ensure
that species be inhabited). 

Axioms for an interpretation of predicate logic are obtained from
those for propositional logic (Griss 1951a: 48). One substitutes
a(x)a(x)a(x) for ppp everywhere, and prefixes all axioms in which xxx
occurs with ∀x∀x\forall x. The meaning of a(x)a(x)a(x) is that xxx is an
element of the species aaa, and ∀x(a(x)→b(x))∀x(a(x)→b(x))\forall x(a(x) \rightarrow
b(x)), is defined as a⊂ba⊂ba \subset b. (See below for a further
remark on this in relation to a criticism voiced by Heyting in 1955.)


Treating intuitionistic mathematics according to Griss’
principles requires a substantial reconstruction. After a first
mathematical sketch of his project in Dutch (Griss 1944), Griss made
an informal start with parts of intuitionistic arithmetic, the theory
of real numbers, and projective geometry in a series of papers
published between 1946 and 1951 (Griss 1946, 1950, 1951b,c,d). 

Griss was not able to continue that series, as in 1951 an illness
began that would lead to his early death in 1953. However, he was able
to act as the unofficial adviser of Nicolle Dequoy, who defended a
doctoral thesis on negationless projective geometry at the
Université de Paris in 1952 (published as Dequoy 1955). Formal
work on negationless logic in Griss’ sense was done by
Destouches-Février
 (1948),[42]
 Gilmore 1953a, 1953b, and 1953c, Vredenduin 1953, Valpola 1955,
Nelson 1966. This line of work culminated in Krivtsov 2000a, 2000b,
2000c, which give a comprehensive modern treatment of negationless
predicate logic, arithmetic, analysis, and higher-order arithmetic.


When Griss began to elaborate the negationless intuitionistic
mathematics that he proposed, Brouwer and Heyting supported his career
in two ways. From 1944 to 1951, they communicated Griss’ papers
to the Royal Dutch Academy of
 Sciences;[43]
 and in 1949 they used their influence to reduce Griss’ teaching
load at the high school in Gouda where he worked (van Rootselaar
1953–1954: 43). 

But while supporting the publication of Griss’ papers, Brouwer
at the same time presented a counterargument to one of Griss’
examples that implied that he did not support Griss’
philosophical
 claim.[44]
 In his letter to Brouwer of 1941, Griss had remarked that 


No real number is known about which it has been proved that it cannot
possibly be equal to 0 (a≠0)(a≠0)(a \ne 0) while at the same time it has not
been proven that the number differs positively from 0 (a#0a#0a
\mathbin{\#} 0). (van Dalen 2011: 405) 


(a#ba#ba \mathbin{\#} b, the apartness relation, is defined as ∃n(|a−b|>(1/2)n)∃n(|a−b|>(1/2)n)\exists
n(|a-b| \gt (1/2)^n).) Brouwer went on to publish a construction of a
real number with just that property in “Essentially negative
properties” (1948A). Brouwer’s argument, while suggestive, is
perhaps not wholly conclusive: although it does show that the most
obvious candidate for a positive equivalent fails, it does not show
that there can be no such equivalent (Krivtsov 2000a: 167). Moreover,
Brouwer did not make explicit how his own philosophical understanding
of negation differed from that of Griss. 

In 1949, David van Dantzig argued that the method that Brouwer had
used in devising his example of an essentially negative property,
which has become known as the method of the creating subject
 (section 3.3),
 depended on the untenable thesis “that there will
‘always’ be a human being willing and capable” of
working on open problems (van Dantzig 1949: 951). Brouwer replied, in
personal correspondence, that any psychological interpretation of
intuitionism is incorrect (van Dalen 2011: 439; van Atten 2004b:
chapter 6 for discussion). Note that, whether correct or not, this
objection does not hinge on the possibility of negation as such.



Van Dantzig also pointed out that Brouwer’s construction cannot
be used as an argument against Griss’ position, on pain of
circularity: 


In any case it seems impossible to define Brouwer’s use of the
term “absurd” without using another negative term (like
“contradiction”), in other words it seems to be
unavoidable to consider Brouwer’s general form of the negation
as an “entité primitive”, irreducible to
affirmative concepts. Therefore Brouwer’s theorem can not
invalidate the attempts of other mathematicians (in particular G.F.C.
Griss, Mrs. P. Destouches-Février and the present author) to do
without the concept of negation. On the contrary, it shows again, how
unclear the concept of “absurdity” is, and makes its
avoidance appear more desirable. (van Dantzig 1949: 952)


On the other hand, while it is clear that Brouwer himself did not
share these objections to absurdity, he had opened his article not by
saying that he wrote it to refute but “to estimate the
significance of affirmative or negationless mathematics, the
development of which is sometimes advocated” (Brouwer 1948A:
963). 

The “affirmative mathematics” mentioned in these
quotations from van Dantzig and Brouwer was proposed by van Dantzig as
a formal system for classical mathematicians to reason about numerical
calculations and empirical problems (van Dantzig 1947b, 1951). It
contains neither negation nor disjunction, although in certain
contexts weak versions of these can be defined, and existential
quantifiers must be
 bounded.[45]
 Presented as “intuitionistic mathematics from a formal
standpoint”, it does not aim to be a philosophical foundation of
a logic for intuitionistic
 mathematics.[46]


In 1955, Heyting objected to Griss’ position that it made it
impossible to express generality: 


If we say, “For all real numbers aaa and bbb, a+b=b+aa+b=b+aa+b =
b+a”, this means the same as “If we construct two real
numbers aaa and bbb, then a+b=b+aa+b=b+aa+b = b+a”, but we have not
actually constructed them. (Heyting 1953–1955: 95)


Taking this line further, a proof of the general statement would
require the actual construction of all pairs of real numbers (and then
showing that for each pair the equality holds), which is impossible.
But in a review of Heyting’s paper, Vredenduin replied that the
Grissian meaning is this: 


As soon as you have realized two real numbers aaa and bbb, you can
be certain that a+b=b+aa+b=b+aa + b = b + a. This would be meaningless only if
real numbers were unrealizable. (Vredenduin 1956: 91)


Accordingly, what a general statement expresses directly is not a
property of actual constructions, nor of unactual ones, but the
correctness of a rule that applies to actual constructions. The
premisse of the rule then means no more than “Let aaa and
bbb be any two real numbers that we have constructed”. Griss
would accept that as meaningful because he supplied a notion of real
number and a construction method that shows that the species of real
numbers thus construed is inhabited. Compare: 


The well-known turn in mathematics: “Suppose ABC to be
rectangular” seems to be a supposition, but mostly means:
“Consider a rectangular triangle ABC”. (Griss 1950:
456)


For further philosophical discussion of affirmative and negationless
mathematics, see Apostel 1972; Beth 1966: 436–439; Fraenkel et
al. 1973: 249–251; Franchella 1994b; Franchella 2008:
57–68; Heyting 1953–55; Heyting 1956: section 8.2. For an
algebraic study of negationless logic see Imai & Iseki 1966 and
Arruda1978; the latter also compares Griss’ and
Vredenduin’s systems with one another. Modern formalizations of
negationless systems are given in Krivtsov 2000a,b,c. 

Griss’ negationless logic has been connected to the Curry-Howard
isomorphism (e.g., Colson & Michel 2007, 2008, 2009; Michel 2008) and
to the Calculus of Constructions (Demange 2012). These authors speak
of “pedagogical logic”, as it reflects the pedagogical
ideal that newly introduced hypotheses and definitions be motivated by
examples. 

An example of recent mathematical work that finds inspiration in the
negationless approach is Veldman 2008. 

Finally, this entry has not, as yet, discussed precursors to Brouwer,
more intricate aspects of Brouwer’s “strong
counterexamples”, 
the
objections to the Proof Interpretation of circularity and impredicativity, 
or the later developments
around the Proof Interpretation. These will be subject of future
updates.