The capability approach is a theoretical framework that entails two
core normative claims: first, the claim that the freedom to achieve
well-being is of primary moral importance, and second, that freedom to
achieve well-being is to be understood in terms of people's
capabilities, that is, their real opportunities to do and be what they
have reason to value. The approach has been developed in a variety of
more specific normative theories, such as (partial) theories of social
justice or accounts of development ethics. It has also led to a new
and highly interdisciplinary literature in the social sciences
resulting in new statistics and social indicators, and to a new policy
paradigm which is mainly used in development studies, the so-called
‘human development approach’. 

This entry will be limited to an explication of the capability
approach from a philosophical point of view. Readers who are
interested in a discussion of the capability approach from the
perspective of the social sciences are referred to Comim, Qizilbash
and Alkire (eds., 2008) and Deneulin (ed., 2009) for overview works;
Kuklys (2005), Schokkaert (2009), and Basu and López-Calva (2011) for
welfare economics; Venkatapuram (2011) for global public health;
Schlosberg (2012) and Holland (2014) for environmental policies, among
many other works in a wide variety of fields. For a comprehensive
introduction to the human development approach, see Fukuda-Parr (2003)
and Fukuda-Parr and Kumar (eds., 2009).
 
1. What kind of theoretical framework?

Within moral and political philosophy, the capability approach has in
recent decades emerged as a new theoretical framework about
well-being, development and justice. Although we can trace some
aspects of the capability approach back to, among others, Aristotle,
Adam Smith, and Karl Marx (see Nussbaum 1988, 1992; Sen 1993, 1999:
14, 24; Walsh 2000), it is economist-philosopher Amartya Sen who
pioneered the approach and philosopher Martha Nussbaum and a growing
number of other scholars across the humanities and the social sciences
who have significantly developed it. The capability approach purports
that freedom to achieve well-being is a matter of what people are able
to do and to be, and thus the kind of life they are effectively able
to lead. The capability approach is generally conceived as a flexible
and multi-purpose framework, rather than a precise theory of
well-being (Sen 1992: 48; Robeyns 2005: 94–96; Qizilbash 2008:
53–54; Sen 2009a; Robeyns 2016). This open-ended and
underspecified nature partly explains why the term ‘capability
approach’ was chosen and is now used in the philosophical
literature rather than, say, ‘capability theory’. The
terms ‘capability approach’ and ‘capabilities
approach’ are both used in the literature to refer to the same
thing. Some philosophers have started to use the term
'capabilitarianism' (Robeyns 2016; Nielsen and Axelsen forthcoming)

Despite some philosophical disagreements about the best description of
the capability approach, it is generally understood as a conceptual
framework for a range of normative exercises, including most prominent
the following: (1) the assessment of individual well-being; (2) the
evaluation and assessment of social arrangements; and (3) the design
of policies and proposals about social change in society. In all these
normative exercises, the capability approach prioritizes certain of
peoples' beings and doings and their opportunities to realize those
beings and doings (such as their genuine opportunities to be educated,
their ability to move around or to enjoy supportive social
relationships). This stands in contrast to other accounts of
well-being, which focus exclusively on subjective categories (such as
happiness) or on the material means to well-being (such as resources
like income or wealth).

Martha Nussbaum (2011) has described the general capability approach
(not her own specific theory) as consisting of two clusters, one
focussing on comparative quality of life and the other on theorising
about justice. The two clusters would share a focus on what people are
able doing and being, and would share a commitment to five principles:
treating each person as an end; a focus on choice and freedom rather
than achievements; pluralism about values; being deeply concerned with
entrenched social injustices; and ascribing an urgent task to
government. However, it has been argued that only two of those
(namely, treating each person as an end and pluralism about values)
are genuinely essential to each and every capability theory, and that
in addition there exists work in the capability approach that does not
neatly fit into one of the two clusters that Nussbaum proposes
(Robeyns 2016). There is clearly disagreement among capability
scholars about how to understand this theoretical approach at the most
general and abstract level, and more research is needed to establish
what would belong to the core of the capability approach, and which
model best describes the approach.

Scholars and policy makers use the capability approach in a wide range
of fields, most prominently in development studies and policymaking,
welfare economics, social policy, and social and political philosophy.
Yet across these areas, the capability approach can be employed in
both narrower and broader ways (Crocker and Robeyns 2009). In the more
narrow way, the capability approach tells us what information we
should look at if we are to judge how well someone's life is going or
has gone; this kind of information is needed in any account of
well-being or human development. Since the capability approach
contends that the relevant kind of information concerns human
functionings (beings and doings) and capabilities (the opportunities
to achieve those beings and doings), the approach provides part of
what is needed for interpersonal comparisons of well-being. This makes
the approach attractive to a variety of theorists and scholars since
interpersonal comparisons are needed for a range of different
exercises, such as comparing how well two persons (or groups or
societies) are doing at the same time or comparing one person (or
groups or society) at two different moments in time. In the narrower
use of the capability approach, the focus is often strictly on the
evaluation of individual functioning levels or on both functionings
and capabilities. However, to apply this approach, we also need to
decide which are the beings and doings that matter for the various
normative usages of the approach (the selection of functionings and
capabilities) and how each person's various functionings or
capabilities are to be aggregated into one overall assessment of
well-being or of freedom to achieve well-being (the aggregation of the
various dimensions). These are crucial challenges for the capability
approach, and will be discussed in more detail in
 Section 3.2.

In its broader uses, the capability approach not only evaluates the
lives of individuals (as in the more narrow use), but also includes
other considerations in its evaluations. For example, the broader use
of the capability approach often pays attention to other normative
considerations and other values than only well-being, such as
efficiency, agency, empowerment, or procedural fairness. For example,
David Crocker (2008) has extended the capability approach with
accounts of agency and participation into a more detailed account of
development ethics, but discusses at length that not all versions of
the capability approach are embracing agency so explicitly. Similarly,
the capability approach can be developed into an alternative
evaluative tool which can replace traditional social cost-benefit
analysis (Alkire 2002). Or it can be used as a normative framework
within which to evaluate and design policies and social institutions,
ranging from welfare-state design in relatively affluent societies
(Wolff and de-Shalit 2007), to governmental and nongovernmental
development policies in poor countries, to policies that affluent
countries and international institutions employ (or are advised to
employ) in their efforts to aid poor countries (UNDP 1990–2010).
In what follows we will discuss the capability approach in its narrow
use, except if otherwise indicated.

The capability approach is a normative theory, rather than an
explanatory theory: in other words, it is not a theory that will
explain poverty, inequality, or well-being, but rather a
theory that helps us to conceptualize these notions. Nevertheless, the
notions of functionings and capabilities in themselves can be employed
as elements in explanations of social phenomena, or one can use these
notions in descriptions of poverty, inequality, quality of life, and
social change.

Before moving on, one more clarification is in order. Within the
analytical strand of normative political philosophy, there are roughly
two different types of answers to the question: “What is the
purpose of doing political philosophy?” The first answer is that
political philosophy should be truth-seeking, even if that implies,
for example, that political ideals such as justice, equality or
democracy are unachievable. The truth-seeking strand within political
philosophy produces a focused and often highly abstract type of
analysis, which does not make the messy compromises that are needed to
make the analysis directly relevant for practice (e.g., subjecting the
analysis to constraints of feasibility). G.A. Cohen has been a
prominent exponent of the truth-seeking strand within political
philosophy (Cohen 2008: 1–25). The alternative approach to
political philosophy is the practical approach, whose purpose is the
direct (or indirect) guidance of our actions and decisions. The
practical approach to political philosophy is more likely to take into
account several types of constraints on our actions, including
feasibility constraints but also facts about the world as we know it,
such as the condition of relative scarcity of resources. The practical
approach to political philosophy obviously also aims to respect truth
(in so far as this is known) in its analyses, but is willing to make
some simplifications and the above-mentioned compromises in order to
move the analysis forward to the realm of practical
recommendations—a realm in which the truth-seeking approach is
much less likely to arrive due to the never-ending analysis of yet
another detail of the structure or properties of a concept that needs
to be analyzed. The distinction between the truth-seeking and the
practical approach is very important for properly understanding the
capability approach, since with very few exceptions (e.g., Vallentyne
2005), all philosophical work on the capability approach falls into
the practical strand of political philosophy, and often has an
interdisciplinary flavor. All that follows should therefore be read
against the background of the assumption that we are operating within
the practical strand of normative political philosophy.
2. The core ideas
2.1 Functionings and capabilities

Functionings are ‘beings and doings’, that is, various
states of human beings and activities that a person can undertake.
Examples of the former (the ‘beings’) are being
well-nourished, being undernourished, being housed in a pleasantly
warm but not excessively hot house, being educated, being illiterate,
being part of a supportive social network, being part of a criminal
network, and being depressed. Examples of the second group of
functionings (the ‘doings’) are travelling, caring for a
child, voting in an election, taking part in a debate, taking drugs,
killing animals, eating animals, consuming lots of fuel in order to
heat one's house, and donating money to charity.

From these examples we can draw a couple of observations. First, these
examples indicate that many features of a person could be described
either as a being or as a doing: we can say that a person is
housed in a pleasantly warm house, or that this person does
consume lots of energy to keep her house warm. Yet other
functionings are much more straightforwardly described as either a
being or a doing, for example ‘being healthy’ or
‘killing animals’. The second observation is that the
notion of ‘functionings’ is a conceptual category that is
in itself morally neutral. Functionings can be univocally good (e.g.,
being in good health) or univocally bad (e.g., being raped). But the
goodness or badness of various other functionings may not be so
straightforward, but rather depend on the context and/or the normative
theory which we endorse. For example, is the care work of a mother who
is caring full-time for her child a valuable functioning or not? A
conservative-communitarian normative theory will most likely mark this
as a valuable functioning, whereas a feminist-liberal theory will only
do so if the care work is the result of an autonomous choice made
against a background of equal opportunities and fair support for those
who have duties to care for dependents.

Capabilities are a person's real freedoms or opportunities to achieve
functionings. Thus, while travelling is a functioning, the real
opportunity to travel is the corresponding capability. The distinction
between functionings and capabilities is between the realized and the
effectively possible, in other words, between achievements, on the one
hand, and freedoms or valuable opportunities from which one can
choose, on the other.
2.2 A metric for interpersonal comparisons

According to the capability approach, ‘functionings’ and
‘capabilities’ are the best metric for most kinds of
interpersonal evaluations. In other words, those interpersonal
evaluations should be conceptualized in terms of people's functioning
(their actual beings and doings) and their capabilities (the real
opportunities they have to realise those functionings). These beings
and doings together are held to constitute what makes a life valuable.
Whereas ‘functionings’ are the proposed conceptualization
for interpersonal comparisons of (achieved) well-being,
‘capabilities’ are the conceptualization for interpersonal
comparisons of the freedom to pursue well-being, which Sen calls
“well-being freedom” (Sen 1992: 40).

The relevant functionings can vary from such elementary things as
being adequately nourished, being in good health, avoiding escapable
morbidity and premature mortality, to more complex achievements such
as having a decent and valuable job, not suffering from lack of
self-respect, taking active part in the life of the community, and so
on. The claim is that functionings are constitutive of a
person's being, and an evaluation of well-being has to take the form
of an assessment of these constituent elements (Sen 1992: 39). To say
that functionings are constitutive of a person's being means that one
cannot be a human being without having at least a range of
functionings: they make the lives of human beings both lives
(in contrast to the existence of innate objects) and also
human (in contrast to the lives of trees or tigers). Human
functionings are those beings and doings that we take to constitute a
human life, and which are central in our understandings of ourselves
as human beings. This implies that the range of potentially relevant
functionings is very broad, and that the capability approach will in
some respects be close to both subjective metrics (for example, by
including the capability to be happy), or resources-based metrics
(since most functionings require some resources as inputs). Yet not
all beings and doings are functionings; for example, being able to fly
like a bird or reaching an age of 200 like an oak tree, are not human
functionings.

Thus, according to the capability approach, the ends of well-being
freedom, justice, and development should be conceptualized in terms of
people's capabilities. Moreover, what is relevant is not only which
opportunities are open to me each by themselves, hence in a piecemeal
way, but rather which combinations or sets of potential functionings
are open to me. For example, suppose I am a low-skilled poor single
parent who lives in a society without decent social provisions. Take
the following functionings: (1) to hold a job, which will require me
to spend many hours on working and commuting, but will generate the
income needed to properly feed myself and my family; (2) to care for
my children at home and give them all the attention, care and
supervision they need. In a piecemeal analysis, both (1) and (2) are
opportunities open to me, but they are not both together open
to me. The point about the capability approach is precisely that we
must take a comprehensive or holistic approach, and ask which
sets of capabilities are open to me, that is: can I
simultaneously provide for my family and properly care for and
supervise my children? Or am I rather forced to make some hard,
perhaps even tragic choices between two functionings which both
reflect basic needs and basic moral duties?

Note that while most types of capability analysis require
interpersonal comparisons, one could also use the capability approach
to evaluate the well-being or well-being freedom of one person at one
point in time (e.g., evaluate her situation against a
capability-yardstick), or to evaluate the changes in her well-being or
well-being freedom over time. The capability approach could thus also
be used by a single individual in her deliberate decision-making or
evaluation processes, but these types of uses of the capability
approach are much less prevalent in the philosophical literature, let
alone in the social sciences.
2.3 The means-ends distinction

The capability approach explicitly endorses and relies upon a key
analytical distinction in practical philosophy, namely the means-ends
distinction. The approach stresses that we should always be clear,
when valuing something, whether we value it as an end in itself, or as
a means to a valuable end. For the capability approach, the ultimate
ends of interpersonal comparisons are people's capabilities. This
implies that the capability approach evaluates policies and other
changes according to their impact on people's capabilities as well as
their actual functionings. It asks whether people are able to be
healthy, and whether the means or resources necessary for this
capability, such as clean water, adequate sanitation, access to
doctors, protection from infections and diseases, and basic knowledge
on health issues, are present. It asks whether people are
well-nourished, and whether the means or conditions for the
realization of this capability, such as having sufficient food
supplies and food entitlements, are being met. It asks whether people
have access to a high-quality education system, to real political
participation, and to community activities that support them, that
enable them to cope with struggles in daily life, and that foster
caring and warm friendships.

Much of the critique that capability theorists have advanced against
alternative normative frameworks (such as Dworkinian resourcism, or
the Rawlsian social primary goods approach), can be traced back to the
objection that alternative approaches value particular means to
well-being rather than the ends. The main reason why the capability
approach holds that it is better to focus on the ends rather than the
means, is that people differ in their ability to convert means into
valuable opportunities (capabilities) or outcomes (functionings) (Sen
1992: 26–28, 36–38). Since ends are what ultimately
matters when thinking about well-being and the quality of life, means
can only work as reliable proxies of people's opportunities to achieve
those ends if they all have the same capacities or powers to convert
those means into equal capability sets. Capability scholars believe
that these inter-individual differences are far-reaching and
significant, and that theories which focus on means tend to downplay
their normative relevance. In the theoretical framework of the
capability approach, these inter-individual differences are captured
by the notion of ‘conversion factors’ (see
 Section 2.4).

One could argue, however, that the capability approach does not focus
entirely on ends, but rather on the question whether a person is being
put in the conditions in which she can pursue her ultimate ends. For
example, being able to read could be seen as not an ultimate end in
itself, since people's ultimate ends will be more specific, such as
reading street signs, the newspaper, or the Bible or Koran. It is
therefore somewhat more precise to say that the capability approach
focuses on people's ends in terms of beings and doings expressed in
general terms: being literate, being mobile, being able to hold a
decent job. Whether a particular person then decides to translate
these general capabilities in the more specific capabilities
A, B or C (e.g., reading street signs,
reading the newspaper, or reading the Bible), is up to them. Whether
that person decides to stay put, travel to the US or rather to China,
is not normatively relevant for the capability approach: the question
is rather whether a person has these capabilities in more general
terms.

Of course, the normative focus on ends does not imply that the
capability approach does not at all value means such as material or
financial resources. Instead, a capability analysis will typically
also focus on resources and other means. For example, in their
evaluation of development in India, Jean Drèze and Amartya Sen
(2002: 3) have stressed that working within the capability approach in
no way excludes the integration of an analysis of resources, such as
food, or other resources. In sum, all the means of well-being, like
the availability of commodities, legal entitlements to them, other
social institutions, and so forth, are important, but the
capability approach presses the point that they are not the ends of
well-being, only their means. Food may be abundant in the village, but
a starving person may have nothing to exchange for it, no legal claim
on it, or no way of preventing intestinal parasites from consuming it
before he or she does. In all these cases at least some resources will
be available, but it will still leave that person hungry and, after a
while, undernourished.

Yet one could wonder: wouldn't it be better to focus on means only,
rather than making the normative analysis more complicated and more
informationally demanding by also focusing on functionings and
capabilities? Capability scholars would respond that starting a
normative analysis from the ends rather than means has at least two
advantages, apart from the earlier mentioned fundamental reason that a
focus on ends is needed to appropriately capture inter-individual
differences. First, the valuation of means will retain the status of
an instrumental valuation rather than take on the nature of an
intrinsic valuation. For example, money or economic growth will not be
valued for their own sake, but only in so far as they contribute to an
expansion of people's capabilities. Second, by starting from ends, we
do not a priori assume that there is only one overridingly important
means to that ends (such as income), but rather explicitly ask the
question which types of means are important for the fostering and
nurturing of a particular capability, or set of capabilities. For some
capabilities, the most important means will indeed be financial
resources and economic production, but for others it may be particular
political practices and institutions, such as effective guarantees and
protections of freedom of thought, political participation, social or
cultural practices, social structures, social institutions, public
goods, social norms, and traditions and habits. As a consequence, an
effective capability-enhancing policy may not exist in increasing
disposable income, but rather fighting a homophobic, ethnophobic,
racist or sexist social climate.
2.4 Conversion factors

Another important idea in the capability approach, especially in the
work by Amartya Sen (1992: 19–21, 26–30, 37–38) and
scholars influenced by his writings, is the notion of conversion
factors. Resources, such as marketable goods and services, but also
goods and services emerging from the non-market economy, including
household production, have certain characteristics that make them of
interest to people. For example, we may be interested in a bike not
because it is an object made from certain materials with a specific
shape and color, but because it can take us to places where we want to
go, and in a faster way than if we were walking. These characteristics
of a good or commodity enable or contribute to a functioning. A bike
enables the functioning of mobility, to be able to move oneself freely
and more rapidly than walking. The relation between a good and the
achievement of certain beings and doings is captured with the term
‘conversion factor’: the degree in which a person can
transform a resource into a functioning. For example, an able bodied
person who was taught to ride a bicycle when he was a child has a high
conversion factor enabling him to turn the bicycle into the ability to
move around efficiently, whereas a person with a physical impairment
or someone who was never taught to ride a bike has a very low
conversion factor. The conversion factors thus represent how much
functioning one can get out of a good or service; in our example, how
much mobility the person can get out of a bicycle.

There are several different types of conversion factors, and the
conversion factors discussed are often categorized into three groups
(Robeyns 2005: 99). All conversion factors influence how a person can
be or is free to convert the characteristics of the resources into a
functioning, yet the sources of these factors may differ. Personal
conversion factors are internal to the person, such as
metabolism, physical condition, sex, reading skills, or intelligence.
If a person is disabled, is in bad physical condition, or has never
learned to cycle, then the bike will be of limited help in enabling
the functioning of mobility. Social conversion factors are
factors from the society in which one lives, such as public policies,
social norms, practices that unfairly discriminate, societal
hierarchies, or power relations related to class, gender, race, or
caste. Environmental conversion factors emerge from the
physical or built environment in which a person lives. Among aspects
of one's geographical location are climate, pollution, the proneness
to earthquakes, and the presence or absence of seas and oceans. Among
aspects of the built environment are the stability of buildings,
roads, and bridges, and the means of transportation and communication.
Take the example of the bicycle. How much a bicycle contributes to a
person's mobility depends on that person's physical condition (a
personal conversion factor), the social mores including whether women
are socially allowed to ride a bicycle (a social conversion factor),
and the available of decent roads or bike paths (an environmental
conversion factor).

The three types of conversion factors all stress that it is not
sufficient to know the resources a person owns or can use in order to
be able to assess the well-being that he or she has achieved or could
achieve; rather, we need to know much more about the person and the
circumstances in which he or she is living. Sen uses
“capability” not to refer exclusively to a person's
abilities or other internal powers but to refer to an opportunity made
feasible, and constrained by, both internal (personal) and external
(social and environmental) conversion factors (Crocker 2008:
171–2; Robeyns 2005: 99).
2.5 Acknowledging human diversity

A strong acknowledgment of human diversity is one of the key
theoretical driving forces of the capability approach. Its criticism
of other normative approaches is often fueled by, and based on, the
claim that the full human diversity among people is insufficiently
acknowledged in many normative theories, such as theories of
distributive justice. This also explains why the capability approach
is often favorably regarded by feminist philosophers, or philosophers
concerned with care and disability issues (e.g. Khader 2008, Terzi
2010), since one of their main complaints about mainstream moral and
political philosophy has precisely been the relative invisibility of
the fate of those people whose lives did not correspond to that of an
able-bodied, non-dependent, caregiving-free individual who belongs to
the dominant ethnic, racial and religious group. People of color,
marginalized people, the disabled and many women do not fit that
picture.

The capability approach thus takes account of human diversity in at
least two ways. First, by its focus on the plurality of functionings
and capabilities as important evaluative spaces. By including a wide
range of dimensions in the conceptualization of well-being and
well-being outcomes, the approach broadens the so-called
‘informational basis’ of assessments, and thereby includes
some dimensions that may be particularly important for some groups but
less so for others. For example, in standard outcome assessments,
women as a group virtually always end up being worse off than men. But
if the selection of outcome dimensions is shifted to also include the
quality and quantity of social relations and support, and being able
to engage in hands-on care, then the normative assessment of gender
inequality becomes less univocal and requires much further argument
and normative defense, including being explicit about how to aggregate
different dimensions (Robeyns 2003).

Secondly, human diversity is stressed in the capability approach by
the explicit focus on personal and socio-environmental conversion
factors that make possible the conversion of commodities and other
resources into functionings, and on the social, institutional, and
environmental context that affects the conversion factors and the
capability set directly. Each individual has a unique profile of
conversion factors, some of which are body-related, others of which
are shared with all people from her community, and still others of
which are shared with people with the same social characteristics
(e.g., same gender or class or race characteristics).
2.6 Basic capabilities

The terminology in the literature on the capability approach has
changed over time, and this has led to some confusing use of certain
terms, and also to difficulties in properly interpreting the earlier
contributions in this field. This is importantly exemplified by the
different interpretations of the term ‘basic
capabilities’. Martha Nussbaum (2000: 84) uses the term
‘basic capabilities’ to refer to “the innate
equipment of individuals that is necessary for developing the more
advanced capabilities”, such as the capability of speech and
language, which is present in a newborn but needs to be fostered.
Amartya Sen (1980) mentioned the term ‘basic capability’
as his first rough attempt to answer the ‘equality of
what?’ question, but changed his terminology in subsequent work
(what he called ‘basic capability’ would later become
‘capability’).

In later work, Sen reserved the term ‘basic capabilities’
to refer to a threshold level for the relevant capabilities. A basic
capability is “the ability to satisfy certain elementary and
crucially important functionings up to certain levels” (Sen
1992: 45 n. 19). Basic capabilities refer to the freedom to do some
basic things considered necessary for survival and to avoid or escape
poverty or other serious deprivations. The relevance of basic
capabilities is “not so much in ranking living standards, but in
deciding on a cut-off point for the purpose of assessing poverty and
deprivation” (Sen 1987: 109).

Hence, while the notion of capabilities refers to a very broad range
of opportunities, basic capabilities refer to the real opportunity to
avoid poverty or to meet or exceed a threshold of well-being. Basic
capabilities will thus be crucial for poverty analysis and in general
for studying the well-being of the majority of people in poor
countries, or for theories of justice that endorse sufficiency as
their distributive rule. In affluent countries, by contrast,
well-being analysis would often focus on capabilities that are less
necessary for survival. It is important to acknowledge that the
capability approach is not restricted to poverty and deprivation
analysis but can also serve as a framework for, say, project or policy
evaluations or inequality measurement in non-poor communities. Sen's
and Nussbaum's extensive writings on the capability approach may
mislead us into thinking that the capability approach is about poverty
and development issues only, but there is conceptually or normatively
no reason to restrict its scope in this way.
2.7 Capabilities as freedoms

Another frequent misunderstanding in the secondary literature concerns
the use of the term ‘freedom’. Especially in his later
work, Amartya Sen often equates capabilities with freedoms, without
always specifying in more detail what kind of freedoms he is referring
to. Yet this equation can easily be misunderstood since, as Sen
himself acknowledges, there are many kinds of freedom (some valuable,
some detrimental, and some trivial) and ‘freedom’ means
very different things to different people.

One important misunderstanding to get out of the way is that
capabilities as freedoms refer exclusively to the “free
market.” Sen does argue that people have reason to value the
freedom or liberty to produce, buy, and sell in markets. This point,
however, is part of his more general work on development, and is a
very different matter than the highly disputed question in economics
and politics regarding the benefits and limits of the market as a
system of economic production and distribution. Functionings and
capabilities are conceptualizations of well-being achievements and
well-being freedoms, and the question which economic institutions are
the best institutional means to foster functionings and capabilities
is both analytically but also politically a question that can only be
settled after we first agree what economic outcomes we should be
aiming at—and this is a question to which the capability
approach gives a (partial) answer.

Yet if Sen and other capability scholars label capabilities as
freedoms, then what kind of freedoms are capabilities? A careful
reading of Sen's work clarifies that capabilities are freedoms
conceived as real opportunities (Sen 1985a: 3–4; 1985b: 201;
2002: chapter 20). For Sen, capabilities as freedoms refer to the
presence of valuable options or alternatives, in the sense of
opportunities that do not exist only formally or legally but are also
effectively available to the agent. As Alexander Kaufman (2006a) has
shown, understanding capability as an opportunity concept of freedom,
rather than some other kind of freedom, may undermine mistaken
critiques on Sen's work.
3. Specifying the capability approach

The capability approach conceptualizes a metric of well-being (in
terms of functionings) and well-being freedom (in terms of
capabilities). However, clearly this still leaves open a range of very
different capability theories to emerge from these metrics. Three
components of specification are widely acknowledged in the capability
literature. First, is the appropriate focus functionings, or rather
capabilities? Second, how are we to select and aggregate the multiple
dimensions of the capability approach? And finally, since the
capability approach only specifies a metric of justice, what else is
needed for a full capability theory of justice to be developed?
3.1 Functionings or capabilities?

Scholars interested in the capability approach have debated the
question of whether the appropriate well-being metric should be
capabilities or functionings, hence opportunities or achievements.
What considerations have been argued to be relevant for this
choice?

The first consideration is normative, and this is the argument Sen and
Nussbaum most often offer: by focusing on capabilities rather than
functionings, we do not privilege a particular account of good lives
but instead aim at a range of possible ways of life from which each
person can choose. Thus, it is Nussbaum's and Sen's commitment to a
liberal version of the capability approach, or an anti-paternalist
consideration, that motivates a principled choice for capabilities
rather than functionings. Obviously, the strength of this argument
depends on how bad one takes paternalism to be. There may be good
reasons to believe that some paternalism is unavoidable, or even
desired (Nussbaum 2000: 51–56). To some extent, the promotion of
functionings (rather than capabilities) may be unavoidable in a
capabilitarian political theory, yet this tendency to paternalism can
be stronger or weaker, depending on several specific choices made in
the theory (Claassen 2014).

A second normative consideration stems from the importance given to
personal responsibility in contemporary political philosophy. If one
believes that one should strive for equality of capability, then each
person should have the same real opportunity (capability), but once
that is in place, each individual should be held responsible for his
or her own choices. This responsibility-sensitivity principle is
widely endorsed not only in political philosophy but also in the
mathematical models being developed in normative welfare economics. If
one wants to endorse and implement this principle of
responsibility-sensitivity, then specifications and applications of
the capability approach should focus on capabilities, rather than
functionings. Yet even at a highly abstract theoretical level,
philosophers disagree on whether we should endorse
responsibility-sensitivity in developing the capability approach
(e.g., Fleurbaey 2002; Vallentyne 2005; Wolff and de-Shalit 2007).
Moreover, for applied work, serious epistemological hurdles may
ultimately lead us to drop the responsibility-sensitive principle for
practical reasoning about the actual world.

Third, there are cases in which a capability is available to a person
but only if other people do not also want to realize that capability
(Basu 1987: 74). For example, two spouses may each have the capability
of holding demanding jobs which are each on their own incompatible
with large caring responsibilities. However, if these spouses also
have infants or relatives with extensive care needs, then at best only
one of them may effectively realize that capability. Since capability
sets may therefore include freedoms that are conditional (because they
depend on the choices of other people), it might be better to focus
both on the individual's capability set and also on what people have
been able to realize from their own capability sets, that is, their
functionings or well-being achievements. The question of who decides
or should decide this sort of spousal question highlights the
importance of agency and procedural fairness, which are generally
taken to be part of the capability approach in its broader use
(Crocker 2008).

It should also be mentioned that the concept of functioning has
particular relevance for our relations to those human beings who are
not yet able to choose (infants), who will never be able to choose
(severely mentally disabled individuals), or who have lost this
ability through advanced dementia or serious brain damage. Whether or
not these persons can decide to be well nourished and healthy, it is
generally held that we (through families, governments, or other
institutions) have the moral obligation to promote or protect their
nutritional and healthy functioning.

Finally, the choice between functionings and capabilities can also be
bridged by a conceptual move. Sen (1987: 36–7) has proposed the
concept of ‘refined functioning’ to designate functioning
that takes note of the available alternatives. Sen (1992: 52) notes:
“‘fasting’ as a functioning is not just starving; it
is choosing to starve when one does have other
options.” That is, one could focus on achieved functionings
levels but—where appropriate—include the exercise of
choice as one of the relevant functionings (Fleurbaey 2002; Stewart
1995).

In addition to these normative and conceptual arguments, there are
also concerns related to the application and measurability that
influence the choice of capabilities, functionings, or a combination
of the two (Robeyns 2006). It is, for example, almost always easier to
observe and measure functionings than capabilities (Sen 1992:
52–3).
3.2 Selecting and aggregating of capabilities?

Other major points of debate in the capability literature are the
questions of which capabilities should be selected as relevant and who
should decide (or how a decision should be made) on the aggregation of
the various dimensions into an overall assessment. At the level of
ideal theories of justice, some have argued that each and every
capability is relevant and should count in our moral calculus
(Vallentyne 2005). Others have argued that considerations of justice
require that we demarcate morally relevant from morally irrelevant and
morally bad capabilities (Nussbaum 2003; Pogge 2002; Pierik and
Robeyns 2007). This demarcation could be done in various ways, and
most capability scholars think that different answers are appropriate
in different normative exercises. In other words, the selection of
relevant capabilities would be different when the question is how to
arrange a society's basic structure, versus when the question is how
to spend the donations Oxfam has collected, or when the normative
question is how to raise one's child. Anderson (1999) argues that, for
purposes of political justice, the only relevant capabilities are
those needed for a person to participate as a citizen. Nussbaum
endorses a well-defined list of capabilities, which, she argues,
should be enshrined in every country's constitution (Nussbaum 2000,
2003, 2006). Sen has been somewhat vague in responding to the question
of how to select and weight capabilities, yet in the secondary
literature it has been argued that he draws on his ideal of agency to
argue that each group should itself select, weight, trade off, and
sequence or otherwise aggregate capabilities as well as prioritize
them in relation to other normative considerations, such as agency,
efficiency, and stability (Crocker 2008; Crocker and Robeyns
2009).

Moving from ideal theory to non-ideal theory and empirical
applications makes the selection of relevant capabilities even more
complicated, for other concerns such as feasibility, data
availability, practical relevance, and even parsimony may play
significant roles. Several proposals are on offer, ranging from
substantive proposals with elaborate theoretical underpinnings,
through several procedural methods, to the atheoretical
practice that an investigator should simply conduct a survey in order
to collect rich data (or use an existing survey) and let a statistical
technique, such as factor analysis, “decide.” At one end
of this spectrum is Martha Nussbaum's well-known list, which contains
prescribed capabilities that are grouped together under ten
“central human capabilities”: life; bodily health; bodily
integrity; senses, imagination and thought; emotions; practical
reason; affiliation; other species; play; and control over one's
environment (Nussbaum 2006: 76–78).

Nussbaum (2000: 70–77; 2006: 78–81) justifies this list by
arguing that each of these capabilities is needed in order for a human
life to be “not so impoverished that it is not worthy of the
dignity of a human being” (2000: 72). She defends these
capabilities as being the moral entitlements of every human being on
earth. She formulates the list at an abstract level and advocates that
the translation to implementation and policies should be done at a
local level, taking into account local differences. Nussbaum argues
that this list can be derived from a Rawlsian overlapping consensus
and stresses that her list remains open-ended and always open for
revision (Nussbaum 2000: 77), yet other philosophers have taken issue
with her claim that this would result in a form of political
liberalism (Barclay 2003) or have argued that this leaves insufficient
scope for democratic deliberation and respect for agency in her
capability approach (e.g., Crocker 2008; Robeyns 2003; Sen 2004a,b).
Yet this strand of critique has itself been criticized for not
understanding the proper role of philosophy and the normative and
political status of Nussbaum's proposal (Claassen 2011).

Amartya Sen consistently and explicitly refuses to defend “one
pre-determined canonical list of capabilities, chosen by theorists
without any general social discussion or public reasoning” (Sen
2005: 158). Of course, groups and theorists might construct lists for
various purposes, and lists need not be “pre-determined”
or “canonical,” however we might understand these terms.
And Sen's refusal to endorse Nussbaum's list has not prevented him
from using—for various purposes—particular selections of
capabilities in his empirical as well as his normative work. However,
beyond stating in general terms that some democratic process and
public reasoning should be involved, Sen has never explained in detail
how such a selection could and should be done.

Several capability scholars, including Anderson, Alkire, Robeyns, and
Crocker, have sought in various ways to fill this lacuna. Anderson
(1999: 316) argues that people should be entitled “to whatever
capabilities are necessary to enable them to avoid or escape
entanglement in oppressive social relationships” and “to
the capabilities necessary for functioning as an equal citizen in a
democratic state.” Alkire (2002: chapter 2) proposes to select
capabilities based on John Finnis's practical reasoning approach. By
iteratively asking “Why do I do what I do?”, one comes to
the most basic reasons for acting: life, knowledge, play, aesthetic
experience, sociability (friendship), practical reasonableness, and
religion. Robeyns (2003) has proposed some pragmatic criteria, mainly
relevant for empirical research, for the selection of capabilities for
the context of inequality and well-being assessments. Crocker (2008:
chapters 9–10) explores the theory and practice of deliberative
democracy to bring more specificity to democratic procedures and
participatory institutions in the development of an agency-sensitive
capability approach.

The theoretical debate on the selection of dimensions has been
complicated by the fact that there are different views on the status
of the selection. Is that selection a truth-claim, or should it rather
be seen as a contribution to democratic-decision making? Is the
scholar proposing a selection of capabilities akin to a
philosopher-king, or rather to a philosopher-citizen or a
philosopher-mediator? Depending on how one sees these issues, it may
affect how justified one believes a certain selection or selection
procedure to be (Claassen 2011, Byskov forthcoming).

What about weighting different capabilities to come to an aggregate
evaluation? If we have a list of relevant capabilities, we would still
be left with the question of whether the capabilities should be
aggregated and, if so, what their relative weights and the formula to
aggregate them will or should be. A closely related question is how
different capabilities should be traded off against one another when
they cannot all be realized fully. Some have argued against trade-offs
on the basis that the different capabilities are incommensurable or
that each capability is an absolute entitlement that never should be
overridden by another entitlement or other normative consideration.
For example, Nussbaum argues that the ten capabilities on her list,
being incommensurable, cannot be traded off against one another (and,
hence, have no relative weights), and also that the state should
provide each citizen with a minimum threshold of each capability.

One possible system of weighting or aggregating is to use a democratic
or some other social choice procedure (Chakraborty 1996). The basic
idea would be to encourage or prescribe that the relevant group of
people decide on the weights. In some contexts, such as small-scale
projects or evaluations, such capability weighting (and selection)
could be done by participatory techniques. It has also been suggested
that we may determine the weights of capabilities as a function of how
much they contribute to overall life satisfaction or happiness
(Schokkaert 2007). Yet this raises the question to what extent
functionings are taken to be merely instrumental to another end, such
as happiness, or indeed any other ultimate good or ideal.

Much of the existing literature refers to the issue of
‘weighting’, but this is only one particular form of the
more general ‘aggregating’, since aggregation may take a
different functional form than simply adding up. For example, if you
have no food, your other capabilities will be worth very little. Some
capabilities may thus be complementary capabilities, implying that
their value to a person depends on the presence (or absence) of other
capabilities. (Note the similarity with the notion of
‘complementary goods’ in consumer theory in economics,
where it is argued that the utility of some goods is dependent on the
quantity of some other goods, as in the case of pencils and erasers,
or shoe polish and shoes of the same color).

It is striking that very few proposals on selecting and weighting or
aggregating have been worked out by philosophers based on foundational
work in ethical theory; instead, most of the proposals on selecting or
weighting have been formulated by scholars working in applied ethics,
normative political philosophy, or engaged with normative work in the
social sciences. It is therefore to be hoped that in the (near) future
proposals will be worked out regarding the selection of dimensions and
aggregation that are much more theoretically grounded.
3.3 What is needed for a capability theory of justice?

The capability approach is often wrongly taken to be an egalitarian
theory or a theory of social or distributive justice. This reading is
mistaken, even though it is entirely understandable given the specific
debates in which the main philosophers defending the capability
approach made their interventions. The capability approach specifies
what should count for interpersonal evaluations and thus provides an
important aspect of a theory of social or distributive justice, yet
more is needed.

Nussbaum's work comes closest to offering us a capability theory of
justice, but her theory too doesn't amount to a full theory of social
justice. Nussbaum's theory of social justice is comprehensive, in the
sense that it is not limited to an account of political justice, or to
liberal democracies. Rather, her account holds for all human beings on
earth, independently of whether they are living in a liberal
democratic regime, or of whether they are severely disabled. The main
demarcation of Nussbaum's account is that it provides only “a
partial and minimal account of social justice” (Nussbaum 2006:
71) by specifying thresholds of a list of capabilities that
governments in all nations should guarantee to their citizens.
Nussbaum's theory focuses on thresholds, but this does not imply that
reaching these thresholds is all that matters for social justice;
rather, her theory is partial and simply leaves unaddressed the
question what social justice requires once those thresholds are
met.

Moreover, it would be a mistake to think that there can be only one
capability theory of justice; on the contrary, the open nature of the
capability approach allows for the development of a family of
capability theories of justice. But this prompts the question: what is
needed to develop a full capability theory of justice, and which of
these aspects have already been developed by theorists of justice?

First, a theory of justice needs to explain on what basis it justifies
its principles or claims of justice. For example, in Rawls's theory of
justice the two principles of justice are justified by the
thought-experiment of the original position and the more general
social contract framework on which this is based. Dworkin's
egalitarian justice theory starts from the meta-principle of equal
respect and concern, which he then develops in the principles that the
distribution of burdens and benefits should be sensitive to the
ambitions that people have but should not reflect the unequal natural
endowments with which individuals are born. One could also develop a
capability theory of justice arguing that the ultimate driving force
is a concern with autonomy or with human dignity. If capability
scholars want to develop a full theory of justice, they will also need
to explain on what bases they will justify their principles or claims.
As mentioned earlier, Nussbaum starts from a notion of human dignity,
whereas the Senian strand in the capability approach stresses the
importance of what people have reason to value, hence an account of
public reasoning. However, little work has been done so far to flesh
out this embryonic idea of ‘having reason to value’, and
it therefore remains unclear whether the capability approach has a
solid unified rationale on the basis of which a full account of
justice could be developed.

Second, as indicated above, in developing a capability theory of
justice we must decide whether we want it to be an outcome or an
opportunity theory, that is, whether we think that we should assess
injustices in terms of functionings, or rather in terms of
capabilities, or a mixture. At the level of theory and principles,
most theorists of justice endorse the view that justice is done if all
have equal genuine opportunities, or if all reach a minimal threshold
of capability levels. Translated to the capability language, this
would imply that at the level of theory and principles, capabilities
are the relevant metric of justice, and not functionings. However, not
everyone subscribes to this view. Anne Phillips (2004) has been a
prominent voice arguing for equality of outcome, rather than
opportunities. In the capability literature, Marc Fleurbaey (2002) has
argued against the view to take only capabilities into account and has
defended a focus on ‘refined functionings’ (being the
combination of functionings and capabilities).

Third, a capability theory of justice will need, just as all other
theories that are derived from the general and underspecified
capability approach, to address the issue of selecting, quantifying
and aggregating of dimensions. For the case of theories of justice,
the problem of selecting, quantifying and aggregating turns into the
question: ‘in which dimensions should we evaluate justice, how
should we construct metrics in these dimensions, and how should we
aggregate all the dimensions for overall assessments of
justice?’ The general challenge of selecting and aggregating
which was discussed above therefore also applies here.

Fourth, a capability theory of justice may need to address other
‘metrics of justice’. In the literature on social justice
there are several terms used to indicate what precisely we are
assessing or measuring: the metric of advantage, the currency of
justice, or the informational basis for the interpersonal comparisons
for the purpose of justice. Within theories of justice, the main
arguments are with Rawlsian resourcists (which will be the subject of
section 5), and with defenders of Dworkinian resourcism (for
comparisons of the capability view with Dworkin's egalitarian theory,
see Dworkin 2000: 299–303; Kaufman 2006b: 125–8; Pierik
and Robeyns 2007; Sen 1984, 2009a: 264–268; Williams 2002)).
Other possible metrics are needs, basic needs, or the many different
types of subjective welfare or preference satisfaction. A full
capability theory of justice would need to show why it serves better
as a metric of justice than these other metrics.

Fifth, a capability theory of justice needs to take a position on the
‘distributive rule’ (Anderson 2010: 81) that it will
endorse: will it argue for plain equality, or for sufficiency, or for
prioritarianism, or for some other (mixed) distributive rule? Both
Martha Nussbaum's and Elizabeth Andersons's theories are sufficiency
accounts (Anderson 1999, 2010; Nussbaum 2006), but from this it does
not follow, as one sometimes reads in the secondary literature, that
the capability approach entails a sufficiency rule. Sen may have given
the (wrong) impression of defending straight equality as a
distributive rule, by asking the question ‘Equality of
what?’ (Sen 1980), though a careful reading shows that he was
merely asking the question ‘If we want to be defending
equality of something, then what would that be?’ In fact, Sen
has remained uncommitted to one single distributive rule, which
probably can be explained by the fact that he is averse of building a
well-defined theory of justice but rather prefers to investigate how
real-life unjust situations can be turned into more just situations,
even if perfect justice is unattainable (Sen 2009). The capability
approach clearly plays a role in Sen's work on justice, since when
assessing a situation he will investigate inequalities in people's
capabilities and analyze the processes that led to those inequalities.
Yet Sen has an eclectic approach to theorizing, and hence other
notions and theories (such as human rights or more formal discussions
on freedoms from social choice theory) also play a role in his work on
justice. The presence and importance of the capability approach in
Sen's work is thus undeniable, but should not be seen as the only
defining feature.

Sixth, a capability theory of justice needs to specify where the line
between individual and collective responsibility is drawn, or how it
will be decided, and by whom, where this line will be drawn. There is
a remarkable absence of any discussion about issues of responsibility
in the capability literature, in sharp contrast to political
philosophy and welfare economics where this is one of the most
important lines of debate, certainly since the publication of Ronald
Dworkin's (1981, 2000) work on justice and equality which led to what
Elizabeth Anderson (1999) has called
‘luck-egalitarianism’. Nevertheless, whether one wants to
discuss it explicitly or not, any concrete capability policy
proposal can be analyzed in terms of the division between personal and
collective responsibility; but this terminology is largely absent from
the capability literature.

In part this might be explained by the fact that much of the work on
capabilities deals with global poverty, where issues of individual
responsibility seem to be less relevant since it would seem outrageous
to suggest that the world's most destitute people are personally
responsible for the situation they are in. That doesn't mean that the
responsibility question is not important: it is indeed of utmost
importance to ask who is responsible for global poverty reduction or
the fulfilling of the Millenium Development Goals, on which political
philosophers have written a great deal (e.g., Pogge 2008, Singer
2009). The point is rather that philosophical puzzles, such as the
issues of expensive tastes (for expensive wine, caviar, fast cars, or
you name it), are simply beyond the radar screen of the child laborer
or the poor peasant. However, while this may perhaps justify the
absence of any discussion about personal responsibility among
capability scholars concerned with poverty, it does not absolve
theorists of justice who deal with justice in affluent societies (or
affluent sections of poor societies) from discussing the just division
between personal and collective responsibility (Pierik and Robeyns
2007: 148–149).

This brings us to a related issue: a theory of justice generally
specifies rights, but also duties. However, capability theorists have
remained largely silent on the questions who should bear the duties
for the expansion of the selected capabilities. Nussbaum passionately
advocates that all people all over the world should be entitled, as a
matter of justice, to threshold levels of all the capabilities on her
list; but apart from mentioning that it is the governments' duties to
guarantee these entitlements (2006: 70), she remains silent on the
question who precisely should bear the burdens and responsibilities
for realizing these capabilities. Yet as Onora O'Neill (1996: chapter
5) has argued, questions of obligations and responsibilities should be
central to any account of justice.

This section makes clear that a capability theory of justice is
theoretically much more demanding than the basic presupposition of the
capability approach that ‘functionings’ and
‘capabilities’ are the best metric for most kinds of
interpersonal evaluations. While much has been written on the
capability approach in recent years, by an increasing number of
scholars, including philosophers, much of the philosophical work
needed for turning the open-ended capability approach into a specific
theory of justice remains to be done.

Note, however, that not all capability theorists working on issues of
justice believe that aiming for such a fully worked-out theory of
justice is what thinking about justice requires. Sen (2009) himself
has argued at length that we don't need a theory that describes a
utopian ideal, but rather we need theorising to help us with making
comparisons of injustice, and to guide us towards a less unjust
society. Similarly, Jay Drydyk (2012) has argued that the capability
approach to justice should focus on reducing capability shortfalls,
for which a utopian account of perfect justice is not needed. Some
capability theorists may want to work out a full theory of justice by
addressing the various specifications outlined above, while others may
want to change the nature of theorising about justice, moving it more
to applied, non-ideal or grounded theories (Watene and Drydyk
2016).
4. An alternative for utilitarianism?

The capability approach explicitly aims at providing an alternative to
normative views that rely exclusively on mental states in their
evaluative exercises. This theme was present in Amartya Sen's
launching of the capability approach in his 1979 Tanner Lectures (Sen
1980), and can be seen as an important move in the development of the
capability approach (Qizilbash 2008: 54). Sen (1999: 59) characterizes
welfarist theories as those consequentialist theories that restrict
“the judgments of states of affairs to the utilities in the
respective states (paying no direct attention to such things as the
fulfillment or violation of rights, duties, and so on)”. He
rejects such theories because, whatever their further specifications,
they rely exclusively on utility and thus exclude non-utility
information from our moral judgments (Sen 1999: 62).

Sen is concerned not only with the information that is included in a
normative evaluation, but also with the information that is excluded.
The non-utility information that is excluded by utilitarianism
includes a person's additional physical needs, due to being physically
disabled for example, but also social or moral principles, such as
human rights or the specific principle that men and women should be
paid the same wage for the same work. For a utilitarian, these
features of life and these principles have no intrinsic value. Men and
women, for example, should not be paid the same wage as long as women
are satisfied with lower wages or total utility is maximized. But Sen
believes it mistaken to think that such egalitarian and other moral
principles would not be taken directly into account in our moral
judgments. However, note that is a matter of philosophical dispute
whether a moral defense of basic liberties can consistently and
convincingly be derived from a capabilities theory; Henry Richardson
(2007) has argued that the idea of capabilities cannot well capture
the social, institutional and deontic aspects of basic liberties. If
Richardson is right, then the capability approach may, perhaps, have a
valid critique on the blind spots of utilitarianism, but not the
answer of how to rectify this.

Thus the normative theories that Sen attacks include those that rely
exclusively on mental states. This does not mean that Sen thinks that
mental states, such as happiness, are unimportant and have no role to
play, for they too are functionings that we sometimes have reason to
value. Rather, it is the exclusive reliance on mental states
that he rejects.

One could question whether the attack of Sen and some other capability
scholars on utilitarianism is as successful as it may seem to them.
One worry is that capability scholars attack the most simplified
version of utilitarianism, or that they exaggerate the difference
between (some versions of) utilitarianism and the capability approach.
Based on a reading of J.S. Mill's work, Qizilbash (2008: 58) concludes
that “the strong contrast which Sen sometimes makes between
classical utilitarianism and his capability view is overdone.”
The current state of the literature seems to lead to the conclusion
that it has not yet been shown that all versions of utilitarianism are
vulnerable to the capability critiques. 
5. An alternative for Rawlsian justice?

The capability metric has been proposed by capability philosophers as
an alternative for, and improvement on, the Rawlsian social primary
goods metric, which focuses on general purpose goods, such as income
and wealth, opportunities and liberties, and the social basis of
self-respect (Rawls 1971). Sen argued that “the primary goods
approach seems to take little note of the diversity of human beings.
… If people were basically very similar, then an index of
primary goods might be quite a good way of judging advantage. But, in
fact, people seem to have very different needs varying with health,
longevity, climatic conditions, location, work conditions,
temperament, and even body size. … So what is being involved is
not merely ignoring a few hard cases, but overlooking very widespread
and real differences” (Sen 1980: 215–216). A person with a
disability, however severe, would not have a claim to additional
resources grounded in his impairment under Rawls's two principles of
justice. Sen argues that Rawls's difference principle would not
justify any redistribution to the disabled on grounds of disability.
Rawls's strategy has been to postpone the question of our obligations
towards the disabled, and exclude them from the scope of his theory.
Rawls certainly does not want to deny our moral duties towards the
people that fall outside the scope of his theory, but he thinks that
we should first work out a robust and convincing theory of justice for
the “normal” cases and only then try to extend it to the
“more extreme cases” (Rawls 2001: 176).

Sen's critique in his 1979 Tanner lecture, however, was not only about
the case of the severely disabled. Sen's more general critique
concerned what he saw as the inflexibility of primary goods as a
metric of justice. Capability scholars thus believe that the more
general problem with the use of primary goods is that it does not
adequately deal with human diversity, since it does not focus on ends
but rather on means, and since it excludes some groups from the scope
of justice.

Yet while capability scholars initially seemed rather sure of their
case against Rawls (Sen 1980, Nussbaum 2006), a more recent wave of
philosophical enquiry has highlighted how complicated the comparisons
between Rawls's theory of justice and the capability view are (Pogge
2002, Robeyns 2009, Brighouse and Robeyns eds. 2010). One reason is
that the capability metric is a general metric of well-being and
well-being freedom, whereas the social primary goods metric emerges as
one element of an integral and complex theory of political justice
(rather than social justice more broadly, let alone the even wider
category of moral evaluations). As Arneson (2010) rightly notes, the
unit of assessment ideally should be the moral theory, and not merely
one part of it, such as the metric of interpersonal comparison. Also,
Rawls's theory of justice is an ideal theory of justice, in
contrast to the capability approach. This means that it is very hard
to compare Rawls's work on justice with the philosophical work on the
capability approach, since their scope and theoretical aims are not
the same.

Regarding scope, Rawls's theory of justice is limited in scope to (1)
the basic structure of society (that is, the set of most important
social institutions), (2) to liberal democratic societies rather than
also to nondemocratic and illiberal societies, (3) and to the
principles of justice insofar as they apply to people in their
capacity as citizens. The scope of the capability approach can be
summarized as “justice applies everywhere”—that is,
it applies to all human beings independently of their country of birth
or residence, and not only to social institutions but also to the
social ethos and to social practices.

Regarding theoretical aims, one can safely say that most capability
scholars tend to disfavor top-down theorizing, and prefer to find out
how theory or philosophy can help us make the actual world, a social
institution or a practice more just, rather then to work more
abstractly on the principles of justice and their justification. This
last difference has been a main point of attention in Sen's more
recent work (Sen 2009a), and by capability theorist who would like to
develop a different kind of justice theorising, which focusses on what
injustices are and which capability shortfalls should be tackled, how,
by whom, and why.

Moreover, Rawlsians have criticized the capability approach too, and
not all of their critiques have been sufficiently rebutted (Pogge
2002; Freeman 2006; Kelly 2010). Firstly, the capability approach is
claimed to be endorsing a particular comprehensive moral view, which
Rawlsians find objectionable. Another main Rawlsian objection to the
capability approach concerns the publicity criterion, which stipulates
that the conception of justice must be public and the necessary
information to make a claim of injustice must be verifiable by all,
and easily accessible. Rawlsians argue that a theory of justice needs
a public standard of interpersonal comparisons, as otherwise the
obtained principles of justice among citizens with diverse conceptions
of the good life will not prove stable. The suggestion is that as
capabilities are very hard to measure or assess in such a public
fashion, and as they would require very large amounts and difficult
sorts of information, the capability approach is unworkable as a
theory of justice. Finally, some Rawlsians, like Richardson (2006)
believe that the Rawlsian principles of justice can be adapted if we
want to include human beings with non-standard needs such as the
disabled, and that this may result in the justification of a mixed
social primary goods/capabilities metric of justice. In short, this
debate, too, is far from closed.