According to the deflationary theory of truth, to assert that a 
statement is true is just to assert the statement itself. For 
example, to say that ‘snow is white’ is true, or that it 
is true that snow is white, is equivalent to saying simply that snow 
is white, and this, according to the deflationary theory, is all that
can be said significantly about the truth of ‘snow is 
white’.


There are many implications of a theory of this sort for 
philosophical debate about the nature of truth. Philosophers often 
make suggestions like the following: truth consists in correspondence
to the facts; truth consists in coherence with a set of beliefs or 
propositions; truth is the ideal outcome of rational inquiry. 
According to the deflationist, however, such suggestions are 
mistaken, and, moreover, they all share a common mistake. The common 
mistake is to assume that truth has a nature of the kind 
that philosophers might find out about and develop theories of. For 
the deflationist, truth has no nature beyond what is captured in 
ordinary claims such as that ‘snow is white’ is true just
in case snow is white. Philosophers looking for the nature of truth 
are bound to be frustrated, the deflationist says, because they are 
looking for something that isn't there.


The deflationary theory has gone by many different names, including 
at least the following: the redundancy theory, the disappearance 
theory, the no-truth theory, the disquotational theory, and the 
minimalist theory. There is no terminological consensus about how to 
use these labels: sometimes they are used interchangeably; sometimes 
they are used to mark distinctions between different versions of the 
same general view. Here we will use ‘deflationism’, and 
‘the deflationary theory of truth’ to denote the general 
view we want to discuss, and reserve other names for specific versions
of that view.
 
1. History of Deflationism


The deflationary theory has been one of the most popular approaches 
to truth in the twentieth century, having received explicit defense 
by Frege, Ramsey, Ayer, and Quine, as well as sympathetic treatment 
from many others. (According to Dummett 1959, the view originates 
with Frege.) The following passages all contain recognizable versions
of the doctrine, though they differ on points of detail. 

It is worthy of notice that the sentence ‘I smell the
scent of violets’ has the same content as the sentence ‘it
is true that I smell the scent of violets’. So it seems, then,
that nothing is added to the thought by my ascribing to it the property
of truth. (Frege 1918) 
Truth and falsity are ascribed primarily to propositions. The 
proposition to which they are ascribed may be either explicitly given
or described. Suppose first that it is explicitly given; then it is 
evident that ‘It is true that Caesar was murdered’ means 
no more than that Caesar was murdered, and ‘It is false that 
Caesar was murdered’ means no more than Caesar was not 
murdered. They are phrases which we sometimes use for emphasis or 
stylistic reasons, or to indicate the position occupied by the 
statement in our argument….In the second case in which the 
proposition is described and not given explicitly we have perhaps 
more of a problem, for we get statements from which we cannot in 
ordinary language eliminate the words ‘true’ or 
‘false’. Thus if I say ‘He is always right’, 
I mean that the propositions he asserts are always true, and there 
does not seem to be any way of expressing this without using the word
‘true’. But suppose we put it thus ‘For all 
p, if he asserts p, p is true’, then
we see that the propositional function p is true is simply 
the same as p, as e.g. its value ‘Caesar was murdered 
is true’ is the same as ‘Caesar was murdered’. 
(Ramsey 1927)
…it is evident that a sentence of the form "p is 
true" or "it is true that p" the reference to truth never 
adds anything to the sense. If I say that it is true that Shakespeare
wrote Hamlet, or that the proposition "Shakespeare wrote 
Hamlet" is true, I am saying no more than that Shakespeare 
wrote Hamlet. Similarly, if I say that it is false that 
Shakespeare wrote the Iliad, I am saying no more than that 
Shakespeare did not write the Iliad. And this shows that the
words ‘true’ and ‘false’ are not used to 
stand for anything, but function in the sentence merely as assertion 
and negation signs. That is to say, truth and falsehood are not 
genuine concepts. Consequently there can be no logical problem 
concerning the nature of truth. (Ayer 1935).

The truth predicate is a reminder that, despite a
technical ascent to talk of sentences, our eye is on the world. This
cancellatory force of the truth predicate is explicit in Tarski's
paradigm:
‘Snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is white.
Quotation marks make all the difference between talking about words 
and talking about snow. The quotation is a name of a sentence that 
contains a name, namely ‘snow’, of snow. By calling the 
sentence true, we call snow white. The truth predicate is a device 
for disquotation. (Quine 1970).



In addition to being popular historically, the deflationary theory has
been the focus of much recent work. Perhaps its most vociferous
contemporary defenders are Hartry Field and Paul Horwich. 


One reason for the popularity of deflationism is its 
anti-metaphysical stance. Deflationism seems to deflate a grand 
metaphysical puzzle, a puzzle about the nature of truth, and much of 
modern philosophy is marked by a profound scepticism of metaphysics. 
Another reason for the popularity of deflationism concerns the fact 
that truth is a semantic notion, and therefore takes its place along 
with other semantic notions, such as reference, meaning, and content.
Many philosophers are concerned with trying to understand these 
semantic notions. The deflationary theory is attractive since it 
suggests that, at least in the case of truth, there is less to be 
puzzled about here than one might expect.
2. The Equivalence Schema


Perhaps because of the widespread interest in deflationism, the 
theory has received many different formulations. The result is that 
there is not so much a deflationary theory of truth as many.
In recent times, however, the deflationary theory has most often been
presented with the help of a schema, which is sometimes called 
the equivalence schema:

(ES) <p> is true if and only if p.



In this schema angle brackets indicate an appropriate name-forming 
device, e.g. quotation marks or ‘the proposition that 
…’, and occurrences of ‘p’ are 
replaced with sentences to yield instances of the schema. With the 
help of (ES), we can formulate deflationism as the view, roughly, 
that the instances of this schema capture everything significant that
can be said about truth. Theories which depart from deflationism deny
that the equivalence schema tells us the whole truth about truth. 
Since such theories add to the equivalence schema, they are often 
called inflationary theories of truth. (The equivalence schema is 
associated with Alfred Tarski (1944, 1958), but it is far from 
obvious that Tarski was any sort of deflationist. We will largely set
Tarski aside here.) 


Formulated in this way, deflationism does not give an 
explicit definition of truth, for (ES) is not a definition 
of anything. Indeed, some deflationists (most notably Horwich 1998b) 
do not provide an explicit definition of truth at all. Instead, they 
provide an explicit definition of having the concept of truth. To be 
more precise, the suggestion is that someone has the concept of truth
just in case he or she is disposed to accept all (noncontroversial) 
instances of the equivalence schema, i.e., every sentence of the form
‘<p> is true if and only if p’ 
that is not paradoxical or in some other way deviant. Of course, such
deflationists may think that, in saying something about what it is to
have the concept of truth, they have told us what the concept of 
truth is. But the latter is a by-product of the former; for this 
reason, we can say that these deflationists are proposing an implicit
definition of the concept of truth. 


Are there versions of deflationism, or positions allied to 
deflationism, which do not employ the equivalence schema or some 
similar device? Yes, but we shall mention them here only to set them 
aside. One such view — which may be called 
expressivism — is the analogue of emotivism in ethics.
(This view of truth is often associated with Strawson 1950, though 
the attribution is a difficult one.) According to emotivism, at least
in one of its most traditional forms, utterances of the form 
‘torture is wrong’ do not, despite appearances, predicate
‘is wrong’ of torture; rather utterances of 
‘torture is wrong’ merely indicate a negative attitude on
the part of the speaker toward torture. Expressivism is the parallel 
position about truth. According to expressivism, utterances of the 
form ‘S is true’ do not, despite appearances, 
predicate ‘is true’ of S; rather 
‘S is true’ merely indicates preparedness on the
part of the speaker to assert S.


Another such view is the prosentential theory of truth 
advanced by Dorothy Grover (see Grover, Camp and Belnap 1973, and 
Grover 1992) . According to this theory, sentences formed with the 
predicate ‘is true’ are prosentences, where a 
prosentence is a device for achieving anaphoric cross-reference to 
sentences uttered previously in a conversation, just as pronouns are 
devices for achieving anaphoric cross-reference to names uttered 
previously in a conversation. According to the prosentential theory, 
for example, just as in
(1) Mary wanted to buy a car, but she could only afford a
motorbike.


we interpret ‘she’ as a pronoun anaphorically dependent on
‘Mary’, so too in 
(2) Snow is white. That is true, but it rarely looks white
in Pittsburgh.


we interpret ‘That is true’ as a prosentence anaphorically
dependent on ‘Snow is white’. 


Expressivism and the prosentential theory are close cousins of 
deflationism, and, in some uses of the term, might reasonably be 
called deflationary. However, they are also sufficiently different 
from those versions of deflationism that utilize the equivalence 
schema to be set aside here. The important difference between 
expressivism and the prosentential theory on the one hand, and 
deflationism as we are understanding it on the other, concerns the 
logical structure of sentences such as ‘S is 
true’. For the deflationist, the structure of such sentences is
very straightforward: ‘S is true’ 
predicates the property expressed by ‘is true’ of the 
thing denoted by ‘S’. We might express this by 
saying that, according to deflationism, ‘S is 
true’ says of S that it is true, just as 
‘apples are red’ says, of apples, that they are 
red or ‘John sleeps’ says, of John, that he 
sleeps. Both expressivism and the prosentential theory deny this, 
though for different reasons. According to expressivism, 
‘S is true’ is properly interpreted not even of 
subject-predicate form; rather it has the structure ‘Hooray to 
S’. Obviously, therefore, it does not say, of
S, that it is true. According to prosententialism, by 
contrast, while ‘S is true’ has a 
subject-predicate structure, it would still be mistaken to interpret 
it as being about S. For consider: according to the 
prosentential theory, ‘S is true’ is a 
prosentence which stands in for the sentence denoted by S 
just as ‘she’ in (1) is a pronoun which stands in for the
name ‘Mary’. But we do not say that ‘she’ in 
(1) is about the name ‘Mary’; similarly, 
according to the prosentential theory, we should not say that 
‘S is true’ is about S. To suppose 
otherwise would be to misconstrue the nature of anaphora.
3. Varieties of Deflationism


Different interpretations of the equivalence schema yield different 
versions of deflationism. 


One important question concerns the issue of what instances of the 
equivalence schema are assumed to be about (equivalently: to what the
names in instances of the equivalence schema are assumed to refer). 
According to one view, instances of the equivalence schema are about 
sentences, where a name for a sentence can be formulated simply by 
quoting the sentence — thus "‘Brutus killed 
Caesar’" is a name for ‘Brutus killed Caesar’. In 
other words, for those who hold what might be called a 
sententialist version of deflationism the equivalence schema
has instances like (3):
(3) ‘Brutus killed Caesar’ is true if and only
if Brutus killed Caesar.


To make this explicit, we might say that, according to sententialism,
the equivalence schema is (ES-sent): 
(ES-sent) The sentence ‘s’ is true if and only
if s


Notice that in this schema, the angle-brackets of (ES) have been 
replaced by quotation marks.


According to those who hold what might be called a 
propositionalist version of deflationism, by contrast, 
instances of the equivalence schema are about propositions, where 
names of propositions are, or can be taken to be, expressions of the 
form ‘the proposition that p’ — thus, 
‘the proposition that Brutus killed Caesar’ is a name for
the proposition that Brutus killed Caesar. For the propositionalist, 
in other words, instances of the equivalence schema are properly 
interpreted not as being about sentences but about propositions, 
i.e., more like (4) than (3): 
(4) The proposition that Brutus killed Caesar is true if
and only if Brutus killed Caesar.


To make this explicit, we might say that, according to 
propositionalism, the equivalence schema is (ES-prop): 
(ES-prop) The proposition that p is true if and only if
p.


To interpret the equivalence schema as (ES-sent) rather than 
(ES-prop), or vice versa, is to yield a different deflationary theory
of truth. Hence sententialism and propositionalism are different 
versions of deflationism. (There are also some further ways to 
interpret the equivalence schema, but we shall set them aside here.) 


The other dimension along which deflationary theories vary concerns 
the nature of the equivalence that the theories interpret instances 
of the equivalence schema as asserting. On one view, the right hand 
side and the left hand side of such instances are analytically 
equivalent. Thus, for sententialists, (3) asserts that, 
"‘Brutus killed Caesar’ is true" means the same as 
‘Brutus killed Caesar’; while for propositionalists (4) 
asserts that ‘the proposition that Brutus killed Caesar is 
true’ means the same as ‘Brutus killed Caesar’. A 
second view is that the right hand side and the left hand side of 
claims such as (3) and (4) are only materially equivalent; this view 
interprets the ‘if and only if’ in both (3) and (4) as 
the biconditional of classical logic. And a third view is that claims
such as (3) and (4) assert a necessary equivalence between their 
right hand sides and their left hand sides; that is, both (3) and (4)
are to be interpreted as material biconditionals that hold of 
necessity.


This tripartite distinction between analytic, necessary, and material
equivalence, when combined with the distinction between sententialism
and propositionalism, yields six different versions of deflationism:




Sentential
Propositional


Analytic
A
B


Material
C
D


Necessary
E
F




It is this variegated nature of deflationism that to a large extent 
dictates the many names that have been used for the theory. The 
labels ‘redundancy theory’, ‘disappearance 
theory’ and ‘no-truth theory’ have been used mainly
to apply to analytic versions of deflationism: positions 
A or B. The label 
‘disquotational theory’ tends to apply to sententialist 
versions, and in fact to material sentential deflationism: position 
C. The label ‘minimalist theory’ is a 
label used recently by Paul Horwich (1998b) to apply to necessary 
versions, and in fact to necessary propositional deflationism: 
position F. It will not be important for us to 
examine all of these versions of deflationism in detail; to a large 
extent philosophers prefer one or other versions of these views on 
the basis of views from other parts of philosophy, views about the 
philosophy of language and metaphysics. However, it will be 
convenient here to settle on one version of the view. We will 
therefore follow Horwich in concentrating mainly on position 
F. Horwich calls this view ‘minimalism’,
but we will continue simply with ‘deflationism’.
4. The Utility of Deflationary Truth


The deflationist idea that the equivalence schema (ES-prop) provides 
an implicit definition of the concept of truth suggests that truth 
is, as the label ‘redundancy theory’ suggests, a 
redundant concept, a concept that we could do without. On the 
contrary, however, advocates of the deflationary theory (particularly
those influenced by Ramsey) are at pains to point out that anyone who
has the concept of truth in this sense is in possession of a very 
useful concept indeed; in particular, anyone who has this concept is 
in a position to form generalizations that would otherwise require 
logical devices of infinite conjunction. 


Suppose, for example, that Jones for whatever reason decides that 
Smith is an infallible guide to the nature of reality. We might then 
say that Jones believes everything Smith says. To say this much, 
however, is not to capture the content of Jones's belief. In order to
do that we need some way of expressing an infinite conjunction of 
something like the following form:
If Smith says that snow is white, then snow is white, and
if he says snow is pink, then snow is pink, and if he says that snow is
chartreuse, then snow is chartreuse,…and so on.


The equivalence schema (ES-prop) allows us to capture this infinite
conjunction. For, on the basis of the schema, we can reformulate the
infinite conjunction as: 
If Smith says that snow is white, then the proposition that
snow is white is true, and if he says snow is pink, then the
proposition that snow is pink is true, and if he says that snow is
chartreuse, then the proposition that snow is chartreuse is true,…and
so on.


In turn, this reformulated infinite conjunction can be expressed as a
statement whose universal quantifier ranges over propositions: 
For every proposition x, if what Smith said
= x, then x is true.


Or, to put the same thing more colloquially: 
Everything Smith says is true.


This statement give us the content of Jones's belief. And the 
important point for deflationists is that we could not have stated 
the content of this belief unless we had the concept of truth as 
described by the deflationary theory. In fact, for most 
deflationists, it is this feature of the concept of truth — its
role in the formation of generalizations — that explains why we
have a concept of truth at all. This is, as it is often put, the 
raison d'être of the concept of truth.


Given deflationists place such heavy emphasis on the role of the 
concept of truth in expressing generalizations, it is ironic that 
some versions of deflationism have been criticized for being 
constitutionally incapable of accounting for generalizations about 
truth (Gupta 1993, Halbach 1999, Soames 1999, Armour-Garb 
2004). For example, theories that implicitly define truth using only 
the instances of (ES-prop) do not allow us to derive a generalization
like (Conjunction). 

(Conjunction) For all propositions p, q (the
conjunction of p and q is true if and only
if p is true and q is true).



Since the instances of (ES-prop) are a collection of particular 
propositions and (Conjunction) is a universal generalization, it is 
not possible to derive (Conjunction) from the instances of (ES-prop).
Yet it is plausible that a theory of truth should allow us to derive 
general truths about truth, like (Conjunction). This suggests that 
deflationary theories of truth formulated using only the instances of
(ES-prop) are inadequate. 


It is for this reason that some deflationists use a version of (Gen) 
to formulate their theory of truth. 

(Gen) For all x, x is true if and only if there is
some p such that x = <p>,
and p.



There are two things to notice about (Gen). First, unlike (ES-prop) 
it is not a schema, but a universally quantified formula. For this 
reason, it is possible to derive (Conjunction) from it. That (Gen) is
universally quantified also means it can be used as an explicit 
definition of truth. So although deflationists often only implicitly 
define truth, it is possible for a deflationist to offer an explicit 
definition. Thus we have another dimension along which deflationary 
theories can vary. 


Second, the existential quantifier in (Gen) must be a higher-order 
quantifier that quantifies into sentential position. Wolfgang 
Künne (2003) takes the existential quantifier to be an objectual
(domain and values) quantifier ranging over propositions. A different
approach would be to take the existential quantifier as a 
substitutional quantifier where the substitution class consists of 
sentences. Christopher Hill (2002) offers a further, idiosyncratic, 
alternative and treats the existential quantifier as a substitutional
quantifier whose substitution class is the set of all propositions. 
However, all these approaches have drawn criticism on the grounds 
that the use of higher-order quantifiers to define truth is circular 
(Platts 1980, Horwich 1998b, McGrath 2000), and may get the extension
of the concept of truth wrong (Sosa 1993). Unfortunately, we cannot 
assess these criticisms here. We shall continue to concentrate mainly
on those versions of deflationism formulated using instances of 
(ES-prop). 


An alternative deflationist approach to the generalization problem is
to attempt to show that, despite appearances, theories that only 
appeal to the instances of (ES-prop) nevertheless do have the 
resources to derive the problematic generalizations. Field (1994a), 
for example, suggests that we allow reasoning with schemas and 
proposes rules that would allow the derivation of generalizations. 
Horwich (1998b) suggests a more informal approach according to which 
we are justified in deriving (Conjunction) since an informal 
inspection of a derivation of some instance of (Conjunction) shows us
that we could derive any instance of it. 
5. Is Truth A Property?


It is commonly said that, according to the deflationary theory, truth
is not a property and therefore that, according to the theory, if a 
proposition is true, it is mistaken to say that the proposition has a
property, the property of being true. There is something right and 
something wrong about this view, and to see what is wrong and right 
about it will help us to understand the deflationary theory. 


Consider the two true propositions (5) and (6):
(5) Caracas is the capital of Venezuela. 



(6) The earth revolves around the sun.



Do these propositions share a property of being true? Well, in one 
sense of course they do: since they are both true, we can say that 
there both have the property of being true. In this sense, the 
deflationary theory is not denying that truth is a property: truth is
the property that all true propositions have. 


On the other hand, when we say that two things share a property 
F, we often mean more than simply that they are both 
F; we mean in addition that there is intuitively a common 
explanation as to why they are both F. It is in this second 
sense in which deflationists are denying that truth is a property. 
Thus, in the case of our example, what explains the truth of (5) is 
that Caracas is the capital of Venezuela; and what explains this is 
the political history of Venezuela. On the other hand, what explains 
the truth of (6) is that the earth revolves around the sun; and what 
explains this is the nature of the solar system. The nature of the 
solar system, however, has nothing to do with the political history 
of Venezuela (or if it does the connections are completely 
accidental!) and to that extent there is no shared explanation as to 
why (5) and (6) are both true. Therefore, in this stronger sense, 
they have no property in common.


It will help to bring out the contrast being invoked here if we 
consider two properties that have nothing to do with truth, the 
property of being, i.e. the property of having existence, and the 
property of being a mammal. Consider Hillary Rodham Clinton and the 
Great Wall of China. Do these objects have the property of existence?
Well, in one sense, they do: they both exist so they both have the 
property of existence. On the other hand, however, there is no common
explanation as to why they both exist. What explains the existence of
the Great Wall is the architectural and defense policies of classical
China; what explains the existence of Hillary Rodham Clinton is Mr 
and Mrs Rodham. We might then say that existence is not a property 
and mean by this that it does not follow from the fact that two 
things exist that there is a common explanation as to why they exist.
But now compare the property of existence with the property of being 
a mammal. If two things are mammals, they have the property of being 
a mammal, but in addition there is some common explanation as to why 
they are both mammals — both are descended from the same family
of creatures, say. According to deflationism, the property of being 
true is more like the property of existence than it is like the 
property of being a mammal.


Depending on one's views about what it takes to be a property, then, 
one might be tempted to say here that being true is not a property, 
because it is not like being a mammal. But in fact most contemporary 
deflationists, pursuing the analogy between truth and existence, 
describe truth as a logical property (for example, Field 1992: 322; 
Horwich 1998a: 37; Künne 2003: 91).
6. The Deflationary Theory of Falsity


Truth and falsity are a package deal. It would be hard to imagine 
someone having the concept of truth without also having the concept 
of falsity. One obvious question to ask the proponent of the 
deflationary theory of truth, then, is how the theory is to be 
extended to falsity. 


A natural account of the concept of falsity defines it in terms of 
the concept of truth. Thus, someone has the concept of falsehood just
in case they accept instances of the schema:
(F-prop) The proposition that P is false if and
only if the proposition that P is not true


A second, and initially slightly different, account of falsity 
defines it directly in terms of negation. According to this view, 
someone has the concept of falsity just in case they accept instances
of the schema: 
(F-prop*) The proposition that P is false if and
only if it is not the case that P


Many deflationists suppose that that (F-prop) and (F-prop*) in fact 
implicitly define the same concept of falsity (cf Horwich 1994). The 
key idea here is that there seems no reason to distinguish being 
true from being the case. If there is no distinction 
between being true and being the case, presumably there is also no 
distinction between ‘It is not the case that p’ 
and ‘It is not true that p’. In addition, 
however, ‘It is not true that p’ is plausibly 
synonymous with ‘the proposition that p is not 
true’; and this means that (F-prop) and (F-prop*) are 
equivalent. As we will shortly see, this account of falsity, though 
certainly a natural one, leaves the deflationary theory open to an 
important objection concerning truth-value gaps. 
7. Objections to Deflationism


Our concern to this point has been only with what the deflationary 
theory is. In the remainder of this article, we consider six 
objections. These are by no means the only objections that have been 
advanced against deflationism — Horwich (1998b) considers 
thirty-nine different objections! — but they do seem 
particularly obvious and important. 
7.1 Objection #1: Propositions Versus Sentences.


We noted earlier that deflationism can be presented in either a 
sententialist version or a propositionalist version. Some 
philosophers have suggested, however, that the choice between these 
two versions constitutes a dilemma for deflationism (Jackson, Oppy 
and Smith 1994). The objection is that if deflationism is construed 
in accordance with propositionalism, then it is trivial, but if it is
construed in accordance with sententialism it is false. To illustrate
the dilemma, consider the following claim: 
(7) Snow is white is true if and only if snow is
white


Now, does snow is white refer to a sentence or a 
proposition? If, on the one hand, we take (7) to be about a sentence,
then, assuming (7) can be interpreted as making a necessary claim, 
(7) is false. On the face of it, after all, it takes a lot more than 
snow's being white for it to be the case that ‘snow is 
white’ is true. In order that ‘snow is white’ be 
true, it must be the case not only that snow is white, it must in 
addition be the case that ‘snow is white’ means 
that snow is white. But this is a fact about language that (7) 
ignores. On the other hand, suppose we take snow is white to
denote a proposition; in particular, suppose we take it to denote the
proposition that snow is white. Then the theory looks to be trivial, 
since the proposition that snow is white is defined as being true 
just in case snow is white. In short, the deflationist is faced with 
a dilemma: take deflationism to be a theory of sentences and it is 
false; take it to be a theory of propositions, on the other hand, and
it is trivial. 


Of the two horns of this dilemma, it might seem that the best 
strategy for deflationists is to remain with the propositionalist 
version of their doctrine and accept its triviality. A trivial 
doctrine, after all, at least has the advantage of being true. 
Moreover, the charge of triviality is something that deflationists 
might well be expected to wear as a badge of honor: since 
deflationists are advocating their theory as following from mundane 
facts about which everyone can agree, it is no wonder that the theory
they advocate is trivial.


However, there are a number of reasons why deflationists have 
typically not endorsed this option. First, the triviality at issue 
here does not have its source in the concept of truth, but rather in 
the concept of a proposition. Second, a trivial version of 
deflationism says nothing about the theory of meaning, where by 
‘theory of meaning’ we mean an account of the connections
between sentences of natural language and the propositions they 
express. After all, if deflationists are attending only to 
propositions, they are evidently not attending to the 
relation between sentences and propositions. Of course, one might 
point out that other theories of truth are also silent on the theory 
of meaning — why then can deflationism not be? However, the 
fact is that many deflationists present their doctrine as a central 
part of a much bigger philosophical project, viz., to provide a 
deflationary account of all the semantic notions, that is, notions 
such as truth, reference, and meaning. The problem for deflationists 
who grasp the second horn of the dilemma is that they must admit that
there is no way to complete this project: the deflationary theory of 
truth can only be maintained by remaining silent about the theory of 
meaning. And this means that deflationism should be understood as a 
much more modest project than it is often taken to be.


The other possible response to this dilemma is to accept that 
deflationism applies inter alia to sentences, but to argue that the 
sentences to which it applies must be interpreted sentences,
i.e., sentences which have meaning. Of course, if the sentences to 
which deflationism applies are interpreted sentences, then there will
be no force to the objection that deflationism is ignoring the fact 
that sentences have meaning. Deflationism, on this interpretation, is
not so much ignoring this fact as assuming it.


On either plausible response to the dilemma, then, the deflationist 
makes use of the notion of meaning to explain truth. This fact has 
led a number of philosophers to argue that, on pain of circularity, 
deflationism cannot be combined with theories of meaning that make 
use of the notion of truth to explain meaning — in particular, 
that deflationism is incompatible with truth-conditional theories of 
meaning (e.g. Dummett 1959, Davidson 1990, Horwich 1998b, Kalderon 
1999, Collins 2002). Other philosophers have also suggested that 
deflationism is incompatible with truth-conditional theories of 
meaning on the grounds that granting truth any kind of 
explanatory role is inconsistent with deflationism (Davidson 1990, 
Field 1986, 1994). 


If deflationism is inconsistent with truth-conditional theories of 
meaning, this is not obviously an objection to deflationism.
After all, there are alternative theories of meaning available: both 
Paul Horwich and Hartry Field have in different ways defended a 
version of a use theory of meaning (see Field 1994a, Horwich 1998a). 
There is, however, a lot of work to be done before a use theory can 
be regarded as a successful theory of meaning. 


What about the claim that deflationism is inconsistent with
truth-conditional theories of meaning? As William G. Lycan notes
(Bar-On et al 2005), the charges of circularity in the literature have
been impressionistic and so remain difficult to evaluate.  Moreover,
on the surface at least, the circularity charge would seem to show
that even inflationism about truth is inconsistent with
truth-conditional theories of meaning, since all theories of truth
will have to take meaning for granted in some sense — for
example, in deciding which sentences are truth-apt (For criticisms of
the circularity charge, see Gupta 1993, Horisk 2008, Lance 1997,
Williams 1999.) 


On the other hand, worries about the explanatory role truth plays in 
truth-conditional theories of meaning can only be evaluated if we 
know, first, what sort of explanatory role truth plays in such 
theories, and, second, what sort of explanatory roles are ruled out 
by deflationism. It seems clear, for example, that if the concept of 
truth is only employed in truth-conditional theories of meaning as a 
device of generalization, there is no inconsistency with deflationary
theories of truth. But does truth have only this role in 
truth-conditional theories of meaning? The compatibility of 
deflationism about truth and truth-conditional theories of meaning 
seems to us an important and unanswered question. (For recent 
discussion, see Williams 1999, Bar-On et al 2005, Collins 2002, Gupta
and Martinez-Fernandez 2005, Horisk 2007 and Field 2005.) 
7.2 Objection #2: Correspondence


It is often said that what is most obvious about truth is that truth 
consists in correspondence to the facts — for example, that the
truth of the proposition that the earth revolves around the sun 
consists in its correspondence to the fact that the earth revolves 
around the sun. The so-called correspondence theory of truth is built
around this intuition, and tries to explain the notion of truth by 
appeal to the notions of correspondence and fact. Even if one does 
not build one's theory of truth around this intuition 
however, many philosophers regard it as a condition of adequacy on 
any theory of truth that the theory accommodates the correspondence 
intuition. 


It is often objected to deflationism, however, that the doctrine has 
particular trouble meeting this adequacy condition. One way to bring 
out the problem here is by focusing on a particular articulation of 
the correspondence intuition, an articulation favoured by 
deflationists themselves (Horwich 1998b). According to this way of 
spelling it out, the intuition that a certain sentence or proposition
‘corresponds to the facts’ is the intuition that the 
sentence or proposition is true because of a certain way the
world is; that is, the truth of the proposition is explained
by some contingent fact which is usually external to the proposition 
itself. We might express this by saying that someone who endorses the
correspondence intuition so understood would endorse:
(8) The proposition that snow is white is true
because snow is white


Now, the problem with (8) is that, when we combine it with the
deflationary theory-or at least with a necessary version of that
theory-we can derive something that is plainly false. Someone who holds
a necessary version of deflationism would clearly be committed to the
necessary truth of: 
(9) The proposition that snow is white is true iff snow is
white.


And, since (9) is a necessary truth, it is very plausible to suppose
that (8) and (9) together entail: 
(10) Snow is white because snow is white.


Unfortunately, however, (10) is false. The reason is that the relation
reported by ‘because’ in (8) and (10) is a causal or
explanatory relation, and such relations must obtain between distinct
relata. But the relata in (10) are (obviously) not distinct. Hence (10)
is false. But this means that the conjunction of (8) and (9) must be
false, and that deflationism is inconsistent with the correspondence
intuition. To borrow a phrase of Mark Johnston's — who mounts a
similar argument in a different context — we might put the point
differently by saying that, if deflationism is true, then what seems to
be a perfectly good explanation in (8) goes missing; if
deflationism is true, after all, then (8) is equivalent to (10), and
(10) is not an explanation of anything. 


How might a deflationist respond to this objection? One response is 
to provide a different articulation of the correspondence intuition. 
For example, one might point out that the connection between the 
proposition that snow is white and snow's being white is not a 
contingent connection, and suggest that this rules out (8) as a 
successful articulation of the correspondence intuition. That 
intuition (one might continue) is more plausibly given voice by (8*):
(8*) ‘Snow is white’ is true because snow is
white.


However, when (8*) is conjoined with (9), one cannot derive the
problematic (10), and thus, one might think, the objection from
correspondence might be avoided. Now certainly this is a possible
suggestion; the problem with it, however, is that a deflationist who
thinks that (8*) is true is most plausibly construed as holding a
sententialist, rather than a propositionalist, version of deflationism.
A sententialist version of deflationism, on the other hand, will in
turn supply a version of (9), viz.: 
(9*) ‘Snow is white’ is true iff snow is
white


which, at least it is interpreted as a necessary truth, will conspire
with (8*) to yield (10). And we are back where we started. 


Another response would be to object that ‘because’ 
creates an opaque context — that is, the kind of context within 
which one cannot substitute co-referring expressions and preserve 
truth. If ‘because’ creates an opaque context, then it 
would be illegitimate to suppose that (8) and (9) entail (10). This 
too is a possibility; however, it is not clear that 
‘because’ creates opaque context of the right kind. In 
general we can distinguish two kinds of opaque context: intensional 
contexts, which allow the substitution of necessarily co-referring 
expressions but not contingently co-referring expressions; and 
hyper-intensional contexts, which do not even allow the substitution 
of necessarily co-referring expressions. If the inference from (8) 
and (9) to (10) is to be successfully blocked, it is necessary that 
‘because’ creates a hyper-intensional context. However, 
it is open to a friend of the correspondence objection to argue that,
while ‘because’ creates an intensional context, it does 
not create a hyper-intensional context.


A final, and most radical, response would be to reject the 
correspondence intuition outright. This response is not in fact as 
drastic as it sounds. In particular, the deflationist does not have 
to say that someone who says ‘the proposition that snow is 
white corresponds to the facts’ is speaking falsely. 
Deflationists would do better to say that such a person is simply 
using a picturesque or ornate way of saying that the proposition is 
true, where truth is understood in accordance with the deflationary 
theory. Indeed, the deflationist can even agree that for certain 
rhetorical or conversational purposes, it might be more effective to 
use the ‘correspondence to the facts’ talk. Nevertheless,
it is important to see that this response does involve a burden, 
since it involves rejecting a condition of adequacy that many regard 
as binding on a theory of truth
7.3 Objection #3: Truth-value Gaps.


Philosophy of language has isolated a class of propositions that are 
supposed to fail of truth-value. According to some moral 
philosophers, for example, moral propositions — such as the 
injunction that one ought to return people's phone calls — are 
neither true nor false. The same thing is true, according to some 
philosophers of language, about propositions which presuppose the 
existence of something which does not in fact exist — such as 
the claim that the present King of France is bald; about propositions
that are vague — such as the proposition that wall hangings are
furniture; and about propositions that are paradoxical, such as those
that arise in connection with the liar paradox. Let us call this 
thesis the gap, since it finds a gap in the class of propositions 
between those that are true and those that are false. 


The deflationary theory of truth is inconsistent with there being a 
gap in the class of propositions, and this has been thought by many 
to be an objection to the theory. The reason for the inconsistency is
very simple, and flows directly from the deflationist theory of 
falsity that we considered earlier. Suppose, for reductio, that the 
gap is correct and thus that there is a proposition Q which 
lacks a truth-value. Obviously, since Q lacks a truth-value,
it is not the case that it is true or false. But now consider the 
equivalence schema (F-prop):
(F-prop) The proposition that P is false if and only if the
proposition that P is not true


It is clear from (F-prop) that if it is not the case that Q 
is true or false, then it is not the case that Q is true or 
not true. But that is a contradiction: it must be the case that 
Q is true or not true. We have been led to this 
contradiction by accepting the following: the claims that all the 
instances of (ES-prop) and (F-prop) are true, the gap, and classical 
logic. Clearly, then, we must give up one of these things. But which?
And which can we give up consistently with deflationism? 


One strategy that is obviously consistent with deflationism is the 
rejection of classical logic (perhaps rejecting or restricting the 
law of excluded middle, for example). We shall largely ignore this 
approach here. Another strategy would be to restrict (ES-prop), so 
that it is not asserted that all instances of (ES-prop) are true 
(Horwich 1998b). However, there are reasons to be suspicious of such 
a restriction. To see this, consider the following two propositions: 

(11) All inclusive disjunctions are true if and only if one of the disjuncts is true.
(12) All the propositions asserted by the Pope are true.



Both (11) and (12) are generalizations we express with the help of 
the truth predicate. And yet both seem to require the truth of all 
instances of (ES-prop). In particular, we may use (12) as a way of 
acknowledging our agreement with everything the Pope said, even if 
some of the propositions he asserted were moral propositions. This 
suggests that we need to use a notion of truth according to which 
instances of (ES-prop) hold even for moral statements, and even if 
they are neither true nor false.


A third strategy modifies deflationism by jettisoning the account of 
falsity that the deflationist offers, while hanging on to the account
of truth. This strategy is a fairly desperate one, however. To begin 
with, if we give up the account of falsehood, it is not clear that we
have an account of truth. Truth and falsehood are, as we have said, a
package deal. Moreover, the deflationary theories of falsity that we 
considered are motivated in large part by classical logic. 
Presumably, it would be desirable to maintain classical logic if at 
all possible, and this means that we should maintain the deflationist
account of falsity. Finally, one can generate a problem for the gap 
even if we operate without falsity, and only with truth (Rescher 
1969). Suppose, again for reductio, that there is a proposition 
Q that is neither true nor false. Now, if Q is 
neither true nor false, then the proposition that Q is true 
will be false. But this means that for at least one instance of the 
equivalence schema, one side of the biconditional will be false, and 
the other side will be neither true nor false. On all logics that 
involve truth-value gaps, however, such a biconditional will be 
counted either as false or else as neither true nor false. Either 
way, the result is that the equivalence schema is not true in all 
instances.


A fourth strategy argues that the gap, as we have presented it, is 
malformed. According to this strategy, one should not respond to the 
phenomena that prompt the gap by suggesting that certain propositions
lack truth values; one should rather suggest that certain declarative
sentences lack truth values, i.e., because they fail to express 
propositions at all. Thus, if we take presupposition failure as our 
example, the suggestion is that instead of supposing that the 
proposition that the present King of France is bald does not
have a truth value if the King of France does not exist, one should 
rather suppose that the sentence ‘the present King of France is
bald’ does not express a proposition, and therefore fails to 
have a truth value. This kind of approach removes any conflict 
between the gap and deflationism. The gap says, or implies, that 
certain sentences fail to express propositions; deflationism says, or
implies, that if those sentences did express propositions, 
they would have truth values. But there is clearly no contradiction 
in supposing, on the one hand, that a certain sentence fails to 
express a proposition and, on the other, that if it did, it would 
have a truth value.


This strategy for dealing with the gap returns us to the problems we 
mentioned earlier concerning which theories of meaning are compatible
with deflationism. For example, some have argued that deflationism is
incompatible with truth-conditional theories of meaning and so cannot
accept that some declarative sentences do not have truth-conditions 
or express propositions (e.g. Field 1994a, Armour-Garb 2001). Even if
this is true, however, the deflationist can maintain that only 
meaningful declarative sentences have truth-conditions or 
express a proposition and that a use theory of meaning will 
distinguish the meaningful sentences from the meaningless. Still, it 
is unclear whether any use theory of meaning can make the appropriate
distinctions — for example, whether it can distinguish 
‘The present King of France is bald’ from ‘The 
present Prime Minister of Australia is bald’. 


A fifth strategy is to reject the gap entirely, and to simply agree 
that there is no gap that divides either propositions or sentences. 
This may initially seem to be an overreaction to the inconsistency of
deflationism and the gap; however, what lies behind this strategy is 
the thought that it is not clear that the various phenomena that 
motivate the gap ought to be regarded as phenomena which involve 
failure of truth value, whether of sentences or propositions. In the 
case of presupposition failure, for example, it is not clear that the
problem is best explained by a failure of certain sentences to have 
truth values, or by the presence of conventional or conversational 
implicatures that govern utterances of those sentences. The 
possibility of a broadly pragmatic account of the phenomena suggests 
that one might accommodate the intuitions behind the gap without 
supposing that there is a gap in the class of propositions (for an 
example, see Stalnaker 1975). Similarly, in the case of vague 
propositions, one might adopt epistemicism: the position that vague 
words like ‘bald’ in fact have precise extensions, but 
that we can never know what these precise extensions are (see 
Williamson 1994, Horwich 1998b). Like the previous strategy, however,
more work is required to show that this approach is able to account 
for the various linguistic phenomena that prompt the gap.


A final strategy for dealing with the gap takes seriously the 
deflationist idea that attributions of truth to a proposition have 
the same semantic value as the propositions to which truth is 
attributed. So far we have assumed that attributions of truth to the 
proposition Q, where Q lacks a truth value, are 
false. However, an alternative approach is to suppose that if 
Q lacks a truth value, then both the proposition that 
Q is true and the proposition that Q is false lack 
truth values too. This allows us to accept that the instances of 
(ES-prop) involving propositions that lack truth value are true, 
since the two sides of the biconditional will have the same semantic 
value. Of course, if we accept the law of excluded middle — 
that is, we accept that either Q or not-Q — 
then we must also accept that either Q is true or 
not-Q is true. Given that, by hypothesis, Q lacks a
truth value, this may seem odd. In particular, it is unclear how we 
can express the fact that Q lacks a truth value. For we 
cannot describe this case by saying that Q is neither true 
nor false. 


To avoid this consequence, we may wish to distinguish two notions of 
truth at this point. One notion of truth, call it the weak notion 
(Yablo 1985, Field 1994b), is implicitly defined by the instances of 
(weak-ES), all of which are asserted to hold.

(weak-ES) the proposition that p is weakly true if and only
if p



Because all instances of (weak-ES) are true, it is the weak notion 
that is required to express (11).

(11) All inclusive disjunctions are true if and only if one of the
disjuncts is true.



In short, weak truth is such that attributions of weak truth to a 
truth-bearer have the same semantic value as the truth-bearer itself.
In contrast, a strong notion of truth will not make all instances of 
(strong-ES) hold.

(strong-ES) the proposition that p is strongly true if and
only if p.



In particular, propositions that lack truth value will falsify 
(strong-ES). This strong notion of truth appears to be required if we
wish to say that it is neither true that Q nor true that 
not-Q. For these sorts of reasons, some have suggested that 
ordinary truth-talk vacillates between using a weak and a strong 
notion of truth (see Field 1994b, McGee 2005). If this is right, then
perhaps deflationists can focus on the weak notion of truth as 
primary, and try to define up a strong notion of truth from it and 
additional resources consistent with their position (see Field 1994b 
for an attempt). 


There are, then, a number of strategies for dealing with the gap that
are prima facie compatible with deflationism. However, in each case 
there are reasons to worry about either the plausibility of the 
strategy, or about whether, on closer inspection, deflationism will 
turn out to be inconsistent with the strategy.
7.4 Objection #4: Consistency and Adequacy


One of the major tasks of philosophical logic in the twentieth 
century has been to provide a theory of truth that can deal with the 
ancient problem of the liar paradox. Consider the following 
proposition.

(The Liar) The Liar is not true.



If we accept the relevant instance of (ES-prop) for The Liar, and 
classical logic, then contradiction quickly follows. Moreover, since 
deriving this contradiction does not rely on the supposition that 
some proposition is neither true nor false, appealing to a weak 
notion of truth will not help with this problem. Indeed, since the 
weak notion of truth implies that all instances of (ES-prop) are 
true, it is precisely this notion of truth that allows the 
contradiction to be derived. A stronger notion of truth that 
restricted (ES-prop) in certain ways might be able to avoid the liar 
paradox. 


Partly for this reason, a number of philosophers have recently argued
that The Liar poses a special problem for deflationary theories of
truth (see Beall and Armour-Garb (eds.) 2005). That is, since it is
unclear whether deflationists can appeal to a strong notion of truth,
they seem to be at a special disadvantage in dealing with the liar
paradox. Moreover, it has been argued that one particular way of
motivating a restriction of (ES-prop) is incompatible with
deflationism: namely, that paradoxical sentences like The Liar are
meaningless, or do not express propositions. (Armour-Garb 2001; but
see Beall 2001 for a contrary view.) 


However, as we mentioned above, not all deflationary theories are 
committed to the truth of all instances of (ES-prop). Horwich's 
minimal theory of truth, for example, only consists of all the 
non-pathological instances of (ES-prop). One possible deflationist 
response to The Liar, then, is to simply bar the problematic 
instances of (ES-prop) from the theory of truth. There are several 
problems with this strategy. For one, by making this ad hoc manoeuvre
we lose the ability to explain why the pathological instances of 
(ES-prop) are pathological. After all, it is surely something about 
the concept of truth, and in particular the role of the relevant 
instances of (ES-prop), that explains why the liar paradox arises 
(Soames 1999, Gupta 2006). Another problem is that it is very 
difficult, if not impossible, to spell out in advance which instances
of (ES-prop) are paradoxical (Kripke 1975, McGee 1992, Yablo 1993). A
final problem is that it appears we need to assume that the 
paradoxical instances of (ES-prop) are true if we are to assert (11) 
(Armour-Garb 2004, Gupta 2006).

(11) All inclusive disjunctions are true if and only if one of the disjuncts is true.



These problems facing accounts that merely restrict the instances of 
the equivalence schema suggest an alternative deflationist response 
to the liar. For both the fact that The Liar's instance of (ES-prop) 
is required to explain its (The Liar's) pathology, and the fact that 
we need The Liar's instance of (ES-prop) to assert (11), give us good
reason to suppose that even the paradoxical instances of (ES-prop) 
are true. Moreover, these reasons hold whether we are deflationists 
or inflationists. If this is right, then, since the paradox is 
generated merely from the relevant instance of (ES-prop) by classical
logic, The Liar poses no special problem for deflationists 
(Gupta 2006). And since everyone's problem is no one's, the liar 
paradox cannot be used against deflationists. This defence of 
deflationism can be bolstered by noting that, like inflationists, 
deflationists can try to deal with the liar paradox by modifying 
classical logic (Field 2003), by adopting epistemicism (Restall 
2006), or by adopting a revision theory (Gupta and Belnap 1993). (See
also Maudlin 2004.) 


However, there is a further line of argument that suggests there is a
special problem for deflationists in this vicinity. The ideal theory 
of truth will be both consistent (e.g. avoids the liar paradox) and 
adequate (e.g. allows us to derive all the essential laws of truth, 
like (11)). Yet it has been recently argued that even if 
deflationists can give a consistent theory of truth, they cannot 
provide an adequate theory. The argument for this conclusion turns on
the notion of a conservative extension of a theory. Informally, a 
conservative extension of a theory is one that does not allow us to 
prove any sentences that couldn't be proved from the original, 
unextended theory. More formally, and applied to theories of truth, a
truth theory, Tr is conservative over some theory 
T formulated in language L if and only if for every
sentence φ of L in which the truth predicate doesn't
occur, if Tr ∪ L  ⊢ 
φ, then L  ⊢  φ. As is well known,
certain truth theories are conservative over arithmetic —
e.g. theories that implicitly define truth using only the instances of
(ES-prop) — and certain truth theories are not —
e.g. Tarski's compositional theory (Tarski 1944).  Specifically, the
addition of certain truth theories allows us to prove that arithmetic
is consistent, something we famously can't do if we are confined to
arithmetic itself. 


Now, it has recently been argued (a) that conservative truth theories
are inadequate and (b) deflationists are committed to conservative 
truth theories (Shapiro 1998, Ketland 1999). The details of the 
arguments for (a) are complicated and we will pass over them here 
(but see Field 1999 for criticism). To get a flavour of the arguments
for (b), consider Shapiro's rhetorical question: ‘How thin can 
the notion of arithmetic truth be, if by invoking it we can learn 
more about the natural numbers?’ Shapiro is surely right to 
press deflationists on their frequent claims that truth is 'thin' or 
'insubstantial'. It might also be a worry for deflationists if any 
adequate truth theory allowed us to derive non-logical truths, given 
the common deflationist assertion that truth is a logical property. 
On the other hand, deflationists themselves insist that truth is an 
expressively useful device, and so they cannot be faulted merely for 
promoting a theory of truth that allows us to say more about matters 
not involving truth. Whether there is more of a worry for 
deflationists in the non-conservativeness of certain truth-theories 
depends on subtle questions about what sort of axioms count as 
essential laws of truth and whether all conservative truth theories 
are inadequate (Shapiro 1998, Field 1999, Ketland 1999). Perhaps most
importantly, though, the debate over conservativeness highlights how 
unclear we are about the commitments of deflationism. 
7.5 Objection #5: Normativity.


It is commonly said that our beliefs and assertions aim at truth. The
idea here, of course, is not that our beliefs and assertions are 
always true in a statistical sense, or even that they are mostly 
true. The idea is rather that truth is a norm of assertion. 
This fact about assertion and truth has often been seen to suggest 
that deflationism must be false. However, the felt contradiction 
between normativity and deflationism is difficult to make precise. 


The first thing to say is that there is certainly a sense in which 
deflationism is not inconsistent with the idea that truth is a norm 
of assertion. To illustrate this, notice that we can obtain an 
intuitive understanding of the content of this idea without 
mentioning truth at all, so long as we focus on a particular case. 
Suppose for whatever reason that Mary sincerely believes that snow is
green, has good evidence for this belief, and on the basis of this 
belief and evidence asserts that snow is green. We might say that 
there is a norm of assertion which implies that Mary is in this case 
open to criticism. After all, since snow is evidently not green, 
there must be something incorrect or defective 
about Mary's assertion that it is. It is this incorrection or 
defectiveness that the idea that truth is a norm of assertion is 
trying to capture.


But now let us see if we can give a general statement of the norm 
that lies behind this particular case. The problem of providing a 
general statement seems to be difficult, and for reasons that by now 
should be familiar. To state the norm in general we would need to be 
able to do something we cannot really do, namely, to complete an 
infinite conjunction of something like the following form:
If someone asserts that snow is green, and snow is not
green then he or she is open to criticism, and if someone asserts that
grass is purple, and grass is not purple then he or she is open to
criticism,…and so on.


Given the equivalence schema (F-prop*) provided by the deflationary
theory of falsity, however, this infinite conjunction can be
reformulated as: 
If someone asserts that snow is green and the proposition
that snow is green is false, then he or she is open to criticism, and
if someone asserts that grass is purple and the proposition that grass
is purple is false, then he or she is open to criticism, and so
on.


In turn, this reformulated infinite conjunction can be reformulated as
a statement whose universal quantifier ranges over propositions: 
For all propositions p, if someone asserts
that p, and p is false, then he or she is open to
criticism


Or, to put it as some philosophers might: 
Truth is a norm of assertion.


For after all, if truth is a norm of assertion, then, if you assert
something false, you are open to criticism. In short, then,
deflationists are certainly not denying that truth is a norm of
assertion; on the contrary, the concept of truth is required to state
that very generalization. 


If the problem of normativity is not the straightforward one that 
deflationists cannot account for the idea that truth is a norm of 
assertion, what is the problem? Crispin Wright argues that the 
problem is not so much that deflationists cannot account for 
normativity; rather, he suggests that the problem is twofold: first, 
that any theory of truth that does account for normativity 
is ipso facto not a deflationary theory properly so-called, 
and second, that any theory of truth which employs the equivalence 
schemas can account for normativity (Wright 1992; and see Price 1998 
for discussion). The result is that, since most contemporary 
varieties of deflationism evidently employ the equivalence schemas, 
most contemporary varieties of deflationism are not varieties of 
deflationism properly so-called.


Wright's objection from normativity is a difficult one to assess. For
one thing, it is difficult to find Wright's reason for supposing that
the equivalence schemas play such a central role in the explanation 
of normativity. As we have seen, the equivalence schemas are crucial 
in providing a general statement of the idea that truth is a norm of 
assertion, but there seems for all that no internal connection 
between truth and the norm in question, and thus no internal
connection between the equivalence schemas and that norm (cf. Price 
1998). Nor is it clear what role normativity plays in the distinction
between an inflationary and a deflationary theory of truth. Certainly
it is not good enough to simply define deflationism so that 
any deflationary theory cannot account for normativity. Of course, it
is a consequence of a definition of this sort that a theory of truth 
is either inflationary or false; but then again, no deflationist will
accept the definition.


Whatever one thinks of the details of Wright's objection, however, it
does have far-reaching consequences for deflationism about truth.
What the objection forces us to consider is the possibility that there
is no very clear distinction between an inflationary and a
deflationary theory of truth. Indeed, this possibility — that
there is no clear inflationary/deflationary distinction — is the
topic of the final objection to deflationism that we will discuss.
7.6 Objection #6: Inflationist Deflationism?


The final objection begins by drawing attention to a little known
doctrine about truth that G.E. Moore held at the beginning of the
century. Richard Cartwright describes the view as follows: “a
true proposition is one that has a certain simple unanalyzable
property, and a false proposition is one that lacks the
property” (1987, p. 73).  This doctrine about truth is, of
course, to be understood as the analogue for truth of the doctrine
that Moore held about good, namely that good is a simple, unanalyzable
quality. 


The problem that this Moorean view about truth presents for the 
deflationary theory might best be expressed in the form of a 
question: what is the difference between the Moorean view and 
deflationism? Of course, there is a sense in which the flavour of the
Moorean view is very different from the flavour of the deflationist 
theory about truth. After all, what could be more inflationary than 
thinking that truth is a property of a proposition that is 
unanalyzable? Certainly Moore's view about good has been viewed in 
this light. However, the fact that one view has a different flavour 
from another does not mean that, at bottom, they are not the same 
view. One might perhaps suggest that, according to the deflationary 
theory, the concept of truth has an important logical role, i.e., to 
capture generalizations. However, this doesn't really answer our 
question. For one thing, it isn't clear that Moore's notion might not
also capture generalizations. For another, the idea that the 
deflationary concept of truth plays an important logical role doesn't
distinguish the metaphysics of deflationism from the metaphysics of 
the Moorean view; and it is the metaphysics of the matter that the 
present objection really brings into focus. Alternatively, one might 
suggest that the distinction between truth according to deflationism 
and truth according to Moore's view is the distinction between having
a simple unanalyzable nature, and not having a nature at all. 
However, what is that distinction? It is certainly not obvious that 
there is any distinction between having a nature about which nothing 
can be said and having no nature at all.


The problem is particularly acute in light of the fact that 
deflationism has often been discussed in the context of various 
claims about reductionism. In many discussions of deflationism, for 
example, the opponent is assumed to be a particular version of a 
correspondence theory that attempts to reduce the correspondence 
relation to certain relations of causation (Field 1986 is a good 
example). However, it should be noted that this kind of view is also 
opposed to the kind of position that takes semantic facts-such as a 
proposition's being true-as primitive (Field 1972 is a good example).
And the problem that we are considering for deflationism is that 
these two views are not simply identical in being opposed to the kind
of view that explains correspondence in terms of causation: it is 
that they are identical simpliciter. The suggestion, in 
short, is that deflationism is identical to what initially seems to 
be its complete opposite, Moorean inflationism.


The decision to be an inflationist or a deflationist about truth has
been called “the biggest decision a theorist of truth must
make” (Boghossian 1990). Certainly this is true at an intuitive
level. But it is sobering also to realize that it is not exactly clear
what this decision amounts to when subjected to philosophical
scrutiny. And this suggests that there is still a lot of work to be
done before we can arrive at a final evaluation of the deflationary
theory of truth.