The identity theory of truth was influential in the formative years
of modern analytic philosophy, and has come to prominence again
recently. Broadly speaking, it sees itself as a reaction against
correspondence theories of truth, which maintain that truth-bearers
are made true by facts. The identity theory maintains,
against this, that at least some truth-bearers are not made true by,
but are identical with, facts. The theory is not normally
applied at the level of declarative sentences, but to what such
sentences express. It is these items—or, again, some of
them—that are held to be identical with facts. Identity
theorists diverge over the details of this general picture, depending
on what exactly they take declarative sentences to express, whether
Fregean Thoughts (at the level of sense), Russellian propositions (at
the level of reference), or both, and depending also on how exactly
facts are construed. But, to give a precise illustration, an identity
theorist who thinks that declarative sentences express Russellian
propositions will typically hold that true such propositions are
identical with facts. The significance of the identity theory, for its
supporters, is that it appears to make available the closing of a
certain gap that might otherwise be thought to open up between
language and world and/or between mind and world. If its supporters
are right about this, the identity theory of truth potentially has
profound consequences both in metaphysics and in the philosophies of
mind and language.
 
1. Definition and preliminary exposition
Declarative sentences seem to take truth-values, for we say things
like

(1) “Socrates
  is wise” is true.

But sentences are not the only bearers of truth-values: we also
allow that what such sentences express, or mean, may be true or false.
So we also say such things as

(2) “Socrates
  is wise” means that Socrates is 
  wise,[1]

and

 (3) That Socrates
is wise is true

or

 (4) It is true
that Socrates is wise.

If, provisionally, we call the things that declarative sentences
express, or mean, their contents—again provisionally,
these will be such things as that Socrates is wise—then
the identity theory of truth, in its most general form, states that
(cf. Baldwin 1991: 35):

(5) The
content of a declarative sentence is true just if it is (identical
with) a fact.

A fact is here to be thought of as, very generally, a way
things are, or a way the world is. On this approach, the
identity theory secures an intimate connection between language (what
language expresses) and world. Of course there would in principle be
theoretical room for a view that identified not the content of, say,
the true declarative sentence “Socrates is wise”—let
us assume from now on that this sentence is true—with the fact
that Socrates is wise, but rather that sentence itself.
However, it would seem that this is not a version of the theory that
anyone has ever advanced, nor does it appear that it would be
plausible to do so (see Candlish 1999b: 200–2; Künne 2003:
6). The early Wittgenstein does, of course, regard sentences as being
themselves facts, but they are not identical with the facts that make
them true.
Alternatively, and using a different locution, one might say that,
to continue with our favored example,

(6) That
Socrates is wise is true just if that Socrates is wise
is the case.

The idea here is that (6) makes a connection
between language and reality: on the left-hand side we have something
expressed by a piece of language, and on the right-hand side we allude
to a bit of reality.  Now (6) might look truistic,
and that status has indeed been claimed for the identity theory, at
least in one of its manifestations. John McDowell has argued that what
he calls true “thinkables” are identical with facts (1996:
27–8, 179–80). Thinkables are things like that
Socrates is wise regarded as possible objects of thought. For we
can think that Socrates is wise; and it can also be the case
that Socrates is wise. So what we can think can also be
(identical with) what is the case. That identity, McDowell claims, is
truistic. On this approach, one might prefer one’s identity
theory to take the form (cf. Hornsby 1997: 2):

(7) All true
thinkables are (identical with) facts.

And on this approach the identity theory aims to secure an intimate
connection between mind (what we think) and world.
A point which has been obscured in the literature on this topic,
but which should be noticed, is that
 (7) asserts a
relation of subordination: it says that true thinkables are a (proper
or improper) subset of facts; it implicitly allows that there might be
facts that are not identical with true thinkables. So
 (7) is not to be confounded with its converse,

(8) All facts
are (identical with) true thinkables,

which asserts the opposite subordination, and says that facts are a
(proper or improper) subset of true thinkables, implicitly allowing,
this time, that there might be true thinkables that are not identical
with facts. (8) is quite distinct from
(7), and if (7) is controversial,
(8) is equally or more so, but for reasons that are
at least in part different. (8) denies the
existence of facts that cannot be grasped in thought. But many
philosophers will hold it to be evident that there are, or at least
could be, such facts—perhaps certain facts involving indefinable
real numbers, for example, or in some other way going beyond the
powers of human thought, perhaps even divine thought (if there is such
a thing). So (8) could be false; its status remains
to be established; it can hardly be regarded as truistic.
Accordingly, one might expect that an identity theorist who wished to
affirm (7), and certainly anyone who wanted to say
that (7) (or (6)) was truistic,
would—at least qua identity theorist—steer clear
of (8), and leave its status sub
judice. Surprisingly, however, a good number of identity
theorists, both historical and contemporary, incorporate
 (8) as well as—or even instead 
of—(7) into their statement of the theory. Richard
Cartwright, who published the first modern discussion of the theory in
1987, though he found difficulties in the formulation, wrote that if
one were formulating the theory, it would say “that every true
proposition is a fact and every fact a true proposition” (1987:
74). McDowell states that 
 true thinkables already belong just as much to the
world as to minds [i.e., (7)], and things that are
the case already belong just as much to minds as to the world [i.e.,
(8)]. It should not even seem that we need to
choose a direction in which to read the claim of identity. (2005: 84)

 Jennifer
Hornsby takes the theory to state that true thinkables and facts
coincide (1997: 2, 9, 17, 20)—they are the same
set—so that she in effect identifies that theory with the
conjunction of (7) and (8), as
also, in effect, does Julian Dodd (2008a: passim). Now,
 (8) is certainly an interesting thesis that merits
much more consideration than it has hitherto received (at least in the
recent philosophical literature), and, as indicated, the above
theorists can appeal to the fact that early expositions of the
identity theory seem to have had as much invested in
 (8) as in
 (5) or
 (7): on this point see §2
below. Nevertheless, it will make for clarity of discussion if we
associate the identity theory of truth, more narrowly, with something
along the lines of (5) or (7),
and omit (8) from this particular
discussion.[2]
That will be my policy here.
Whether or not (6) is truistic, both
 (5) and (7) involve technical or
semi-technical vocabulary, and so can hardly count as truisms.
Moreover, they have been advanced as moves in a technical
debate—concerning the viability of the correspondence theory of
truth—and so on that basis, too, can hardly be regarded as
truistic (Dodd 2008a: 179). What (5) and
 (7) mean, and which of them one will prefer as
one’s statement of the identity theory of truth, if one is
favorably disposed to that theory—one may of course be happy
with both—will depend, among other things, on what exactly one
thinks about the nature of such entities as that Socrates is
wise. In order to get clear on this point, discussion of the
identity theory has naturally been conducted in the context of the
Fregean semantical hierarchy, which distinguishes between levels of
language, sense, and reference. Frege recognized what he called
“Thoughts”
 (Gedanken)[3]
 at the level of sense corresponding to
(presented by) declarative sentences at the level of
language. McDowell’s thinkables are meant to be Fregean
Thoughts, the change of terminology being intended to stress the fact
that these entities are not thoughts in the sense of dated (and
perhaps spatially located) individuals, but are abstract contents that
are at least in principle (particular cases may introduce
restrictions) available to be grasped by different thinkers at
different times and places. So a Fregean identity theory of truth
would regard both such entities as that Socrates is wise and,
correlatively, facts as sense-level entities: this kind of identity
theory will then state that true such entities are identical with
facts. This approach will naturally favor (7) as
its expression of the identity theory.
By contrast with Frege, Russell abjured the level of sense and (at
least around 1903–4) recognized what, following Moore, he called
“propositions” as worldly entities composed of objects and
properties. A modern Russellian approach might adopt these
propositions—or something like them: the details of
Russell’s own conception are quite vague—as the referents
of declarative sentences, and an identity theorist who followed this
line might prefer to take a particular reading of
 (5) as his or her slogan. So this Russellian would
affirm something along the lines of:

(9) All true
Russellian propositions are identical with facts (at the level of
reference),

by contrast with the Fregean’s

(10) All true
Fregean Thoughts are identical with facts (at the level of
sense).

This way of formulating the relevant identity claims indicates
immediately that it would, at least in principle, be open to a
theorist to combine (9) and
 (10) in a hybrid position that (i) departed from
Russell and followed Frege by admitting both a level of
Fregean sense and one of reference, and also, having admitted
both levels to the semantic hierarchy, (ii) both located
Fregean Thoughts at the level of sense and located Russellian
propositions at the level of reference. Sense being mode of
presentation of reference, the idea would be that declarative
sentences refer, via Fregean Thoughts, to Russellian
propositions. (For this disposition, see Gaskin 2006: 203–20;
2008: 56–127.)  So someone adopting this hybrid approach would
affirm both (9) and (10). Of
course, the facts mentioned in (9) would be
categorially different from the facts mentioned in
 (10), and one might choose to avoid confusion by
distinguishing them terminologically, and perhaps also by privileging
one set of facts, ontologically, over the other. If one wanted to
follow this privileging strategy, one might say, for instance, that
only reference-level facts were genuine facts, the
relata of the identity relation at the level of sense being
merely fact-like entities, not bona fide facts. That
would be to give the combination of (9) and
 (10) a Russellian spin. Alternatively, someone who
took the hybrid line might prefer to give it a Fregean spin, saying
that the entities with which true Fregean Thoughts were identical were
the genuine facts, and that the corresponding entities at the level of
reference that true Russellian propositions were identical with were
not facts as such, but fact-like correlates of some sort. Just so far,
of course, these privileging strategies leave the status of the
entities they are treating as merely fact-like unclear; and,
as far as the Fregean version of the identity theory goes,
commentators who identify facts with sense-level Fregean Thoughts
usually, as we shall see, abjure reference-level Russellian
propositions altogether, rather than merely downgrading their
ontological status, and so affirm (10) but reject
(9). We shall return to these issues in
 §4 below.
2. Historical background
The expression “the identity theory of truth” was first
used—or, at any rate, first used in the relevant sense—by
Stewart Candlish in an article on F.H. Bradley published in 1989. But
the general idea of the theory had been in the air during the 1980s:
for example, in his discussion of John Mackie’s correspondence
theory of truth, first published in a Festschrift for Mackie
in 1985, McDowell noted that if we say something like
A true statement is one such that the way things
are is the way it represents them as being, 
we thereby make
 truth consist in a relation of correspondence (rather
than identity) between how things are and how things are represented
as being, (1998: 137 n. 21) 
the implication here being that identity would be
the right way to conceive the given relation. And versions of the
identity theory go back at least to
 Bradley,[4]
 and to the founding
fathers of the analytic tradition (Sullivan 2005: 56–7
n. 4). The theory can be found in G.E. Moore’s “The Nature
of Judgment” (1899), and in the entry he wrote (perhaps at the
same time) on “Truth” for J. Baldwin’s
Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1902–3) (1993:
4–8, 20–1; see Baldwin 1991: 40–3). Russell embraced
the identity theory at least during the period of his 1904 discussions
of Meinong (see, e.g., Russell 1973: 75), and possibly also in his
The Principles of Mathematics of 1903, and for a few years
after these publications as
 well.[5]
 Frege has a statement of the theory in his
1919 essay “The Thought”, and may have held it
earlier.[6]
Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (1922) is usually held to
propound a correspondence rather than an identity theory of truth. In
the Tractatus, declarative sentences (Sätze)
are said to be facts (arrangements of names), and states of affairs
(Sachlagen, Sachverhalte, Tatsachen) are
also said to be facts (arrangements of objects): a sentence is true
just if there is an appropriate relation of correspondence (an
isomorphism) between sentence and state of affairs. Interestingly, it
has been suggested (by Peter Sullivan) that Wittgenstein’s
position in the Tractatus may actually be closer to an
identity theory than has traditionally been supposed (Sullivan 2005:
58–9). The idea is that Wittgenstein’s simple objects are
in fact to be identified with Fregean senses, and that in effect the
Tractatus contains an identity theory along the lines of
 (7) or
 (10).[7]
 The orthodox position,
which will be presupposed here, is that, like Russell, the Tractarian
Wittgenstein simply abjures the level of the Fregean sense, so that
his semantical hierarchy consists exclusively of levels of language
and reference, with nothing of a mediatory or similar nature located
between these levels, and accordingly that, since he does not
recognize the existence of proposition-like entities (either at the
level of sense, obviously, or at the level of reference), Wittgenstein
does not have the wherewithal to expound an identity conception of
truth—at least not a plausible one, since, as was noted above
(§1), no one wants to identify true
sentences with the facts or states of affairs that make them
true (if any).
Note that Wittgenstein has two different conceptions of fact, a
factive and a non-factive one. According to the former conception,
facts necessarily obtain or are the case; according to the latter,
facts may fail to obtain or not be the case. (This non-factive
conception is explicit at Tractatus 1.2–1.21, and
presupposed at 2.1; see Johnston 2013: 382.) Identity theorists
normally presuppose the factive conception, and that is the policy
which will be followed here; but the non-factive conception will be
tangentially relevant in §5
below. Similarly, for Wittgenstein states of affairs may either obtain
or fail to obtain—both possibilities are, in general, available
to them—and he says or implies of the world both (i) that it is
everything that is the case, and (ii) that it is everything that is
the case as well as everything that is not the case
(Tractatus 1.1, 2.04–2.063; see Stenius 1960: 51).
3. Motivation
What motivates the identity theory of truth? It is best viewed as a
response to difficulties that seem to accrue to at least some versions
of the correspondence theory of truth (cf. Dodd 2008a: 120, 124). The
correspondence theory holds that truth consists in a relation of
correspondence between something linguistic or quasi-linguistic, on
the one hand, and something worldly on the other. Generally, the items
on the worldly end of the relation are taken to be facts or
(obtaining) states of affairs. For many purposes these two latter
kinds of entity (facts, obtaining states of affairs) are assimilated
to one another, and that strategy will be followed here. The exact
nature of the correspondence theory will then depend on what the other
relatum is taken to be. The items mentioned so far make
available three distinct versions of the correspondence theory,
depending on whether this relatum is taken to consist of
declarative sentences, Fregean Thoughts, or Russellian
propositions. Modern correspondence theorists make a distinction
between a truth-bearer, which would typically be one of these
three items, and 
truth-makers,[8]
 which are held to be facts. On this
approach, true declarative sentences, Fregean Thoughts, or Russellian
propositions correspond to facts in the sense that facts are what make
those sentences, Thoughts, or propositions true, when they are true.
(Henceforth we shall normally speak simply of Thoughts and
propositions, understanding these to be Fregean Thoughts and
Russellian propositions respectively, unless otherwise specified.)
That immediately gives us a constraint on the shape of worldly
facts. Take our sample sentence “Socrates is wise”, and
recall that this sentence is here assumed to be true. At the level of
reference we encounter the object Socrates and (assuming realism about
properties)[9] the
property of wisdom, and both of these may be taken to be entities in
the world, but neither amounts to a fact: neither amounts to a
plausible truth-maker for the sentence “Socrates is wise”,
or for its expressed Thought, or for its expressed proposition. That
is because the existence of Socrates, just as such, and the existence
of wisdom, just as such, are not enough to make it true that Socrates
is wise (Armstrong 1997: 115–16; Dodd 2008a: 7). (Even if we add
in further universals, such as the relation of instantiation, and
indeed the instantiation of instantiation to any degree, the basic
point is not altered.) Rather, if there are to be truth-makers in the
world, it seems clear that they will have to be structured,
syntactically or quasi-syntactically, in the same general way as
declarative sentences, Thoughts, and propositions. For convenience we
can refer to structure in this general sense as “propositional
structure”: the point then is that neither Socrates, nor the
property of wisdom, nor (if we want to adduce it) the relation of
instantiation is, just as such, propositionally structured. Following
this line of thought through, we appear to reach the conclusion that
nothing short of full-blown entities like the fact that Socrates
is wise will be competent to make the sentence “Socrates is
wise”, or the Thought or proposition expressed by that sentence,
true.[10]
The question now is: can we regard such entities as truth-makers
for corresponding sentences, Thoughts, or propositions? Consider first
the suggestion that the worldly fact that Socrates is wise is
the truth-maker for the reference-level proposition that Socrates
is wise. There surely are such facts as the fact that
Socrates is wise: we appear to talk about such things all the
time. The problem would seem to be not with the existence of such
facts, but rather with the relation of correspondence which is said by
the version of the correspondence theory that we are currently
considering to obtain between the fact that Socrates is wise
and the proposition that Socrates is wise. As emerges from
this way of expressing the difficulty, there seems to be no linguistic
difference between the way we talk about propositions and the way we
talk about facts, when these entities are specified by
“that” clauses.  That suggests that facts just
are true propositions. If that is right, then the relation
between facts and true propositions is not one of
correspondence—which, as Frege famously observed
(1918–19: 60; 1977: 3; Künne 2003: 8), implies the
distinctness of the relata—but identity.
This intuition can be strengthened by noting the following point
about explanation. Correspondence theorists have typically wanted the
relation of correspondence to explain truth: they have
usually wanted to say that it is because the proposition
that Socrates is wise corresponds to a fact that it is true,
and because the proposition that Socrates is
foolish—or rather: It is not the case that Socrates is
wise (after all, his merely being foolish is not enough to
guarantee that he is not wise, for he might, like James I and VI, be
both wise and foolish)—does not correspond to a fact that it is
false. But the distance between the true proposition that Socrates
is wise and the fact that Socrates is wise seems to be
too small to provide for explanatory leverage. In fact, there seems to
be no distance at all. Suppose we ask: Why is the proposition that
Socrates is wise true? If we reply by saying that it is true
because it is a fact that Socrates is wise, we seem to have
explained nothing, but merely repeated ourselves (cf. Strawson 1971:
197; Anscombe 2000: 8). There are, to be sure, circumstances in which
we tolerate statements of the form “A because
B” where an appropriate identity—perhaps even
identity of sense, or reference, or both—obtains between
“A” and “B”. For example, we
say things like “He is your first cousin because he is a child
of a sibling of one of your parents” (Künne 2003: 155). But
here there is a definitional connection between left-hand side and
right-hand side, which is not so with “The proposition that
Socrates is wise is true because it is a fact that Socrates
is wise”. In the latter case there is no question of
definition; rather, we are supposed, according to the correspondence
theorist, to have an example of metaphysical explanation, and that is
what, according to the identity theorist, fails. After all, the
identity theorist will insist, it seems obvious that the relation,
whatever it is, between the proposition that Socrates is wise
and the fact that Socrates is wise must, given that the
proposition is true, be an extremely close one: what could this
relation be? If the identity theorist is right that the relation can
hardly be one of metaphysical explanation (in either direction), then
it seems hard to resist the apparent insinuation of the linguistic
data that the relation is one of identity.
It is for this reason, incidentally, that identity theorists
normally insist that their position should not be defined in terms of
an identity between truth-bearer and truth-maker. That way of
expressing the theory is too much in thrall to correspondence
theorists’ talk (cf. Candlish 1999b: 200–1, 213). For the
identity theorist, to speak of both truth-makers and truth-bearers
would imply that the things allegedly doing the truth-making were
distinct from the things that were made true. But, since in the
identity theorist’s view there are no truth-makers distinct from
truth-bearers, and since nothing can make itself true, it follows that
there are no truth-makers simpliciter, only truth-bearers.
That is: if there were truth-makers, they would have to
be identical with truth-bearers; but they could not be
so identical; so there are no truth-makers. On this approach
correspondence appears to give way to identity as the relation which
must obtain between a proposition and a fact if the proposition is to
be true. And explanatory pretensions will have to be abandoned, or at
least severely curtailed: for while it is, according to the identity
theorist, correct to say that a proposition is true just if it is
identical with a fact, false otherwise, it is perhaps hard to maintain
that anything very illuminating has been said about truth (cf. Hornsby
1997, 2). What the identity theorist has attempted to do is spell out
some conceptual connections that we habitually draw between the
notions of proposition, truth, and fact; and some may feel that this
does not take us very far. (Of course, an identity theorist will
counter that to go further would be to fall into error.) That is why
McDowell, for one, prefers to talk of an identity conception
of truth (2005: 83), rather than an identity theory, which he
regards as too grand a term for the view in
 question.[11]
 So much for the
thesis that facts are truth-makers and propositions
truth-bearers; an exactly parallel argument applies to the version of
the correspondence theory that treats facts as truth-makers and
Thoughts as truth-bearers.
Although it is not strictly relevant to the motivation of the
identity theory, we might look briefly, for the sake of completeness,
at the suggestion that facts make declarative
sentences true. So far, this seems to be a thesis that the
identity theorist can accept: there is no threat of triviality, or of
a collapse to an identity relation, because worldly facts such as
that Socrates is wise are genuinely distinct from linguistic
items such as the sentence “Socrates is wise”. So the
identity theorist need not jib at the suggestion that such sentences
have worldly truth-makers, if that is how the relation of
correspondence is being glossed. But one might question the
appropriateness of the gloss: for it does not seem possible, without
falsification, to draw detailed links between sentences and bits of
the world. After all, different sentences in the same or different
languages can surely “correspond” to the same bit of the
world, and these different sentences might have very different
(numbers of) components. The English sentence “There are
cows” contains three words: are there then three bits in the
world corresponding to this sentence, and jointly making it true? What
about the fact that an equivalent sentence in another language might
contain a different number of words? It is natural to think that, if
the correspondence idea is to be doing serious work in the assertion
that a true declarative sentence corresponds to something in
the world, there must be a reasonably robust structural isomorphism
between sentence and world; but then the fact that quite differently
structured and constituted sentences—“There are
cows”, as it might be, and its translations into other
languages—ought to correspond to the same piece of reality will
raise a severe difficulty.  How can a three-word sentence and a
ten-word sentence both “correspond” in any interesting
sense to reality? Both sentences can be true, of course, and we often
use the phrase “corresponds to the facts” as a variant
locution for “is true”; but the correspondence theorist is
after more than merely a fancy way of talking. So it could well be
objected that we are going down a blind alley here. The relation of
“correspondence” between world and sentence seems not to
be doing real work in establishing the truth-value of a sentence;
rather, the point will surely be that a sentence is true just if it
expresses a true Thought or a true proposition (or both), and here the
identity theorist will insist, as we have seen, that the relation of a
true Thought or proposition to a fact is one of identity, not
correspondence. But, whether or not it is attractive, it would at
least be theoretically possible to combine an identity theory of truth
at the level of Thought or proposition (or both) with a correspondence
theory at the level of
 language.[12]
4. Identity, sense, and reference
Identity theorists are agreed that, in the case of any particular
relevant identity, a fact will constitute the worldly relatum
of the relation, but there is significant disagreement among them on
the question what the item on the other end of the relation
is—whether a Thought or a proposition (or both). As we have
seen, there are three possible positions here: (i) one which places
the identity relation exclusively between true Thoughts and facts,
(ii) one which places it exclusively between true propositions and
facts, and (iii) a hybrid position which allows identities of both
sorts (identities obtaining at the level of sense will of course be
quite distinct from identities obtaining at the level of
reference). Which of these positions an identity theorist adopts will
depend on wider metaphysical and linguistic considerations that are
strictly extraneous to the identity theory as such.
Identity theorists who favor (i) generally do so because they want
to have nothing to do with propositions as such. That is to
say, such theorists eschew propositions as reference-level
entities: of course the word “proposition”
may be, and sometimes is, applied to Fregean Thoughts at the level of
sense, rather than Russellian propositions at the level of reference.
For example, Hornsby (1997: 2–3) uses “proposition”
and “thinkable” interchangeably. So far, this
terminological policy might be considered neutral with respect to the
location of propositions and thinkables in the Fregean semantic
hierarchy: that is to say, if one encounters a writer who talks about
“thinkables” and “propositions”, perhaps
identifying them, one does not yet know where in the semantic
hierarchy this writer thinks they belong. We cannot assume, unless we
are specifically told so, that they are necessarily meant to belong to
the level of sense. After all, someone who houses propositions at the
level of reference holds that these reference-level entities are
thinkable, in the sense that they are graspable in
thought (perhaps via Thoughts at the level of sense). But they
are not thinkables if this latter word is taken to be a
technical term referring to entities at the level of sense, as it is
taken by McDowell and Hornsby, who both identify their thinkables with
Fregean Thoughts, which are clearly sense-level entities. For clarity
the policy here will be to continue to apply the word
“proposition” exclusively to Russellian propositions at
the level of reference.
Note that the above point shows that the McDowell/Hornsby way with
the word “thinkable” is unhappy: for someone who (say)
locates propositions at the level of reference, and also locates
Fregean Thoughts at the level of sense to present these propositions,
holds such reference-level propositions to be, in a relatively
non-technical sense, thinkable—that is, graspable in
thought via Fregean senses. To that extent Frege’s own word
“Thought” (capitalized) seems to be a better fit for the
relevant sense-level propositionally structured entities than the
neologism “thinkable”, which turns out to be too
imprecise, and my policy here will be to use “Thought” in
the relevant sense, namely to mean propositionally structured
sense-level entities that are presented by declarative sentences and
are capable of being taken up into thought. McDowell was moved to
change the terminology from “Thought” to
“thinkable” by the reflection that such things are not
private entities, or available to particular individuals only, or
episodes that are occurrent only at particular times and places, but
are objective, publicly available contents able to be entertained by
different thinkers at different times and places.  So long as we
continue to bear this important point in mind, there would seem to be
no difficulty, and some advantage, in continuing to use the
Frege’s own terminology.
Usually, as we have said, identity theorists who favor (i) above
have this preference because they repudiate propositions as
reference-level entities. There are several reasons why such identity
theorists feel uncomfortable with propositions, construed as entities
at the level of reference. There is a fear that these entities, if
they existed, would have to be construed as truth-makers; and identity
theorists, as we have seen, want to have nothing to do with
truth-makers (Dodd 2008a: 112). That fear could be defused if facts
were also located at the level of reference for true propositions to
be identical with. This move would take us to an identity theory in
the style of (ii) or (iii) above. Another reason for suspicion of
reference-level propositions is that commentators often follow Russell
in his post-1904 aversion specifically to false objectives,
that is, to false propositions in re (Russell 1966: 152;
Cartwright 1987: 79–84). Such entities are often regarded as too
absurd to take seriously as components of reality. (So Baldwin 1991:
46; Dodd 1995: 163; 1996; 2008a: 66–70, 113–14,
162–6.) More especially, it has been argued that false
propositions in re could not be unities: that the price of
unifying a proposition at the level of reference would be to make it
true (Dodd 2008a: 165). That, if right, would surely constitute a
reductio ad absurdum of the whole idea of reference-level
propositions. For if there cannot be false reference-level
propositions, it seems that there cannot be true ones either. If, on
the other hand, one is happy with the existence of propositions in
re or reference-level propositions, both true and
 false,[13]
 one is likely to
favor an identity theory in the style of (ii) or (iii). And, once one
has got as far as jettisoning (i) and deciding between (ii) and (iii),
there must surely be a good case for adopting (iii): for if one has
admitted propositionally structured entities both at the level of
sense (Thoughts) and at the level of reference (propositions), there
seems no good reason not to be maximally liberal in allowing
identities between entities of these two types and, respectively,
sense- and reference-level kinds of fact (or fact-like entities).
Against what was suggested above about Frege
 (§2), it has been objected that Frege could not
have held an identity theory of truth (Baldwin 1991: 43); the idea
here is that, even if he had acknowledged states of affairs as
bona fide elements of reality, Frege could not have
identified true Thoughts with them on pain of confusing the levels of
sense and reference. As far as the exegetical issue is concerned, the
objection overlooks the possibility that Frege might have identified
true Thoughts with facts construed as sense-level entities,
rather than with states of affairs taken as reference-level
entities; and, as we have noted, Frege does indeed appear to have made
the former identification (Dodd and Hornsby 1992). Still, the
objection raises an important theoretical issue. It would surely be a
serious confusion to try to construct an identity across the
categorial division separating sense and reference, in particular to
attempt to identify true Fregean Thoughts with reference-level facts
or states of
 affairs.[14]
 It has been suggested that McDowell and
Hornsby are guilty of this 
confusion;[15]
 they have each rejected the
charge,[16]
insisting that, for them, facts are not reference-level entities, but
are, like Fregean Thoughts, sense-level
 entities.[17]
But, if one adheres to the Fregean version of the identity theory
((i) above), which identifies true Thoughts with facts located at the
level of sense, and admits no correlative identity, in addition,
connecting true propositions located at the level of reference with
facts or fact-life entities also located at that level, it looks as
though one faces a difficult dilemma. At what level is the world to be
placed? Suppose first one puts it at the level of reference (this
appears to be Dodd’s favored view: see 2008a: 180–1, and
passim). In that case the world will contain no facts or
propositions, but just objects and properties hanging loose in
splendid isolation from one another, a dispensation which looks
suspiciously like an unacceptable Kantian transcendental
idealism. (Simply insisting that the properties include not merely
monadic but also polyadic ones, such as the relation of instantiation,
will not in itself solve the problem: we will still just have a bunch
of separate objects, properties, and relations.) If there are no true
propositions—no facts—or even false propositions to be
found at the level of reference, but if also, notwithstanding that
lack, the world is located there, the objects it contains will be bare
objects, not things of certain sorts. Some philosophers of a
nominalistic bias might be happy with this upshot; but the problem is
how to make sense of the idea of a bare object—that is, an
object not characterized by any properties. (Properties not
instantiated by any objects, by contrast, will not be problematic, at
least not for a realist.)
So suppose, on the other hand, that one places the world at the
level of sense, on the grounds that the world is composed of facts,
and that that is where facts are located. This ontological
dispensation is explicitly embraced by McDowell (1996: 179). The
problem with this way out of the dilemma would seem to be that Fregean
sense is constitutively mode of presentation of reference, so that on
this approach the world would be made up of modes of
presentation—of what? Of objects and properties? These are
certainly reference-level entities, but if they are presented by items
in the realm of sense, which is being identified on this approach with
the world, then again, as on the first horn of the dilemma, they would
appear to be condemned to an existence at the level of reference in
splendid isolation from one another, rather than in propositionally
structured combinations, so that once more we would seem to be
committed to a form of Kantian transcendental idealism (Suhm,
Wagemann, Wessels 2000: 32; Sullivan 2005: 59–61; Gaskin
2006:199–203). Both ways out of the dilemma appear to have this
unacceptable consequence. The only difference between those ways
concerns where exactly in the semantic hierarchy we locate the world;
but that in itself is, arguably, of relatively less concern to
metaphysicians than the requirement to avoid divorcing objects from
the properties that make them things of certain sorts, and both ways
out of the dilemma flout this requirement.
To respect the requirement, we need to nest reference-level objects
and properties in propositions, or proposition-like structures, also
located at the level of reference. And then some of these structured
reference-level entities—the true or obtaining ones—will,
it seems, be facts, or at least fact-like. Furthermore, once one
acknowledges the existence of facts, or fact-like entities, existing
at the level of sense, it seems in any case impossible to
prevent the automatic generation of facts, or fact-like entities,
residing at the level of reference. The generation occurs by
a simple process of abstraction, such reference-level facts or
fact-like entities being merely equivalence classes of suitable
Thoughts (that is, Thoughts expressed by synonymous sentences
according to some appropriate standard of synonymy). One has to decide
how to treat these abstracted entities theoretically. If one were to
insist that the sense-level entities were the genuine and only facts,
the corresponding reference-level entities would be merely fact-like,
and contrariwise.  But, regardless whether the propositionally
structured entities automatically generated in this way by sense-level
propositionally structured entities are to be thought of as facts or
merely fact-like, it would seem perverse not to identify the world
with these abstracted
 entities.[18]
 To insist on continuing to identify the
world with sense-level rather than reference-level propositionally
structured entities would seem to fly in the face of a requirement to
regard the world as maximally objective and maximally
non-perspectival. McDowell himself hopes to avert any charge of
embracing an unacceptable idealism consequent on his location of the
world at the level of sense by reminding us that senses present their
references directly, not descriptively, so that reference is, as it
were, contained in sense (1996: 179–80). But an opponent might
reply that the requirement of maximal objectivity forces an
identification of the world with the contained, not the containing,
entities in this scenario, which in turn forces—if the threat of
Kantian transcendental idealism is to be obviated—the upshot
that the contained entities be propositionally structured as such,
that is, as contained entities, and not simply in virtue of
being contained in propositionally structured containing
entities.[19]
5. Difficulties with the theory and possible solutions
5.1 The modal problem
G.E. Moore raised a difficulty for the identity theory (1953: 308)
which has been repeated since (see, e.g., Fine 1982: 46–7;
Künne 2003: 9–10). The proposition that Socrates is
wise exists in all possible worlds where Socrates and the
property of wisdom exist, but in some of those worlds this proposition
is true and in others it is false. The fact that Socrates is
wise, by contrast, only exists in those worlds where the
proposition both exists and is true. So it would seem that the
proposition that Socrates is wise cannot be identical with
the fact that Socrates is wise. They have different modal
properties, and so by the principle of the indiscernibility of
identicals they cannot be identical.
Note, first, that this problem, if it is a problem, has nothing
especially to do with the identity theory of truth or with facts. It
arises already for true propositions and propositions taken
simpliciter before ever we get to the topic of facts. That
is, one might think that the proposition that Socrates is
wise is identical with the true proposition that Socrates is
wise (assuming, as we are doing, that this proposition
is true), and yet the proposition taken simpliciter
and the true proposition appear to have different modal properties:
the true proposition that Socrates is wise does not exist at
worlds where the proposition that Socrates is wise is false,
but the proposition taken simpliciter obviously does. And
indeed the problem, if it is a problem, is still more general, and
purported solutions to it go back at least to the Middle Ages (when it
was discussed in connection with Duns Scotus’ formal
distinction).[20]
 Suppose that Socrates is a cantankerous
old curmudgeon. Now grumpy Socrates, one would think, is identical
with Socrates. But in some other possible worlds Socrates is of a
sunny and genial disposition. So it would seem that Socrates cannot be
identical with grumpy Socrates after all, because in these other
possible worlds, while Socrates goes on existing, grumpy Socrates does
not exist—or so one might think.
Can the identity theorist deal with this problem, and if so how?
Here is one suggestion. Suppose we hold, staying with grumpy Socrates
for a moment, that, against the assumption made right at the end of
the last paragraph, grumpy Socrates does in fact exist in the
worlds where Socrates has a sunny disposition. The basis for this move
would be the thought that, after all, grumpy Socrates is identical
with Socrates, and Socrates exists in these other worlds. So
grumpy Socrates exists in those worlds too; it is just that he is not
grumpy in those worlds. (Suppose Socrates is very grumpy;
suppose in fact that grumpiness is so deeply ingrained in his
character that worlds in which he is genial are quite far away and
rather few in number. Someone surveying the array of possible worlds,
starting from the actual world and moving out in circles, and
stumbling at long last upon a world with a pleasant Socrates in it,
might register the discovery by exclaiming, with relief, “Oh
look! Grumpy Socrates is not grumpy over here!”.) Similarly, one
might contend, the true proposition, and fact, that Socrates is
wise goes on existing in the worlds where Socrates is not wise,
because the true proposition, and fact, that Socrates is wise
just is the proposition that Socrates is wise, and
that proposition goes on existing in these other worlds, but in those
worlds that true proposition, and fact, is not a true proposition, or
a fact. (In Scotist terms one might say that the proposition that
Socrates is wise and the fact that Socrates is wise are
really identical but formally distinct.) Note that this does not
involve the Wittgensteinian non-factive conception of facts: for there
is nothing according to this picture which is a fact but does not
obtain when these properties are indexed to the same parameters (in
particular: are taken to hold of the same possible world).
This solution was, in outline, proposed by Richard Cartwright in
his 1987 discussion of the identity theory (1987: 76–8;
cf. David 2002: 128–9; Dodd 2008a: 86–8). According to
Cartwright, the true proposition, and fact, that there are subways
in Boston exists in other possible worlds where Boston does not
have subways, even though in those worlds that fact would be not be a
fact.  (Compare: grumpy Socrates exists in worlds where Socrates is
genial and sunny, but he is not grumpy there.) So even in worlds where
it is not a fact that Boston has subways,
that fact, namely the fact that Boston has subways,
continues to exist.  So far so good, but Cartwright arguably makes two
mistakes in describing this solution. First, he draws on
Kripke’s distinction between rigid and non-rigid designation,
suggesting that his solution can be described by saying that the
expression “The fact that Boston has subways” is
a non-rigid designator. But that is surely mistaken: that expression
goes on referring to, or being satisfied by (depending on how exactly
one wants to set up the semantics of definite descriptions: see Gaskin
2008: 56–81), the fact that Boston has subways in
possible worlds where Boston does not have subways; it is just that,
though that fact exists in those worlds, it is not a fact there. But
the expression in question is perfectly rigid. The second slip-up that
it seems to be possible to detect in Cartwright’s presentation
is that he allows for a true reading of

The fact that there are subways in Boston might not have
been the fact that there are subways in Boston.

But Cartwright should surely say that this sentence is just false,
period (David 2002: 129). The fact that there are subways in
Boston would still have gone on being the same
fact in worlds where Boston has no subways, namely the fact
that there are subways in Boston; it is just that in those
worlds this fact would not have been a fact. You
might say, in that world the fact that there are subways
in Boston would not be correctly described as a fact, but in
talking about that world we are talking about it from the point of
view of our world, and in our world it is a fact. (Similarly with
grumpy Socrates.)
Now, an objector will no doubt want to press the following point
against the above argument on behalf of the identity
theorist. Consider again the fact that Socrates is
wise. Surely, the objector will say, it is more natural to
maintain that that fact does not exist in a possible world
where Socrates is not wise, rather than that it exists there all
right, but is not a fact. After all, imagine a conversation about a
world in which Socrates is not wise and suppose that Speaker
A claims that Socrates is indeed wise in that world. Speaker
B might counter with: 
 No, sorry, you're
wrong. There is no such fact in that world; the purported fact
that Socrates is wise simply does not exist in that world.

It might seem odd to insist that B is
not allowed to say this and must say instead,  Yes,
you’re right that there is such a fact in that world, namely the
fact that Socrates is wise, but in that world that
fact is not a fact.  
How might the
identity theorist respond to this objection? One possible strategy
would be to make a distinction between fact and
factuality, as follows. Factuality, one might say,
is a reification of facts. Once you have a fact, you also get, as an
ontological spin-off, the factuality of that fact. The fact,
being a proposition, exists at all possible worlds where the
proposition exists, though in some of these worlds it is not a fact,
since the proposition is false in those worlds. The factuality of that
fact, by contrast, only exists at those worlds where the fact
is a fact—where the proposition is true. So factuality
is a bit like a trope. Compare grumpy Socrates again. Grumpy Socrates,
the identity theorist might contend, exists at all worlds where
Socrates exists, though at some of those worlds he is not grumpy. But
Socrates’ grumpiness—that particular
trope—exists only at worlds where Socrates is grumpy. That seems
to obviate the problem, because the suggestion being canvassed here is
not that grumpy Socrates is identical with Socrates’
grumpiness—so that the fact that these two entities have
different modal properties need embarrasses no one—but rather
that grumpy Socrates is identical with Socrates. Similarly,
the suggestion is not that the proposition that Socrates is
wise is identical with the factuality of the fact
that Socrates is wise, but that it is identical with that
fact. So the identity theorist would accommodate the
objector’s point by insisting that facts exist in all
sorts of possible worlds where their factualities do not
exist.
Finally, the reader may be wondering why this problem was ever
raised against the identity theory of truth in the first place. After
all, one might think, the identity theorist does not say that
propositions simpliciter are identical with facts, but that
true propositions are identical with facts, and now true
propositions and facts surely have exactly the same modal
properties: for regardless how things are with the sheer proposition
that Socrates is wise, at any rate the true
proposition that Socrates is wise must be thought to exist at
the same worlds as the fact that Socrates is wise, whatever
those worlds are. However, as against this quick way with the
purported problem, there stands the intuition, mentioned and exploited
above, that the true proposition that Socrates is wise is
identical with the proposition that Socrates is wise. So long
as that intuition is in play, the problem indeed arises—for true
propositions, in the first instance, and then for facts by
transitivity of identity. But the identity theorist will maintain
that, as explained, the problem has a satisfactory solution.
5.2 The “right fact” problem
Candlish (1999a: 238–9; 1999b: 202–4), following
Cartwright (1987: 74–5), has urged that the identity theory of
truth is faced with the difficulty of getting hold of the “right
fact”. Consider a version of the identity theory that
states:

(11) The
proposition that p is true just if it is identical
with a
 fact.[21]

Candlish’s objection is now that (11)
does not specify which fact has to be
identical with the proposition for the proposition to be true. But
what the identity theory requires is not that a true proposition be
identical with some fact or other, it is that it be identical
with the right fact. (1999b: 203) 
In
another paper Candlish puts the matter like this: 
But after all, any proposition might be identical with some
fact or other (and there are reasons identified in the
Tractatus for supposing that all propositions are themselves
facts), and so all might be true. What the identity theory needs to
capture is the idea that it is by virtue of being identical
with the appropriate fact that a proposition is true. (1999a:
239) 
The reference to the Tractatus is
suggestive. Of course, we must beware of confusion at this point: the
Tractatus does not have propositions in the sense of that
word figuring here, that is, it does not recognize Russellian
propositions (propositions at the level of reference). Nor indeed does
it recognize Fregean Thoughts. In the Tractatus, as we have
noted (§2), declarative sentences
(Sätze) are facts (arrangements of names), and states of
affairs (Sachlagen, Sachverhalte,
Tatsachen) are also facts (arrangements of objects). And it
is usually held, as we have said, that Wittgenstein propounds a
correspondence theory of truth connecting the two, so that (assuming
that that orthodoxy is correct) the Tractatus is not
immediately relevant to a context in which the identity theory of
truth is in question. But what is interesting in Candlish’s
allusion to the Tractatus is the reminder that propositions
(in our sense) are Tractarian in the sense that they are
structured arrangements of entities, namely objects and
properties.  (Correlatively, Fregean Thoughts are structured
arrangements of senses.) False propositions (and false Fregean
Thoughts) will equally be arrangements of objects and properties
(respectively, senses). So the difficulty that Cartwright and Candlish
have identified can be put like this. Surely any proposition,
whether or not it is true, is identical with some fact or
other given that a proposition is an arrangement of entities of
the appropriate sort. If propositions just are facts, then
every proposition is identical with some
fact—at the very least, with itself—whether it is true or
false. So surely the right-to-left direction of (11)
is incorrect.
J.C. Beall (2000) has attempted to dissolve this problem on the
identity theorist’s behalf by invoking the principle of the
indiscernibility of identicals. If we ask, in respect of
 (11), what the “right” fact is, it seems
that we can answer that the “right” fact must at least
have the property of being identical with the proposition that
p,[22] and
the indiscernibility principle then guarantees that there is only one
such fact. However, this proposal does not deal with the difficulty
that we have just identified. For suppose that the proposition
that p is false. That proposition will still be identical
with itself, of course, and if we are saying (in Wittgensteinian
spirit) that propositions are facts, then that proposition will be
identical with at least one fact, namely itself. So it will satisfy
the right-hand side of (11), its falsity
notwithstanding. But now, having said that, an obvious patch-up
suggests itself: the right fact is surely the fact that
p. Gloss (11) with

(12) The
proposition that p is true just if (a) it is a fact
that p, and (b) the proposition that
p is identical with that fact.

Falsity now no longer presents a difficulty, because if it is false
that p then it is not a fact that p, so (a)
fails, and there is no appropriate candidate for the proposition
that p to be identical 
with.[23]
 Notice that, in view
of the considerations already aired in connection with the modal
problem ((i) of this section), we have to be careful here. Suppose
that it is true that p in the actual world, but false at some
other possible world. It would be wrong to say, given the line taken
above, that, in the possible world where it is false that p,
there is no such fact as the fact that p. There is indeed
such a fact, because it is (in the actual world) a fact that
p, and that fact, and the true proposition, that p, go
on existing in the possible world where it is false that p;
it is just that that fact is not a fact in that
possible world. But (12) deals with this
subtlety. In the possible world we are considering, where it is false
that p, though the fact that p exists, it is not a
fact that p, so (a) fails, and there is accordingly no risk
of our getting hold of the “wrong” fact. Note also that if
we follow a Wittgensteinian line, we will indeed allow the (false)
proposition that p to be identical with a
fact—at the very least with itself—but we can now, given
the failure of (a), say with a clear conscience that that fact is the
wrong fact, which does not suffice to render the proposition
true.
5.3 The “slingshot” problem
If the notorious “slingshot” argument worked, it would
pose a problem for the identity theory of truth. The argument exists
in a number of different, though related, forms, and this is not the
place to explore all of these in 
details.[24]
 Here we shall look briefly at what is one
of the simplest and most familiar versions of the argument, namely
Davidson’s. This version of the argument aims to show that if
true declarative sentences refer to anything (for example to
propositions or facts), then they all refer to the same thing (to the
“Great Proposition”, or to the “Great Fact”).
This upshot would be quite unacceptable to an identity theorist of a
Russellian cast, who thinks that declarative sentences refer to
propositions, and that true such propositions are identical with
facts: any such theorist is naturally going to want to insist that the
propositions referred to by different declarative sentences are, at
least in general, distinct, and likewise that the facts with which
distinct true propositions are identical are also distinct. Davidson
expresses the problem that the slingshot argument purportedly throws
up as follows:    The difficulty follows upon
making two reasonable assumptions: that logically equivalent singular
terms have the same reference; and that a singular term does not
change its reference if a contained singular term is replaced by
another with the same reference. But now suppose that
“R” and “S” abbreviate any
two sentences alike in truth value. (1984: 19)
He then argues that the following four sentences have the same
reference:

(13)
RRR
(14)
z^(z=z&R)=z^(z=z)z^(z=z&R)=z^(z=z)\hat{z} (z = z \mathbin\&amp; R) = \hat{z} (z = z)
(15)
z^(z=z&S)=z^(z=z)z^(z=z&S)=z^(z=z)\hat{z} (z = z \mathbin\&amp; S) = \hat{z} (z = z)
(16) SSS

(The hat over a variable symbolizes the description operator: so
“z^z^\hat{z}” means the zzz such that
…) This is because (13) and
 (14) are logically equivalent, as are
 (15) and (16), while the only
difference between (14) and 
(15) is that (14) contains the
expression (Davidson calls it a “singular term”)
“z^(z=z&R)z^(z=z&R)\hat{z} (z = z \mathbin\&amp; R)” whereas 
(15) contains “z^(z=z&S)z^(z=z&S)\hat{z} (z = z \mathbin\&amp;
S)”,  and these refer to the same thing if
S and R are alike in truth value. Hence any two
sentences have the same reference if they have the same truth
value. (1984: 19)
The difficulty with this argument, as a number of writers have
pointed out (see, e.g., Yourgrau 1987; Gaskin 1997: 153 n. 17;
Künne 2003: 133–41), and the place where the identity
theorist is likely to raise a cavil, lies in the two assumptions on
which it depends. Davidson calls these assumptions
“reasonable”, but they have both been widely questioned.
The first assumption is “that logically equivalent singular
terms have the same reference”. Why should one accept this
assumption?  Intuitively, the ideas of logical equivalence and
reference seem to be quite distinct, indeed to have, as such, little
to do with one another, so that it would be odd if there were some
a priori reason why the assumption had to hold. And it is not
difficult to think of apparent counterexamples: the sentence “It
is raining” is logically equivalent to the sentence “It is
raining and (either David Cameron is Prime Minister or it is not the
case that David Cameron is Prime Minister)”, but the latter
sentence seems to carry a referential payload that the former does
not. Of course, if declarative sentences refer to truth-values, as
Frege thought, then the two sentences will indeed be co-referential,
but to assume that sentences refer to truth-values would be
question-begging in the context of an argument designed to establish
that all true sentences refer to the same thing. The second assumption
is “that a singular term does not change its reference if a
contained singular term is replaced by another with the same
reference”; this assumption is also dubious, though to spell out
details would take us too far afield into the semantics of definite
descriptions.[25]
 At any rate, enough has been said to
indicate that the identity theorist does, plausibly, have a viable
response to the slingshot argument.
5.4 The congruence problem
Two further objections to the identity theory may be dealt with
more briefly. One objection, which goes back to an observation of
Strawson’s made in 1950 (1971: 196; cf. Künne 2003:
10–12), is based on the point that canonical names of
propositions and of facts are not straightforwardly congruent: they
are not intersubstitutable salva proprietate, vel sim.  For
example, we say that propositions are true, not that they obtain,
whereas we say that facts obtain, not that they are true. How serious
is this point? The objection in effect presupposes that for two
expressions to be co-referential, or satisfied by one and the same
thing, they must be syntactically and proprietorially congruent, i.e.,
that (a) they can fill the same slots in sentences, with the same
results in terms of well- or ill-formedness; and (b) predicates that
can properly and sensibly be attached to the one expression can
properly and sensibly be attached to the other. But this assumption is
(in both its parts) highly controversial, and it may be possible for
the identity theorist simply to deny it. (See Gaskin 2008:
106–10, for argument on the point, with references to further
literature; cf. Dodd 2008a:
 83–6.)[26]
5.5 The individuation problem
It might appear that we individuate propositions more finely than
facts: for example, one might argue that the fact that Hesperus is
bright is the same fact as the fact that Phosphorus is
bright, but that the propositions in question are different
(Künne 2003: 10–12). The identity theorist has a number of
strategies in response to this objection. One would be simply to deny
it, and maintain that facts are individuated as finely as
propositions: if one is a supporter of the Fregean version of the
identity theory, this is likely to be one’s response (see, e.g.,
Dodd 2008a: 90–3). Alternatively, one might respond by saying
that, if there is a good point hereabouts, at best it tells only
against the Fregean and Russellian versions of the identity theory,
not against the hybrid version. The idea here would be that—so
this identity theorist is ready to concede—we normally think of
facts as extensional, reference-level entities; and this theorist also
agrees that we also, at least sometimes, individuate propositions or
proposition-like entities intensionally. These twin points then do
indeed tell against either a strict Fregean or a strict Russellian
version of the identity theory: they tell against the strict Fregean
position because, as well as individuating facts intensionally, we
also, sometimes, individuate facts extensionally; and they tell
against the strict Russellian position because, as well as
individuating facts extensionally, we also, sometimes, individuate
facts intensionally. But the hybrid version of the identity theory is
not touched by the objection, because that theory accommodates factual
entities, of some sort, at both levels of sense and reference, but
different sorts at these different levels—either facts at the
level of sense and correlative fact-like entities at the level of
reference or vice versa. It will follow that Thoughts and
propositions are available, if true, to be identical with the factual
entities of the appropriate level (sense and reference, respectively),
and the individuation problem does not arise.  Propositions or
propositionally structured entities will be individuated just as
finely as we want them to be individuated, and at each level of
resolution there will be facts or fact-like entities, individuated to
the same resolution, for them to be identical with, if true.
5.6 Truth and Intrinsicism
The solutions to these problems, if judged satisfactory, perhaps
point us in the direction of a conception of truth that has been
called “intrinsicist” (Wright 1999: 207–9), or
“primitivist” (Candlish 1999b: 207). This was a conception
recognized by Moore and Russell who, in the period when they were
sympathetic to the identity theory, spoke of truth as a simple and
unanalysable property (Moore 1953: 261; 1993: 20–1; Russell
1973: 75; Cartwright 1987: 72–5; Johnston 2013: 384). The point
here is as follows. There are of course particular, individual
explanations of the truth of many propositions. For example, the true
proposition that there was a fire in the building will be explained by
alluding to the presence of combustible material, enough oxygen, a
spark caused by a short-circuit, etc. So, case by case, we will (at
least often) be able to provide explanations why given propositions
are true, and science is expanding the field of such explanations all
the time. But according to the intrinsicist, there is no prospect of
providing a general explanation of truth, in the sense of an
account that would explain, in utterly general terms, why any
true proposition was true. At that general level there is nothing
interesting to be said about what makes true propositions true: there
are only the detailed case-histories. The intrinsicist is quite happy
to embrace one or another version of the identity theory of
truth. What is abjured is the idea that the truth of a true
proposition might consist in a relation to a distinct
fact—that the truth of the true proposition that Socrates is
wise, for example, might consist in anything other than
identity with the fact that Socrates is wise. There seems
point in holding that, on this approach, truth is held to be both
intrinsic to propositions, and
 primitive.[27]
 Intrinsicism is not a popular position
these days: Candlish describes it as “so implausible that almost
no one else [apart from Russell, in 1903–4] has been able to
take it seriously” (1999b: 208); but it may be an idea whose
time has come.
Candlish (ibid.) thinks that intrinsicism and the identity theory
are competitors, but that view is not mandatory. Intrinsicism says
that truth is a simple and unanalysable property of propositions; the
identity theory says that a true proposition is identical with a fact
(and with the right fact). These statements will seem to clash only if
the identity theory is taken to propound a heavy-duty analysis of
truth. But if, following recent exponents of the theory, we take it
rather to be merely spelling out a connection between two entities
that we have in our ontology anyway, namely true propositions and
facts, and which turn out (like Hesperus and Phosphorus) to be
identical, on the basis of a realization that an entity like that
Socrates is wise is both a true proposition and a fact, then
there will seem to be no clash between intrinsicism and the identity
theory. The identity theory, one might say, analyses the way in
which truth is a simple and unanalysable property.