Contract is a branch of private law. It thus concerns private
obligations that arise in respect of symmetrical relations among
natural and artificial persons rather than public obligations that
arise in respect of hierarchical relations between persons and the
state. Contract, at least in its orthodox expression, is distinctive
for concerning chosen, or voluntary, obligations—that is,
obligations constituted by the intentions of the contracting
parties. This entry describes doctrinal and theoretical accounts of
contract law with a special emphasis on the relationship between
contract law and two near-neighbors—tort law and fiduciary
law.
Section 1 briefly outlines the doctrinal structure of orthodox
contract law, with an emphasis on contract’s character as chosen
obligation. At the same time, contract law concerns obligations that
might also be associated with adjacent bodies of doctrine that
elaborate un-chosen obligations—in particular tort law and
fiduciary law—and the norms—concerning due care and
loyalty—that underlie these involuntary obligations.  Section 2
describes encroachments by these bodies of law into contract and the
doctrinal, economic, and moral ideas that each employs.  Section 3
asks whether contract might remain doctrinally and theoretically
separate from tort and fiduciary law and retain its distinctive
character as chosen, private obligation.
 
1. Contract’s Doctrinal Distinctiveness
The idea that contract establishes chosen obligation highlights the
affinity between contract obligation in law and promissory obligation
in morals. And contracts indeed do characteristically arise through an
exchange of promises. This is inscribed in legal doctrine, in the
principles that contracts are created through offer, acceptance, and
consideration. An offer, according to the U.S. second
Restatement on Contracts,
is the manifestation of willingness to enter into
a bargain, so made as to justify another person in understanding that
his assent to that bargain is invited and will conclude it. (R2
Contracts: 
 §24)[1]
To establish a contract,
an offer must be met with an appropriate acceptance,
characteristically
a manifestation of assent to
the terms [of the offer] made by the offeree in a manner invited or
required by the offer. (§50)
These
requirements entail that all orthodox contracts contain promises.  But
not all promises establish contracts, among other reasons because the
law further requires that contracts be supported by good
consideration. The consideration doctrine, in its modern
form, adds a bargain requirement to contract formation. The
Restatement says that
[t]o constitute
consideration, a performance or a return promise must be bargained for
 and adds that
[a] performance
or return promise is bargained for if it is sought by the promisor in
exchange for his promise and is given by the promisee in exchange for
that promise. (R2 Contracts: §71)
Contracts,
that is, must arise not out of a simple, gratuitous promise, but
rather out of an exchange of promises, in which each promise
constitutes, in Oliver Wendell Holmes’s words, “reciprocal
conventional inducement” for the other (Holmes 1881:
293–94).
Contract obligation so constituted possesses several fundamental
features that distinguish it from adjacent forms of private obligation
recognized by law, including in particular tort obligation on the one
hand and fiduciary obligation on the other. Indeed, the formal
structure of contract may be understood by establishing contrasts
between contract obligation and these near-neighbors. Most
importantly, contract is distinct from both tort and fiduciary law in
that contract involves essentially chosen obligations. A
contractual obligation, that is, does not just come into being in
connection with a choice but is, rather, itself chosen—directly
intended into existence. The lawyer Samuel Williston—who wrote a
leading treatise and served as Reporter for the Restatement (First) of
Contracts—once observed that he “[didn’t] see why a
man should not be able to make himself liable if he wishes to do
so” (Handbook NCCUSL 1925: 194). And orthodox contract law
largely reflects this approach to contractual
obligation. Philosophers, moreover, have produced several elaborations
of the will theory of contracts that the orthodox approach
invites.[2]
Orthodox contract is, in this respect, distinct from tort: a tort
obligation might arise in connection with a choice—as
the obligation not to be drunk arises in connection with the choice to
operate a car; a contract obligation, by contrast, is itself
immediately chosen—at the core of every offer and every
acceptance lies, as the Restatement says, an intention to establish an
obligation by communicating this intention.
The distinction between contract and tort may be understood in
greater detail by reading it off the face of legal doctrine.
To begin with, in contradistinction to the classical obligations of
tort law—including both obligations concerning intentional torts
and negligence—contract obligation is not fault-based but rather
strict liability. A contractual promisor might take all reasonable
(that is, non-negligent or cost-justified in the sense associated with
tort law) care to avoid making contracts that she cannot keep and
might make every reasonable (cost-justified) effort to keep whatever
contracts she has made. Yet she remains liable to her promisee when
she makes and breaches a contract. 
Furthermore, and again in contradistinction to tort obligation,
contract obligation is forward-rather than backward-looking; contract
concerns realizing promised gains rather than restoring a status
quo ante disturbed by a wrong. A contractual promisor must not
just avoid harming her promisee on account of his reliance on the
promise, she must affirmatively vindicate her promisee’s
expectations of performance. Contract remedies further reflect the
forward-looking character of contract obligations. These remedies do
not just make promisees who have been disappointed by breach whole,
restoring them to the positions that they would have occupied had
contractual promises never been made. Rather, the law requires
promisors to put their promisees in positions as good as they would
have occupied had the promisors performed. Typically, contract law
achieves this end by awarding money damages that insure the
promisees’ valuations of performance (under what the law calls
the expectation remedy) (R2 Contracts: §344
cmt. a).[3]
Orthodox contract’s chosen character also distinguishes it
from fiduciary duties. Fiduciary obligations need not be
chosen—think of the duties that parents owe children or that a
court-appointed lawyer owes her client. And even where fiduciary
relations arise in connection with and perhaps through choices, the
obligations themselves do not arise at the pleasure of the choices of
the parties who owe them. The substantive duties that fiduciary
relations involve, that is, are not cabined by the original intentions
of the parties but instead reflect mandatory duties of fiduciary
loyalty. Fiduciary duties may thus grow and change organically, ex
post, with the relations themselves, as loyalty’s demands
adjust to a beneficiary’s new vulnerabilities. By contrast,
contract law limits contractual obligations according to the
parties’ ex ante intentions and never requires a party
to shoulder a new burden, not assumed up front, simply because
changing circumstances make this best overall. Even long-term,
relational contracts take their content from the parties’
(shifting and developing) intentions rather than from legally mandated
principles of fairness, loyalty, or other-regard.
This general distinction is once again inscribed in greater detail
in the doctrinal particulars of contract law.
Most notably, whereas the core fiduciary duty demands that
fiduciaries display loyalty in favor of their
 beneficiaries,[4]
 the core duty of
contract law requires only that promisors perform their contracts in
good faith (see, e.g., R2 Contracts: §205 cmt. a;
U.C.C. §1-304).  Fiduciary loyalty necessarily involves a measure
of affirmative, open-ended other regard.  Contractual good faith, by
contrast, expressly announces no substantive obligation additional to
the terms of a contractual promise but instead articulates respect for
the terms of this promise. In particular, good faith forbids the
exercise of discretion during performance designed to recapture a
benefit allocated to a counterparty at formation (Burton 1980:
373). Good faith thus does not so much introduce altruism into the
contract relation as preclude contract obligation itself from
exacerbating inequality in bargaining power, thus becoming a tool of
exploitative advantage-taking. Whereas a fiduciary who promises to
walk a mile with her beneficiary must, if new circumstances require,
walk with him twain, a contractual promisor must walk only the precise
mile, and along the precise path, that she promised. Apart from
recognizing the side-constraint of good faith, a contractual promisor
may remain as self-interested within her contract as she was without
it. 
This difference has practical consequences. A promisor who breaches
a contract (for example, a seller who delivers her goods not to her
initial buyer but to a third party who offers a higher price) may thus
retain the ex post gains from this so-called “efficient
breach”. This rule permits even an intentionally breaching
promisor to vindicate only her promisee’s value of performance
rather than, say, disgorging her own (greater) gains from breach. A
contractual promisor who contemplates breach may thus consult
exclusively her own self-interest in respect of the gains that breach
creates. She retains the right to manage the performance on her own
account, as it were, rather than as her promisee’s
trustee. Similarly, a promisee confronted with breach must take all
reasonable steps to protect her contractual expectations herself or
risk being denied her full expectation remedy, under the doctrine that
requires victims of breach to mitigate their damages. This doctrine
reflects the fact that contracting parties will include a duty of
reasonable mitigation in their agreements ex ante, in order
to maximize the expected contractual surplus available for them to
share. Contracts thus include implied agreements that promisors may
require their promisees to reduce the losses associated with even
self-interested breaches. Fiduciary loyalty would forbid this.
Contract thus falls in between tort and fiduciary obligation.
Contracts create a special relationship between the parties to them,
constituted by strict liability, forward-looking obligations that
reach beyond the tort obligations of reasonable care that persons owe
even to strangers. But at the same time, the special relationship that
contract establishes retains an extremely thin character. The parties
to contracts remain at arm’s length and assume no duties of
loyalty or open-ended other regard for one another. Instead,
contracting parties acquire only a duty of good faith respect for the
contractual settlements that their agreements elaborate. As Charles
Fried observed (in developing an account of contract law based on the
law’s promissory roots and thus on the idea that contract
obligation is “essentially self-imposed”) (1981: 2),
contractual trust does not establish intimacy but rather serves
“humdrum ends: We make appointments, buy and sell” (1981:
8).
2. Contract’s Vulnerability to Tort and Fiduciary Law
Even though contract asserts its distinctiveness from both tort and
fiduciary law, each adjacent body of obligation has, at some point in
the past half-century, emerged as a competitor to contract.  Contract,
that is, might be recast as a special case of tort or fiduciary
obligation. This should perhaps come as no surprise. A legal form that
establishes special obligations of a sort that do not arise among
strangers but equally rejects the affirmative and open-ended
obligations that arise among intimates deprives itself of the most
natural arguments in its favor. And this has rendered the grounds of
contract uncertain, and contract itself vulnerable to encroachments
from tort or fiduciary law. 
Suggestions that contract might be recast as tort or fiduciary law
invariably proceed along two often-parallel lines: one concerns legal
doctrine; and the other legal theory. Studying these suggestions
yields insight into the strengths and weaknesses of accounts that
understand contract, in the classical manner, as a free-standing form
of chosen obligation.
2.1 Contract as Tort
Ever since contract emerged from tort in the common law, both
doctrinal and theoretical forces have sought to restore contractual
obligation to its tort-based origins. In each case, tort’s
encroachment emphasizes the role that reliance plays in contractual
obligation.
A contractual promise typically engenders reliance by its
promisee. Indeed, the reliance is among the points behind the
promise. By relying on the performance even before it is provided, the
promisee increases its value to him: a buyer of cement, for example,
increases its value by investing in gravel to mix with the cement and
skilled workers to build with it. This increase in the
performance’s value, moreover, increases the amount that the
promisee will pay for the promise up front.  Reliance and investment
thus increase a contract’s value to both promisee and
promisor.
The prospect of reliance suggests re-constituting contract on the
model of tort. The explicit misrepresentation torts are narrowly
cabined, to be sure. Fraud, for example, requires scienter
(see R2 Torts: §526); and liability for merely negligent
misrepresentation does not generally arise in connection with
statements of 
intention.[5]
 But perhaps the body of doctrine nominally
called “contract” in fact expands liability for
misrepresentation from outside tort law’s official boundaries
but nevertheless by deploying tort’s basic structures and
principles. Perhaps “contract” is just the name that the
law gives to the sub-class of tort obligations arising in respect of
one person’s reliance on another’s representations
concerning her future conduct or current intentions in respect of this
conduct. Understanding contract doctrine in this way requires taking
some interpretive license, but perhaps not so much as to require
rejecting tort law’s basic colonizing claim.
To begin with, the distance between contractual strict liability
for promises on the one hand and, on the other, tort-like duties of
reasonable care in respect of representations concerning future
conduct should not be overstated. Modern contract law employs a
so-called “objective” standard to evaluate offer and
acceptance. (Recall that the Restatement’s definition of offer
refers not to the offeror’s actual state of mind but rather to
manifestations that “justify another person in
understanding” that assent is invited.) This standard plausibly
transforms contract from chosen obligation—which arises at the
pleasure of the promisor’s actual intentions—into
obligation that arises involuntarily based on the intentions others
reasonably believe the promisor to have. And even the requirement of
privity—that contractual obligation arises only directly among
the parties to a promise and not towards third parties who rely on
promises—has been relaxed. It would go too far to say that this
change makes a contractual promisor liable to all third parties whose
reliance on her promises she has reason to foresee, but the retreat
from privity opens up the possibility that such an approach no longer
qualitatively misunderstands the positive law.
Furthermore, not just contract formation but the content of
contractual obligation once established might also be recharacterized
along the lines of tort law’s harm-based
approach. Contract’s forward-looking obligations—to
vindicate contractual expectations rather than just rectify
reliance-based losses—are less distinctive than they might
appear. It has been familiar at least since Lon Fuller and William
Perdue pointed it out that where markets are thick, so that a
promisee’s reliance on her promisor includes forsaking an
effectively identically attractive offer from another promisor, then
the promisee’s reliance interest equals her valuation of
performance—her contractual expectation (Fuller & Perdue
1936).  In addition, any number of legal doctrines—imposing
requirements of foreseeability (see, e.g., Hadley v.
Baxendale 1854), for example, or respecting the proof of lost
expectations (see, e.g., R2 Contracts §351;
U.C.C. §2-723)—cabin the expectation interest and remedy
where markets are not thick. And there even exist cases in which
courts have refused to vindicate contractual expectations that could
not be recast as reliance losses in respect of forgone opportunities,
including by reading a reliance requirement into the conditions for
establishing certain contractual commitments (see, e.g.,
Overstreet v.  Norden Laboratories 1982).
Finally, contract law’s black letter has—at least since
the Restatement (First) of Contracts and more expansively still in the
Restatement (Second)—included the doctrine that
[a] promise which the promisor should reasonably
expect to induce action or forbearance on the part of the promisee or
a third person and which does induce such action or forbearance is
binding if injustice can be avoided only by enforcement of the
promise. (R2 Contracts: §90)
This
principle—called Promissory Estoppel—was
initially narrowly construed by courts, so that it effectively applied
only where all the essential elements of properly promissory (and
hence orthodox contract) obligation obtained, but a technical failure,
typically of consideration, nevertheless prevented a contract from
arising in the ordinary 
 fashion.[6]
 However, in the middle 1960s, some courts
began to expand reliance-based obligation for promissory estoppel to
arise in the absence of any completed promise, and based
instead on manipulative (but not fraudulent or otherwise
conventionally tortious) representations made during pre-contractual
negotiations (The leading case remains Hoffman v. Red Owl Stores,
Inc. 1965). This class of obligations—possessing a
contractual character but arising out of reliance on pre-promissory
representations and thus apart from any fully-formed
promise—imposed contracts entirely apart from consent. If
orthodox contract is distinctive on account of being voluntary or
chosen private obligation, then obligation arising under §90 so
interpreted displaces or colonizes contract, effectively in favor of
tort. Thoughts such as these led Grant Gilmore to call promissory
estoppel “anti-contract” (Gilmore 1974: 61) and worry that
it opened up a class of reliance-based, essentially tort-like
obligation that would one-day swallow contract whole.
These doctrinal developments were matched by several substantial
theoretical innovations that sought to recharacterize contract as
reliance-based and thus in effect a special case of tort.
Genealogical thinkers as different as Patrick Atiyah and Margaret
Jane Radin wondered why the law should be especially solicitous of
coordination through private exchange or of the promise-based
contractual obligation through which market economies manage such
exchange (see, e.g., Atiyah 1979 and Radin 1987).  Atiyah thus
proposed that the best reconstruction of contract law, in its full
historical development, de-emphasizes chosen obligation and the
promissory form in favor of the thought that contract law coordinates
conduct, and rationalizes socially productive reliance on promises,
based not on individual private wills but rather on shared public
norms—in Atiyah’s words, on “the social and legal
morality of a group of persons” (1981: 121).  As if on queue,
the rise of the unconscionability doctrine (U.C.C. §2-302)
generated an apprehension, including in Gilmore (1974) and Fried
(1981), that lawmakers were codifying the relevant public norms and
legal morality, at least for consumer contracts and possibly
beyond.
Economic approaches to contract law similarly de-emphasized
contract’s promissory roots and have had (at least in the United
States) a much greater impact on both law and legal theory. 
The economic analysis of contract law begins, in effect, from
Hume’s observation that
experience has
taught us, that human affairs wou’d be conducted much more for
mutual advantage, were there certain symbols or signs instituted, by
which we might give each other security of our conduct in any
particular incident.  (Hume 1739 [1978]: bk. 3, pt. II, sec. v [Of the
Obligation of Promises], p. 522; emphasis removed )
 Contract law, as one prominent economic theorist
put it, thus allows
individuals to bind themselves
to a future course of conduct, to make it easier for others to arrange
their lives in reliance on [a] promise.  (Craswell 1989: 496; see
generally Goetz & Scott 1980)
In this way,
law enables persons to coordinate their conduct to their mutual
benefit. Contract law, so understood, becomes a legal technology for
producing efficient coordination. And contracts should be enforced
just insofar as doing so (by increasing confidence in the promises
that they contain) establishes optimal incentives for reliance and
thus maximizes the joint surplus produced through contractual
coordination (see, e.g., Schwartz & Scott 2003: 541).
This approach entails that nothing in the intrinsic character of
contract law favors promise-based or chosen obligation; instead,
everything depends on contingent facts (contingent on the states of
legal, managerial, and economic technologies of production) about what
legal forms coordinate reliance in the most efficient way. Many lawyer
economists (just what share varies with the times) believe that
placing promise at the center of contract fits this bill. But others
argue that the law should be more solicitous of
reliance—especially reliance on pre-contractual
representations—than orthodox contract doctrine allows (see,
e.g., Bebchuk & Ben-Shahar 2001: 427; Ben-Schachar 2004; Craswell
1996; Johnston 1999; Katz 1996).  Some lawyer-economists have even
proposed rejecting outright orthodox contract law’s
intentionalist insistence on assent as a pre-requisite for obligation,
in favor of a regime in which bargaining gives rise to a converging
series of bilateral options, in which each bargaining party may be
held to its representations although no agreement has been reached
(Ben-Schachar 2004: 1830–35). In addition, and independently,
the economic focus on sustaining optimal reliance rejects orthodox
contract law’s categorical preference for remedies that, by
vindicating a promisee’s forward-looking promissory
expectations, possess a distinctively promissory form. It may be that
such remedies happen to support optimal reliance, although it may of
course not;[7]
but in either event, the agreement-based idea of securing the
promissee’s benefit of her bargain “will not have played
any role in the analysis leading up to [the] conclusion” what
remedy is optimal (Craswell 2000: 107). 
In all these ways, the economic approach to contract law rejects
the idea that contract and tort are categorically distinct. One
prominent paper expounding a general economic theory of contract makes
this plain in its title, proposing a general theory of contract law
based on the tort-like principle of mitigation, or loss-prevention
(Goetz & Scott 1983). This feature of economic approaches to
contract is natural. It reflects the economic analysis of law’s
more general disregard for doctrinal categories: law and economics,
one commentator has observed, simply “does not take the
doctrinal invocations and restatements as legal data to be
explained”, but instead focuses its attention on explaining case
outcomes (Kraus 2002: 692).
More explicitly philosophical accounts have also sought to
re-characterize contract law as a special case of the broader class of
harm-based obligations more familiarly associated with tort.
Broken agreements impose burdens on disappointed promisees: the
burdens take the form of costs (including opportunity costs) incurred
in reliance on a promised performance that never occurs and
disappointments associated with expectations raised by a promise but
never vindicated. If these costs might be classed as harms, then
[i]f there is a general principle that one ought
not cause harm to others, that might be enough to justify some sort of
rule against [agreement-breaking]. (Craswell 1989: 499)
 Thoughts much like this led Adam Smith to suggest
that contract is
founded on the reasonable
expectation produced by a promise … [which is] a declaration of
your desire that the person for whom you promise should depend on you
for the performance of it. (Smith c.1764 [1985]: 263)

U.S. American lawyers have been familiar with the thought that
contract might be best understood as a special case of tort at least
since Lon Fuller and William Perdue suggested that reliance-based
contractual obligations are easier to justify than expectation-based
obligations (Fuller & Perdue 1936: 53–57). The basic impulse
behind Fuller and Perdue’s view retains its attraction
today. The leading contemporary exponent of this harm-based and thus
tort-like theory of contractual obligation is T.M. Scanlon, who argues
first that promises should be understood in terms of the morality of
harm and second that contracts should be understood to import the
moral principles governing promising into law (Scanlon 1998:
295–327, 2001: 93–94).  Scanlon’s view grounds
promisees’ faith in promissory assurances in pre-promissory
moral principles that forbid certain forms of manipulating others and,
moreover, require that persons exercise due care in leading others to
form certain 
expectations.[8]
 Scanlon hopes, in this way, to explain the
wrongfulness of making lying or careless promises through these
pre-promissory values and then to defend a broader principle of
promissory
 fidelity[9]
 by reference to the fact that promisees may
reasonably trust promisors to avoid these narrower wrongs (Scanlon
1998: 308–09).
Scanlon recognizes that a harm-based theory of promise and contract
must account for the ways in which these norms depart from the
tort-like norms that generally govern the morality and law of
harm:[10]
including that promise and contract obligate promisors to perform
their promises—to satisfy their promisees’
expectations—rather than merely to compensate disappointed
promisees for lost reliance or merely to warn of non-performance in
order to minimize such reliance
 losses;[11]
 and, that contract
law enforces the promisor’s obligation to vindicate her
promisee’s expectation and not merely reimburse his lost
reliance.[12]
Scanlon defends each of these rules of agreement-keeping by comparing
the benefits that the rules confer to the burdens that they impose and
arguing that, given the balance between these, it would be
unreasonable for promisors who must bear the burdens to reject the
rules, and that promisees may justifiably claim the benefits of the
rules, as the formal structure of the harm theory 
 requires.[13]
 With respect to
the rule that promisors are obligated to satisfy promisees’
expectations and not merely warn them of non-performance or compensate
their lost reliance, Scanlon argues that the benefits to promisees of
protecting promissory expectations are
 substantial[14]
 and that, given
the conditions of mutual knowledge, etc., that are built into the
general account of promising, the burdens that this rule imposes on
promisors are
 slight.[15]
 Given this balance, Scanlon concludes,
promisees have reason to insist on having their expectations protected
and promisors cannot reasonably reject this rule of promise-keeping
(Scanlon 1998: 304–05).  And similarly, with respect to the
legal enforcement of promisees’ expectations, Scanlon argues
that the benefits of legal enforcement are
 substantial,[16]
 while the costs of
enforceability are much less 
 weighty.[17]
 Scanlon therefore
concludes, once again, that in light of this balance no person could
reasonably reject a legal regime that enforces contractual
expectations (Scanlon 2001).
Legal doctrine (both in its current state and through its
genealogical reconstruction), economic theory, and moral theory might
thus all be deployed against the view that contract represents a
distinctive legal form. These arguments all propose that rather than
constituting directly chosen obligation, contract merely reflects the
application of broader, involuntarily imposed duties not to harm to
the special case of harms imposed through representations of current
intentions or future conduct.
2.2 Contract as Fiduciary Obligation
Efforts to assimilate contract to fiduciary obligation have a more
recent vintage or at least vogue. Nevertheless, they have been
gathering steam.
Here also, the argument against contract’s distinctiveness
has a doctrinal component, with remedies playing an especially
prominent role in the recent legal developments. 
Recall that orthodox contract law’s preference for the
expectation remedy, and the associated practice of efficient breach,
permits a breaching promisor to retain for herself ex post
gains produced by her breach. The contractual duty of good faith in
performance requires the promisor to respect the contractual
settlement, but vindicating the promisee’s expectation interest
fully satisfies the required respect. Beyond this, the promisor may
remain as self-interested within the contract as she was without it:
once again, she may decide whether to perform or breach by consulting
only her own account. 
Courts and other legal actors have begun, especially in
jurisdictions in the Commonwealth tradition but also (although more
cautiously) in the United States, to require more of breaching
promisors. Courts in England and in Israel are becoming increasingly
sympathetic to “gain based damages” for breach of
contract, which give disappointed promisees not just their contractual
expectations but also, and additionally, a share of the ex
post gains promisors have acquired through breach (see generally
Adras Bldg. Material Ltd. v. Harlow & Jones, GmbH 1988;
Cunnington 2008). And some U.S. American courts have similarly begun,
at least where they perceive breaching promisors as grasping, not just
to vindicate promisees’ expectations but also to require
promisors to disgorge any gains that their refusals to perform
create.[18]
The Uniform Commercial Code has similarly liberalized the right to
specific performance (U.C.C. §2-716). And the recently adopted
Restatement of Restitution gives courts discretion to replace the
expectation remedy with disgorgement for breaches that are material,
deliberate, and profitable, on the generic ground that expectation
damages are “inadequate” (see R3 Restitution; see also
Kull 2001: 2023–24.).
The expectation remedy, by definition, provides the promisee with
the same value as performance would have done—no less, but also
no more. The supracompensatory remedies just described are therefore
justified only insofar as a promisor owes her promisee not just good
faith in respect of the contractual settlement, but also an obligation
to administer contractual performance in the interests of the
promisee, with respect to any further gains that become possible. This
obligation amounts to a requirement that promisors display greater
benevolence for their promisees in respect of unallocated gains within
the contract than they were required to display in negotiations
concerning these gains without the contract. The metes and bounds of
the required benevolence must, moreover, remain open-ended, because
the requirement is not limited to respecting the surplus allocation
fixed in the initial contract.  The move to gain-based damages thus
adopts a fiduciary logic: it recasts contract to abandon the
arm’s length perspective from which the contract was made in
favor of an open-ended obligation of loyalty in favor of the
promisee. It should therefore come as no surprise that cases imposing
supracompensatory remedies sometimes adopt the idea of a constructive
trust—in which the promisor is taken to administer the
contractual performance on her promisee’s behalf—to
explain their holdings (see, e.g., Gassner v.  Lockett
1958).
As occurred in connection with tort, so fiduciary law’s
encroachment on contract has attracted theoretical attention. The
attention has come from both economically and philosophically minded
commentators.
Scholars writing in a principally economic vein have thus observed
that the efficiency of the expectation remedy—and in particular
the optimal incentives associated with efficient breach—might be
replicated by properly administered supracompensatory remedies also
(Brooks 2006). The expectation remedy creates efficient incentives to
perform or breach—incentives that produce performance when and
only when the promisee remains the highest valuer of performance when
performance comes due—by placing the decision whether to perform
or breach unilaterally in the hand of the promisor (thereby avoiding
the transactions costs of renegotiation) while at the same time
forcing a breaching promisor to internalize the full costs of breach,
including the promisee’s valuation of performance (thereby
inducing the promisor to strike the optimal balance among these
costs). This result is not unique, however, and a properly constructed
restitutionary remedy—which permits the promisee to choose
between specific performance of the promise and breach plus
disgorgement by the promissor of the gains breach
achieves—possesses the same efficiency. Once again, the decision
whether to perform or breach falls unilaterally to a single party,
this time the promisee who may insist on performance; and the
unilateral decider once again internalizes the full costs of any
performance he insists on, now understood as the lost opportunity to
receive restitution of the gains that breach might have achieved.  A
theory of “efficient performance” thus perfectly mirrors,
and perfectly replicates, orthodox contract law’s theory of
efficient breach. This has led lawyer-economists to suggest that
economic analysis ends at an impasse—neither orthodox contract
nor fiduciary revisionism is more efficient than the other. Some legal
scholars would break the economic impasse on moral grounds, favoring
“more robust notions of contractual duty” over the feeble
notion of duty that (the theory of efficient breach reveals) orthodox
accounts of contract law invite (Brooks 2006: 753).
Certain moral theorists have, for some time and with increasing
force, adopted a parallel line of attack against orthodox contract
law. Orthodox contract remedies merely price breach; and they set
prices so low (at levels that enable breaching promisors to profit
from their wrongs) as to encourage breaches of the very obligations
that contract law purports to establish. This feature of the orthodox
doctrine, these critics say, undermines the immanent normativity of
contract obligation and causes contract law to diverge from the
morality of promise in unattractive ways (various of these claims
appear in, for example, Friedman 1989; Shiffrin 2009, 2007; Brooks
2006) Moral critics of orthodox contract also, and relatedly, attack
other features of established law, for example the mitigation
doctrine. This doctrine supports the expectation remedy by requiring
promisees to respond to breach by taking steps to minimize their
contractual disappointments. Critics of orthodox contract law charge
that the doctrine authorizes breaching promisors to draft their
promisees involuntarily into their service, specifically by requiring
promisees to exercise initiative in order to reduce the damages that
breaching promisors owe (Shiffrin 2012). Supracompensatory remedies,
moral critics of orthodox contract say, avoid these wrongs. A legal
regime that responded to breach of contract by ordering specific
performance, restitutionary disgorgement, or even punitive damages
would truly sanction rather than merely pricing breach. Such a regime
would thus support the internal norms of contract obligation and bring
the law of contract into conformity with the morality of promise.
Once again, the doctrines that achieve these ends insert fiduciary
norms into contract law. 
Accordingly—and as happened in connection with
tort—legal doctrine, economic theory, and moral thought are once
again deployed against the view that contract represents a distinctive
legal form. These arguments again propose that rather than
constituting distinctively chosen obligation, on terms fully fixed by
the contracting parties’ ex ante intentions, contract
should reflect the application of broader and not purely voluntary
duties to the special case of agreements. The new assault on contract
differs from the old in that it proceeds from contract’s
opposite flank and invokes not the involuntary duties to avoid harm
that tort law establishes among strangers but rather the involuntary
duties of affirmative other-regard that fiduciary law imposes among
intimates.
3. Can Contract Remain Chosen Obligation?
 Both challenges—from tort and from fiduciary
law—reject contract’s formal distinctiveness by rejecting
contract’s character as chosen obligation. The challenge from
tort casts contract as just a special case of the involuntary duty not
to harm others, triggered by promissory representations concerning
present intentions or future conduct. The challenge from fiduciary law
casts contract as inextricably intertwined with mandatory duties of
loyalty and other-regard, triggered by the relations of trust that
promises establish.
To answer these challenges, orthodox accounts of contract must
vindicate—both in doctrine and in theory—the distinctive
and unmediated role of intentions in creating and fixing contractual
obligations. Contract can remain distinct from tort only insofar as
intentions specifically to obligate play a central role in contractual
obligations. And contract can remain distinct from fiduciary law only
insofar as contractual obligations cannot develop organically,
outstripping the intentions though which contracts are created, but
instead remain always cabined by the ex ante intentions
through which contracting parties establish their contracts. 
3.1 Contract and Tort Redux
Orthodox theories of contract contend that doctrine provides legal
raw materials that might establish a structural distinction between
contract and tort, and that legal theory can give this distinction an
elaboration that emphasizes contractual obligation’s
fundamentally and immediately chosen character.
Begin with doctrine 
Offer and acceptance each specifically require an intention to
establish an obligation through this very intention. The Restatement
thus emphasizes that an offer manifests an intention (the Restatement
calls this a “willingness”) to assume an obligation (in
the words of the Restatement, a “bargain”) (R2 Contracts:
§24).  To be sure, modern contract law does not require that
contracting parties in fact posses such intentions to obligate in
their own particular minds but only that they act and speak in ways
that would make a reasonable interlocutor conclude that they possess
intentions to obligate. But this so-called “objective”
approach to intention in contract formation does not necessarily
remove intentions to obligate from the picture or transform contract
into a species of tort. In particular, contract law
continues—even in the face of the objective approach—to
treat threshold questions concerning intentions to obligate
qualitatively differently from the way it treats questions concerning
the substantive content of intended performance, once the threshold of
chosen obligation is crossed. Specifically, the law refuses to impute
to potential traders a general intent to make efficient, or fair, or
otherwise optimal contracts and then to imply contracts based on that
intent. Even so called “objective” theories of offer and
acceptance thus do not ask directly whether a reasonable person would
have contracted but instead filter their reasonableness inquiry
through the question whether the parties would understand each other
as expressing the specific intent to be bound. In contrast, once a
contract is established by specific intent, the law is willing,
through any number of doctrines concerning both interpretation and
gap-filling, to impute to the parties a general intent that their
contracts contain optimal terms. Orthodox theories argue that this
contrast—and the law’s separate emphasis on the threshold
intent to be bound—institutes a structural distinction between
contract and tort.
Moreover, orthodox accounts of contract law observe that, contrary
to Gilmore’s fears, inclusion of promissory estoppel in contract
law (through §90 of the Restatement) has not in the end caused
the law to abandon contract’s intentionalist structure. The
cases that invoke promissory estoppel to establish contract liability
in the absence of any fully articulate promise (for purely
non-promissory representations made during pre-contractual
negotiations) turn out to have generated more fear than followers, and
a systematic review of cases governed by these principles shows that
absent conventional torts, non-promissory representations do not
create liability for reliance incurred during negotiations (see
Schwartz & Scott 2007: 672). As one court has put it, in order for
pre-contractual understandings to receive legal recognition, more is
needed than convergence on the details of a plan—there
must be “overall agreement … to enter into the
binding contract” (Teachers Ins. & Annuity
Assoc. v. Tribune Co. 1987; emphasis added).  Promise, understood
as immediately chosen obligation, thus re-enters the doctrinal
picture.  Unconscionability—at least as a doctrine that recasts
contract in terms of fairness-based rather than chosen
obligations—has had a similarly truncated career. A few early
cases toyed with suggestions that substantively unfair terms might in
themselves and without more render a contract unconscionable.[19] But (with certain
very narrowly cabined 
 exceptions[20]) the law has settled on the view that unconscionability has an ineliminable procedural component, which requires a plaintiff to demonstrate not just that a contract’s terms are substantively unfair but also that she failed to exercise meaningful choice in accepting
 them.[21] Unconscionability thus also protects rather than supplants the chosen-ness of contract obligation.
Indeed, orthodox theories observe, tort law proper retains basic
principles that demur to encroach directly or generally on
contract. Most notably, Restatement (Second) of Torts §548,
concerning fraudulent misrepresentation, insists that tort liability
for misrepresentation requires that the party asserting liability has
relied specifically on the truth of the representation upon
which the claimed liability is based. The Restatement expressly adds
that reliance “upon the expectation that the maker [of the false
statement] will be held liable in damages for its falsity”
cannot sustain a fraud claim (R2 Torts: §548).  By contrast, the
bootstrapping that tort law refuses is of the essence of contract and
underwritten by the fact that contractual promisors, in contrast to
those who make representations for purposes of tort law, intend not
just to convey information but rather, directly though the self-same
intentions, to assume obligations. Contract, orthodox theories insist,
countenances bootstrapping precisely because it contemplates chosen
obligations.
Finally, orthodox theories observe that concrete cases embrace the
distinctive features that they accord to contract (admittedly not
uniformly, see, e.g., Overstreet v.  Norden Laboratories
1982, but sufficiently often and in sufficiently important cases to
render plausible contract’s claim to constitute a separate legal
form).  Warranties, for example, may create obligations even though
they warrant facts that could not possibly obtain. As Judge Learned
Hand once explained, because a promisor “obviously cannot
control what is already in the past”, a warranty
is intended precisely to relieve the promisee of
any duty to ascertain the fact for himself; it amounts to a promise to
indemnify the promisee for any loss if the fact warranted proves
untrue. (Metropolitan Coal Co. v.  Howard 1946)
 Another court similarly observed that the
“crucial question” raised by a contractual promise (such
as a warranty) thus “is not whether the buyer believed in the
truth of the warranted information but whether it believed it was
purchasing the seller’s promise as to its truth” (CBS,
Inc. v. Ziff-Davis Publishing Co. 1990: 1001). The court,
moreover, expressly explained its reasoning by observing that its
approach reflected “the prevailing perception of an action for
breach of express warranty as one that is no longer grounded in tort,
but essentially in contract” (CBS, Inc. v. Ziff-Davis
Publishing Co. 1990: 1001). Nor is this approach—which
recognizes that contracts establish obligations unsupported by
reliance or associated tort norms—limited to the warranty
context. In one prominent case, a court enforced a promise that
created an 8 billion dollar windfall—and hence cannot have
induced any reliance, not even in the form of lost
opportunities—to the promise’s full extent (see
Texaco, Inc. v.  Pennzoil, Co. 1987). Such a verdict cannot
readily be assimilated to tort; it is most naturally explained and
justified by the recognition of contract as a distinctive legal
form.
Next, consider theory
Orthodox accounts of contract marshal the doctrinal features of
contract law that resist assimilation to tort in a separate effort to
emphasize that theoretical accounts of contract must accommodate
contract’s character as chosen obligation.
Economic theories that emphasize contract’s usefulness as a
technology for sustaining efficient reliance must confront the fact
that contract law protects promissory reliance even where this is not
efficient and fails to protect non-promissory reliance even where this
would be efficient. On the one hand, philosophical theories of
promising as various as Rawls’s and Raz’s emphasize that
promissory obligation endures even where, as things have developed,
keeping a promise would not be best overall (Rawls 1955; Raz 1977).
Charles Fried (1981) makes the same point concerning contract.  On the
other hand, the economic approach, as James Gordley has observed,
makes it “puzzling, to put it mildly, that the law enforces
promises more readily than other commitments” (1991: 235; a
similar point is made in Atiyah 1981).  These and related difficulties
have led many (although not all) lawyer-economists to abandon the
effort to explain orthodox contract law in terms of efficient
reliance in favor of an alternative campaign to reform the
law to suit economic theory.
The piecemeal reforms described in the earlier section on efforts
to reframe contract in terms of tort belong to this program. The
program also shows a more general and systematic face, especially in
commercial law, in the form of an effort to reconstruct contract
doctrine with the single-minded purpose of 
facilitating the ability of firms to maximize welfare [which in this
context means joint contractual surplus] when making commercial
contracts. (Schwartz & Scott 2003: 556) 
Because firms are artificial persons, this program can ignore concerns
for respecting party autonomy that contract law must otherwise
address. And insofar as firms (by assumption) are owned by perfectly
diversified shareholders, who thus possess equal interests in both
sides of all commercial transactions, the program can ignore both
distributive and corrective justice. But these observations, even as
they shore up the economic case for reforming contract law, also
reveal the deep and pervasive radicalism of the economic reform
program. Orthodox approaches to contract thus insist that this program
abandons the most basic presupposition from which the study of
contract law as the law of agreements ordinarily departs. Whereas
contracts, intuitively understood, involve coordination among multiple
parties, the transactions addressed by the economic theory ultimately
involve only the one perfectly diversified shareholder; and they are,
therefore, not in the end agreements at all.
Orthodox accounts of contract thus respond to economically
motivated encroachments on the role of choice in contract by raising
the stakes. They observe that the movement of thought begun by the
economic observation that contract promotes efficient reliance does
not end merely by assimilating contract to the misrepresentation
torts. Instead, it ends by rejecting the broader conception of private
law as regulating the interactions among distinctive and independent
persons that conventional understandings of both contract and tort
embrace.[22]
Finally, orthodox contract’s insistence that contract is
chosen obligation also underwrites theoretical resistance to moral
views, such as Scanlon’s, that seek to explain contractual
obligation in terms of the involuntarily imposed obligation not to
harm others. These theories find it difficult to account for both the
strictness of contractual obligations to keep agreements and
also contract law’s commitment to vindicating promissory
expectations.
Begin by considering contract’s strict-liability character.
Not every lost reliance or disappointed expectation constitutes a harm
that tort-like duties require avoiding. Indeed, even in ordinary cases
in which reliance and expectations are foreseeable and in fact
foreseen, no harm-based obligations need arise, as Charles Fried
vividly observed in connection with defending his preferred
voluntarist account of contract. Imagine, Fried supposed, that a
musician convenes a string quartet in his apartment and that this
causes a music lover to buy the unit next door. Surely, Fried claimed,
even if the musician knows of the reliance, she is under no obligation
to continue to convene the quartet or to reject a suggestion to play
at the cellist’s house instead (see Fried 1981: 10–11; for
further examples, see Raz 1977: 216–17).  Indeed, even reliance
or expectations based on a promise need not ground obligation (in
either promise or contract): where a third person other than the
promise overhears an agreement between two others and relies on or
forms expectations of its performance, this does not (without more)
create promissory or contractual obligations in favor of the
third. (This example is presented by Raz 1977: 217 and taken up by
Cartwright 1984: 243.)
Accounts that cast contract as chosen obligation (on the orthodox
model) emphasize that these cases all illustrate that harm-based
obligations can arise out of contractual promises only insofar as the
reliance or expectations that might underwrite such obligations are
justified. But contractual promises, taken alone, seem
capable of justifying contractual reliance or expectations only
insofar as they obligate. Accounts that seek to assimilate
contract to tort by casting contractual obligations as harm-based thus
confront a circle. As Randy Barnett observes:
a
person, rather than being entitled to legal enforcement because
reliance is justified, is justified in relying on those commitments
that will be legally enforced. Reliance theories [that is,
harm-theories] therefore must appeal to a criterion other than
reliance to distinguish justified acts of reliance. (Barnett 1986:
276)[23]
 Finally, harm-based theories of contract must do
more than just show that agreement-based reliance (or expectations)
can be justified when the surrounding circumstances are
right. Contracts generate obligations of agreement-keeping quite
generally, without any need for support from considerations (such as
friendship or some other form of solidarity) that come from outside
the morality of agreements. 
Orthodox views thus insist that the harm-based theory of contract
is in a difficult bind. On the one hand the theory cannot bootstrap
its way into validity by grounding promissory assurances in the very
obligation of agreement-keeping that it is charged to explain.  And on
the other, it must show that a contractual promise can, at least
ordinarily, by itself render relying on, or forming
expectations based on, the promise justified, quite apart from any
broader or richer attendant factors. Orthodox views propose that until
it can escape this circle, the effort to assimilate contract to the
tort-like morality of harm cannot get off the
 ground.[24]
Moreover, orthodox accounts of contract observe that even if a
harm-based theory can successfully explain strict liability for
promise-keeping in a non-circular and yet non-reductive way, the
theory remains unable to explain why contracts create entitlements in
respect not just of reasonable reliance but also in respect of
promissory expectations. Tort law, after all, remains
backward-looking: the obligations it contemplates (including
obligations associated with representations concerning current
intentions or future actions) are limited to preventing losses.  And
the remedies it recommends (for example, the damage awards
contemplated in the law of torts) are limited to the compensation
necessary to restore the status quo ante. Contract law by
contrast differs in each of these respects, and the harm-based view,
as Scanlon recognizes, must explain why contract requires promisors to
satisfy their promisees’ expectations rather than merely to
compensate disappointed promisees for lost reliance and why contract
remedies vindicate contractual expectations rather than merely
reimbursing lost reliance.
Scanlon defends each of these rules of agreement-keeping by
comparing the benefits that the rules confer to the burdens that they
impose and arguing that, given the balance between these, it would be
unreasonable for promisors who must bear the burdens to reject the
rules, and that promisees may justifiably claim the benefits of the
rules, as the formal structure of the harm theory requires.  Scanlon
argues that the benefits to promisees of protecting promissory
expectations are substantial (Scanlon 1998:
 302–3)[25]
 and that, given
the conditions of mutual knowledge, etc., that are built into the
general account of promising, the burdens that this rule imposes on
promisors are
 slight.[26]
 Given this balance, Scanlon also concludes,
the benefits of legal enforcement of contracts are
 substantial,[27]
 while the costs of enforceability are much
less weighty.[28]
 Scanlon therefore concludes, once again,
that in light of this balance, no person could reasonably reject a
legal regime that enforces contractual expectations (Scanlon
2001:108).
Orthodox theories of contract reply that this conclusion comes too
quickly to be earned. To succeed, Scanlon’s view must show not
only that contract cannot be reasonably rejected in favor of an
alternative of no obligations of agreement-keeping, but also that
contract cannot be reasonably rejected in favor of any alternative
rule of agreement keeping. This makes it natural to ask how the
harm-theorist can sustain the conclusion that no alternative
principles may reasonably be preferred over orthodox contract
law’s scheme of chosen obligation. And earlier
arguments—especially those associated with the economic analysis
of law—suggest that the harm-theorist cannot sustain the
position that orthodox contract law may be reasonably rejected in
favor of limiting contractual obligation according to tort law’s
morality of harm. At the very least, orthodox views of contract
conclude, these considerations argue the harm-based effort to ground
contract not in choice but rather in the morality of harm to a
stalemate.
3.2 Contract and Fiduciary Law Redux
Orthodox theories of contract seek to defend the view that contract
is quintessentially chosen obligation against encroachment from
fiduciary law also. Once again both doctrinal and theoretical
considerations figure in the defense.
The most important doctrinal consideration against the fiduciary
reconstruction of contract law develops a fundamental distinction between
the duty of good faith that governs contracts and the various duties
of loyalty that arise within fiduciary relations (here see generally
Daniel Markovits (2014a,b). 
The duty of good faith in performance, which both the Uniform
Commercial Code and the Restatement (Second) of Contracts make
mandatory for every contract that they govern, requires parties to
display “honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing” (U.C.C. §§1-201,
2-103) and to avoid types of conduct that “violate community
standards of decency, fairness or reasonableness” (R2 Contracts:
§205 cmt. [a]). Critically, however, the duty of good faith in
performance “does not create a separate duty of fairness and
reasonableness which can be independently breached”
(U.C.C. §1-304 [cmt. 1]). Thus, as one prominent judge has more
colorfully explained, “even after you have signed a contract,
you are not obliged to become an altruist toward the other
party” (Mkt. St. Assocs. Ltd. P’ship v. Frey
1991: 
594).[29]
 Nor does good faith require contracting
parties to adopt even an attitude of substantive impartiality between
their contractual interests and the interests of their contracting
partners. The law does not seek, “in the name of good faith, to
make every contract signatory his brother’s keeper”
(Mkt. St. Assocs. 1991: 593.). Instead, Good faith
characterizes contract obligation’s form and identifies an
attitude towards contractual obligations: good faith supports the
parties’ contractual settlement, working to “effectuate
the intentions of the parties, or to protect their reasonable
expectations” (Burton 1980:
 371)[30].
 It is thus,
fundamentally, an attitude of respect for the contract relation, and
the measure of good faith is the contract itself. The duty of good
faith in performance permits the parties to remain as self-interested
within their contracts as they were without them, save that they must
respect the terms of their contractual settlements as side-constraints
on their self-interest and may not use the inevitable room to maneuver
that arises within every contract, and the strategic vulnerabilities
that a contract itself thus creates, “to recapture [during
performance] opportunities forgone upon contracting” (Burton
1980: 373).
Orthodox accounts of contract deploy these observations to argue
that good faith in contract law requires less of parties than
fiduciary loyalty and devotion. A fiduciary is “required to
treat his principal as if the principal were he”
(Mkt. St. Assocs. 1991: 593).  But good faith, by contrast,
does not mean that a party vested with a clear
right is obligated to exercise that right to its own detriment for the
purpose of benefiting another party to the contract (Rio Algom
Corp. v. Jimco Ltd. 1980). 
As another prominent U.S. American court explains,


“[G]ood faith does not envision loyalty to the contractual
counterparty, but rather faithfulness to the scope, purpose, and terms
of the parties” contract. (ASB Allegiance Real Estate Fund
v. Scion Breckenridge Managing Member, L.L.C. 2013[31])

The distinction, orthodox accounts insist, marks a deep feature of
contract law. As Jack Beatson observes,
[o]ne of the hallmarks of English common law is that it
does not have a doctrine of abuse of rights: if one has a right to do
an act then, one can, in general, do it for whatever reason one
wishes. (Beatson 1995: 266)
This entails that
 [e]xcept where the contracting parties are also in a
fiduciary relationship, self-interest is permissible, and indeed is
the norm in the exercise of contractual rights. (Beatson 1995:
267)
Once again, a fiduciary whose beneficiary asks
her to walk a mile with him must, if circumstances develop to require
it, walk with him twain; but a contractual promisor must walk only the
mile, and only along the path, that she promised. As long as she
respects her promise, mere self-interest cannot be bad faith.
These doctrinal distinctions, once again, may be given theoretical
elaborations, in both economic and moral registers.
Begin with economics, and recall that critics of orthodox contract
who seek to assimilate contract to fiduciary ideals propose that
contractual promisors should manage contractual performance not purely
on their own but rather also on their promisees’ accounts, in a
kind of constructive trust for their promisees’ benefits.  That
is the device that organizes and rationalizes the critics’
various suggestions that breaching promisors should disgorge any gains
produced by their breaches to their promisees in restitution or pay
punitive damages on account of the betrayals that their breaches
involve. 
Views that seek to maintain the distinction between contract and
fiduciary obligation emphasize that this regime will not leave
promisor behavior undisturbed. In particular, a promisor who faces
restitutionary claims for any gains produced by an efficient breach
will seek to recapture some of these gains for herself by refusing to
realize them—threatening, as it were, to perform—unless
her promisee waives a portion of his restitutionary claim. And this
entails that the restitutionary remedies preferred by those who
propose to recast contract in fiduciary terms expose contracting
parties to the risk of costly renegotiations, which destroy
contractual surplus and thus set back the interests of both promisors
and promisees. That is why, recall, the efficient performance regime
can mirror orthodox contract’s expectation-remedy-plus-efficient
breach only by coupling restitutionary disgorgement with a power, in
the promisee, to command her promisor to “breach”
and disgorge. That power is necessary if the parties are to avoid
surplus-destroying renegotiations.
These observations cast light on the economic relationship between
promisees and promisors under the fiduciary reconstruction of
contract’s full efficient performance regime. Promisees, under
this regime, possess a right to capture any gains that a promised
performance produces, no matter how deployed, and also a power to
command their promisors to deploy the contractual performance in the
optimal way. This seemingly complex relationship admits a much simpler
characterization—a promisee who possesses the comprehensive
entitlements and powers associated with the efficient performance
regime in effect owns his promisor (at least in respect of
the contractual performance). 
Orthodox theories of contract argue that this characterization
reveals that the efficient performance regime possesses a
fundamentally non-contractual character. As Ronald Coase famously
proposed, the scope of the firm—the boundary between
coordinating economic activity within a firm through ownership and
managerial control and coordinating economic activity across firms by
contract—is fixed by the balance between the transaction costs
of each coordinating mechanism (Coase 1938).  Coase’s insight
applies naturally to the efficient performance regime, to
recharacterize that regime in a fundamental way. Where the balance of
transactions costs really does make it efficient, as the efficient
performance remedy supposes, for promisees to exercise managerial
control over their promisors’ actions, those actions will
already fall within the promisees’ firms. There will thus be no
need for the contracts that the efficient performance remedy seeks to
vindicate.
These observations invite a simple restatement of the orthodox
account of contract: where the allocation of discretion and control
associated with the efficient performance remedy really is optimal,
there will be no separate legal entities to begin with and hence no
contracts. The legal norms associated with orthodox contract
law—the expectation remedy, the practice of efficient breach,
and more generally self-interest side-constrained by good faith
respect for the contractual settlement—may thus be cast as
constitutive of economic coordination by contract.
Finally, orthodox accounts propose a moral interpretation of these
economic ideas, which they marshal in reply to orthodox contract
law’s moralist critics. These critics, recall, object to the
fact that orthodox contract (insofar as the expectation remedy
encourages efficient breach, for example, or the mitigation doctrine
permits promisors to draft promisees into their service) encourages
promisors to consult their narrow self-interest in dealing with
promisees. The critics believe that a morally better relation would
require contracting parties to display some measure of affirmative
other regard towards each other, on the model of fiduciary
loyalty. 
Orthodox views reply that contract—understood on the orthodox
model that permits side-constrained self-interest—does not
involve simply less other-regard than fiduciary loyalty but
rather different other-regard. They add that the contractual
version of other-regard possess properties that make it morally
appealing, at least within the spheres of life that contract typically
governs (Markovits 2004a).
Loyalty requires a fiduciary to adjust open-endedly to the
interests of her beneficiary as circumstances develop ex
post. To make the required adjustments, and discharge her duty of
loyalty, the fiduciary must adapt her conduct in light of her
beneficiary’s particular, substantive interests, about which
she must form her own opinions. Otherwise, she will not know what
to deploy her loyalty in favor of. This necessarily imports a measure
of paternalism into every fiduciary relation. Indeed, the paternalism
is part of the point of the fiduciary relation, which displaces the
beneficiary’s own worse judgment in favor of her
fiduciary’s better judgment; and the fiduciary’s duty of
loyalty serves to guarantee that the fiduciary will indeed exercise
her judgment on the beneficiary’s behalf. Fiduciary paternalism
can have real value, especially where beneficiaries reasonably
mistrust their own judgment. But fiduciary paternalism has costs
also. In particular, beneficiaries find fiduciaries more helpful in
promoting their interests than in asserting ongoing, independent
control over their own lives. 
Orthodox views emphasize that contractual other-regard, by
contrast, possesses a thoroughgoingly anti-paternalist character. The
duty of good faith in performance, including specifically by resisting
altruism and ratifying (side-constrained) self-interest within the
contract relation, insists that all contractual sharing must be fixed
ex ante, according to the intentions of the contracting
parties. A contractual promisor must take her promisee’s
intentions at face value; she may not look behind them, and even
override them, in the service of the promisee’s true interests,
as a fiduciary must do for her beneficiary. Contract law in this way
forbids paternalism within contracts once made just as surely as it
forbids paternalism in determining which contract might be made.  The
duty of good faith in performance thus extends freedom of contract
into the interstices of the contract relation.
 Those who defend contract’s departure from fiduciary law
thus emphasize that fiduciaries are required by loyalty to engage
their beneficiaries concretely, in terms of the beneficiaries’
particular interests and for the particular persons whom they are. But
contract-partners, by contrast, engage each other only abstractly,
through their general personalities. That is, they contract based
simply on formal contractual capacity and take each other’s
stated intentions at face value, never second-guessing each
other’s substantive purposes. Orthodox approaches thus cast
contract as better than fiduciary law—morally better—for
sustaining coordination at arm-length among independent traders, who
wish to benefit from joint projects with others, and indeed to share
the gains from these projects with their counterparties, without
assuming responsibility for their counterparties and all-the-while
retaining rights to ongoing control over their own lives.