As a species of practical ethics, bioethics exhibits a complex and
contested relationship to philosophical theory. On the one hand, many
who teach and write in this interdisciplinary field are philosophers
who naturally believe that their specific contribution to the
field—their “expertise,” if you will—consists
in the application of distinctly philosophical methods, including
various kinds of ethical theory, to practical problems arising in
biomedical research, clinical medicine, and public health. But on the
other hand, many who work in the area of bioethics, including many
philosophers, are highly skeptical of the so-called “applied
ethics” model of moral reasoning, in which exemplars of high
theory (e.g., consequentialist utilitarianism, Kantian deontology,
rights-based theories, natural law, etc.) are directly
“applied” to practical problems. Indeed, most
philosophically-inclined contributors to the bioethics literature have
eschewed high moral theory in favor of various modes of moral
reasoning falling on a spectrum between the strong particularism of
various strains of casuistry or narrative ethics, on one end, and the
mid-level norms of the enormously influential
“principlism” of Beauchamp and Childress, on the other
(Beauchamp and Childress, 2009).[1]
 According to philosophers Robert
K. Fullinwider (2008) and Will Kymlicka (1996), bioethics in the
public domain can and should go about its business as a species of
ethical reflection independently of any reliance upon high-flying
ethical theory.


This article explores the controversy concerning the role of
philosophical theory for practical ethics in general and bioethics in
particular. The main body of this entry dialectically canvasses the
respective claims for “high theory,” for particularistic
“anti-theory,” and for various species of
“mid-level” theorizing in between these extremes. A
discursive taxonomy of the kinds of philosophical theories deployed in
practical ethics—i.e., metaethical, normative,
metaphysical—is provided in a 
 supplement.
 

1. What's theory to practice, and practice to theory?


Determining the precise nature of the relationship between bioethics
and ethical theory is complicated by the absence of a canonical
definition of “theory.” Although philosophers have
self-consciously engaged in ethical theorizing since the days of the
ancient Greeks, they have not given much thought to what it is that
makes certain kinds of ethical reflection distinctly theoretical as
opposed to other, more practical intellectual pursuits. So when we
inquire into the nature of the relationship between bioethics and moral
or political theory, it will obviously matter a great deal whether we
define “theory” narrowly—restricting it to a small
cluster of paradigmatic examples, such as classical or contemporary
versions of utilitarianism or Kantianism—or more broadly so as to
encompass many different modes of moral reflection, including feminist
critiques of reproductive technologies, virtue ethics, or various
conceptual and normative accounts of coercion and exploitation in
biomedical research. The broader our definition of
“theory,” the more commonsensical will be the claim that
theory should play an important role in bioethics.


Things get even more complicated when we recall that bioethics is
not a monolithic field; it encompasses a variety of distinct but
interrelated activities, some of which might be more amenable to the
deployment of philosophical theory than
 others.[2]
 At the most concrete and immediate level, there is clinical bioethics,
which amounts to the deployment of bioethical concepts, values and
methods within the domain of the hospital or clinic. The paradigmatic
activity of clinical bioethics is the ethics consult, in which
perplexed or worried physicians, nurses, social workers, patients or
their family members call upon an ethicist (among others, e.g.,
psychiatrists and lawyers) for assistance in resolving an actual
case. These case discussions take place in real time and they are
anything but hypothetical. While those who discuss bioethics in an
academic context can afford to reach the end of the hour in a state of
perplexed indeterminacy, the clinical ethicist is acutely aware that
the bedside is not a seminar room and that a decision must be
reached.


Second, there is policy-oriented bioethics. In contrast to the
clinical ethicist, who is concerned with the fate of individual
patients, the bioethicist cum policy analyst is called upon to assist
in the formulation of policies that will affect large numbers of
people. Such policy discussions can take place on the level of
individual hospitals or health systems, where administrators, medical
and nursing staff, and bioethicists debate, inter alia, the
merits of competing policies on medical futility or do-not-resuscitate
orders; or they can take place in the more rarified atmosphere of
various state and national commissions charged with formulating policy
on topics such as cloning, access to health care, organ
transplantation, or assisted suicide. Although such commissions operate
at much higher levels of generality than the clinical ethicist in the
trenches, both of these kinds of bioethical activity tend to be
intensely practical and result-oriented. The clinical ethicist will
usually be wary of invoking philosophical or religious theory because
her interlocutors usually have neither the time nor the inclination to
discuss matters on this level, while the bioethicist on the national
commission will soon realize the impossibility of forging a consensus
with his or her peers on the basis of theory alone.


Finally, at the other end of the practice-theory spectrum, there is
bioethics as a theoretical pursuit of truth, a variant unhindered by
the resolutely practical constraints of the clinic and commission. The
academic is free to think as deeply or to soar as high into the
theoretical empyrean as she wishes. Unlike the clinical ethicist, she
is unhindered by time constraints, medical custom, law, or the need to
reach closure on a decision. The seminar lasts all semester, and it
might serve a good educational purpose to leave one's students even
more confused at the end than they were at the beginning. And unlike
the bioethicist cum policy analyst, the academic doesn't have
to worry about finding a common language or bending to the necessities
imposed by pluralism or sponsoring agencies of government. It is here
within the academic domain that the relationship between
philosophical-religious theory and bioethics will tend to be most
explicit and most welcome, although even here bioethicists need to be
responsive to the above constraints should they desire the fruits of
their intellectual labors eventually to have some influence on public
policy. Presumably, a standard motivation for engaging in practical
ethics is to influence practice.


Although I have sketched above three different kinds of activities
that can all be lumped under the common rubric of
“bioethics,” it should be kept in mind that each of these
constituent elements of bioethics influences the others—e.g.,
bioethical theory can influence reasoning in policy settings, and
clinical practice can sometimes prompt the theoretician to reexamine
some of his basic assumptions. It should also go without saying that
quite often the same individuals can and do engage in various areas of
bioethical activity, alternatively, as clinicians, teachers,
theoreticians, and as consultants to industry or government.


So much for preliminary remarks. Let us now move on to a more
dialectical examination of the role of theory in bioethics. We shall
begin with the respective cases for and against deploying high moral
theory. We will then proceed to examine the case for anti-theory in
bioethics, and will close with a brief on behalf of a “theory
modest,” as opposed to theory free, approach to bioethical
problems. Interested readers are encouraged to consult the 
 supplement to this entry, 
which offers a discursive typology of the various kinds of
theory deployed in bioethics.
2. The heroic phase of ethical theory and “applied ethics”
2.1 The allure of high theory


As the era of contemporary practical ethics dawned in the early
1970s, it was natural for philosophers and religious moralists to
assume that their role in the division of labor within this budding
field would call for much more than the modest metaethical chores
traditionally allotted to them, such as providing definitions for terms
like “right” and “good” (Hare 1952). Inspired
by the example of John Rawls' monumental theory of justice
(1971), if not always by his methods or conclusions, practically-minded
philosophers set out to vindicate not only Rawls's faith in the
ability of human reason to justify a particular conception of the basic
structure of society, but also their own faith, less obviously shared
by Rawls, that moral and political theory could also advance debate
across a whole spectrum of practical domains, including medical
practice, human experimentation, business, the environment, journalism,
law, and politics. It was also quite natural for such philosophers to
assume that, over and above their skill in logical criticism, their
specific expertise as philosophers would consist in their knowledge of
ethical theory and their ability to apply such theory to practical
problems, such as paternalism in the physician-patient relationship and
access to health care. Finally, they assumed a particular picture or
model of ethical theorizing, according to which a vast, tightly
organized system of judgments is supported by a pivotally placed
keystone composed of one or two principles, such as Kant's
categorical imperative. Annette Baier compares this conception of
theory to a great vaulting structure (Baier 1994).


Thus dawned what we might call the “heroic” phase of
practical ethics, in which philosophers attempted to tackle all manner
of problems with the aid of moral and political theory. This confidence
in the deployment of ethical theory prompted the authors of the leading
bioethics texts and anthologies to preface their chapters on particular
moral problems or themes with material introducing students to the
rudiments of ethical theory, including obligatory sections on
consequentialism, deontology, rights, natural law, and so on.
 [3]
Typical examples of
this trend might include Joseph Fletcher's (1974) and Peter
Singer's (1999) utilitarian approaches to the whole spectrum of
bioethical issues, Alan Donagan's explicitly Kantian argument for
informed consent in medical practice and research (1977), and Tristram
Engelhardt's (1986) critique of redistribution in health care on
the basis of libertarian premises borrowed from Robert Nozick (1974).
What kinds of motivations might be adduced to explain and endorse such
resort to high theory in bioethics?


Theoretical issues crop up everywhere in bioethics, and most of the
ethical judgments we bring to bear on them may implicitly but
ultimately commit us to some theory or other (Rachels 1998, and Darwall
2003). Most of the time, however, both in our personal lives and on the
job, we manage to muddle through whatever moral puzzles might arise by
appealing to virtuous habits instilled in us by our parents, or to
various rules of thumb that have provided good guidance in the past, or
by groping our way analogically from one case to another. Most of the
time, such ethical coping mechanisms work well enough, and we get along
quite well without resort to ethical theory of any kind; but sometimes
they don't, and those are the occasions when we need to seek
moral justification at a higher level. Sometimes the problem is
unavoidably philosophical, such as the debate over abortion or the
derivation and use of human stem cells. Such contested issues turn on
unavoidable metaphysical questions bearing on the moral status of human
embryos and fetuses. If we want to show respect to our interlocutors on
the other side of these arguments, we will need to exchange good
reasons with them, and these reasons will inevitably involve
theoretical propositions.


Another occasion for moving up the ladder of “justificatory
ascent” (Dworkin 1997) is provided by our need to weigh, balance,
and adjudicate between the conflicting demands of various mid-level
principles. One alleged weakness of pluralistic theories like those of
W.D. Ross or the principlism of Beauchamp and Childress is that the
various principles that constitute the backbone of such theories can
and often do conflict with one another; and when they do, we may need
to ascend to a higher level of justification provided by a more
comprehensive moral theory. Sidgwick thus famously argued in favor of
utilitarianism on the ground that such a theory could help us resolve
conflicts among ordinary commonsensical duties, such as duty to keep
promises and the duty to rescue strangers in mortal peril, that common
sense morality could not resolve on its own (1981, orig. 1884).


A similar point in favor of high theory concerns the role of rules in
moral argument. Most of us, perhaps most of the time, successfully
navigate moral problems arising in everyday life by means of various
rules that have stood the test of time: e.g., keep your promises, do
not kill, do not lie, etc. But here too, controversies arise due to
conflicting rules or to interpretive difficulties in assessing the
nature, point, and weight of various rules in varying
circumstances. In order to adjudicate these controversies, we need a
normative standard that can articulate the nature of the rules, their
respective grounds of justification, and their comparative weight in
moral argument—in short, we need theory (Nussbaum 2000a). 


Another virtue of theory concerns the importance of achieving
consistency in our moral judgments and the value of developing a truly
systematic perspective on our moral lives. But given the finite nature
of our life span, the urgency of practical concerns, and the limited
range of our attention, we fall far short of Dworkin's mythical
judge, Hercules, who somehow manages to digest all the imaginable legal
precedents in a case, all the institutional history of court and
country, and discerns a coherent order in all this flotsam and jetsam
with the aid of the best political philosophy available (Dworkin 1977).
Usually the best we mere mortals can hope for is to illuminate a few
important niches of our collective life, so we try to develop theories
bearing, inter alia, on the nature of suffering, the
physician-patient relationship, the ethical treatment of children in
research, the nature and limits of private property, equal opportunity,
and so on.


Here too conflicts may arise between different theories and the weight
they give to different principles or values. For example, our regnant
theories of the physician-patient relationship are largely dominated
by the value of autonomy and the principle of respect for individual
choice, but as Alan Wertheimer has shown, our standard approach to
research ethics remains paternalistic in some ways that may not be
defensible (forthcoming). We charge Institutional Review Boards (IRBs)
with the task of protecting potential research subjects from studies
that might pose “excessive” risks, and we worry that
financial rewards for participation might exercise “undue
influence” on subjects, especially those who are poor and
socially marginalized.


Although one could attempt to simply muddle through in the face of
such inconsistencies, the more rational and, some would say, the more
ethically responsible choice is to strive for systematic coherence
among the various theories we develop in different contexts. Although
we may never arrive at the degree of systematic coherence achieved by
Hercules before breakfast, we should at least try to achieve coherence
among all the disparate regions of our moral
 experience.[4]
2.2 The allure of ideal political philosophy


In confronting questions bearing on health inequalities and
inequities, bioethics will naturally seek guidance in various
contemporary theories of justice, including Rawlsian contractarianism,
utilitarian cost-benefit analysis, and libertarian theories of natural
rights. In order to present us with a picture of a completely just
society, the theorist must make several idealizing assumptions that
tend to distance that picture from social reality as we know it. Rawls,
for example, famously assumes “full compliance” with the
principles of justice in an ideally just society (1971/1999). Everyone
would obey laws based upon the principles of equal liberty and the just
allocation of social primary goods. There would be no racial
discrimination, no crime, no glaring power imbalances between the
sexes, and no social or economic inequalities that did not maximally
advance the interests of the worst off group in society. On the global
level, each nation, according to Rawls, would ideally have sufficient
means to govern itself democratically (or at least
“decently”), so that in working out the terms of ideal
global justice, we need not worry about the sort of widespread, severe
poverty and rampant corruption that currently blight the lives of
billions of people (Rawls 1999b). In response to the critic who might
ask what this idealized picture has to do with the social world that we
actually inhabit, Rawls's response would be that the theorist
must abstract from such realities precisely in order to present us with
an ideal theory of justice. In a perfectly just society, there would
indeed be no crime and no shameful class barriers to equal opportunity;
if there were, that society would not be perfectly just. Thus, as one
philosopher has put it, ideal theory presents us with a picture of our
ultimate social objective, Paradise Island (Robeyns 2008).
3. Problems with bioethics conceived as applied high theory
3.1 The ubiquity of moral pluralism


Notwithstanding the many attractions of high theory as an
intellectual pursuit, the heroic phase of “applied ethics”
was short lived; indeed, it was practically stillborn. Perhaps the main
obstacle to the deployment of high theory to moral practice in
medicine, research, and public health has been the absence of consensus
on which theory should prevail. There are, first of all, many
theories from which to choose—utilitarian, Kantian, Rawlsian,
libertarian, etc.—and no clear winner among them. This would
not be a serious problem were bioethics merely an academic pursuit, but
the entire field of practical ethics sees itself as a potentially
useful guide to practice. If all interpretive activity within the field
were to depend upon the selection of a single, superior moral/political
theory, practitioners hoping for assistance in dealing with real world
clinical or policy problems would have to suffer a very long wait
indeed. (“Be right with you, as soon as we resolve the
fundamental disagreements between consequentialists and
deontologists.”)


Even if philosophers could overcome their seemingly endless and
intractable disagreements bearing on which high theory to adopt, we
would still face the problem of balkanization and disagreement
within our favored theory. Rule utilitarians disagree with act
utilitarians; Rawlsians disagree with each other, inter alia,
on the metric of equality and the soundness of the difference
principle; and libertarians debate the stringency of their preference
for liberty over social equality.


In the face of this proliferation of theoretical possibilities and
the extreme unlikelihood of reaching some sort of societal consensus on
the best interpretation of the best theory, James Rachels'
(admittedly guarded) optimism about our ability to eventually develop
an ethical theory, acceptable to all rational persons, as a basis for
bioethics would appear to be misplaced (Rachels 1998). The fact that
just about every self-respecting ethical theory that we know of
condemns slavery—Rachels's key case study suggesting the
possibility of a rational consensus on theory—still leaves us a
long way from reaching consensus on a theory that could successfully
adjudicate the front-burner issues in bioethics, such as access to
health care, the ethics of genetic enhancement, and assisted suicide.
Indeed, notwithstanding theory's unifying aims, allotting a
central role to applied high theory in clinical and policy-oriented
bioethics would in all likelihood serve only to increase the amount of
disagreement and pluralism in society.
3.2 Shortcomings of ideal political theory


Notwithstanding the value of doing ideal political theory, those
seeking practical means of advancing justice in the here and now will
immediately discover that some of the most celebrated theories of
justice in current circulation are ill-suited to this purpose. This is
because the authors of these theories self-consciously advance them as
“ideal theories”—i.e., as theories of what a
perfectly just society would look like. Although this sounds perfectly
unremarkable on first hearing—what else should we expect a
theory of justice to do?—attempting to glean practical advice
from ideal theories proves to be an extremely problematic endeavor. Why
should this be so?


The often yawning gap between our shining ideal theories and tawdry
social realities engenders serious problems when we try to envision how
we might get from where we are now, mired in all sorts of injustice, to
Paradise Island. As many political theorists have pointed out, what
might be the correct principles for an ideally just world might not be
immediately and directly applicable to the actual world that we inhabit
(Sen 2006, Robyns 2008) Knowing what perfect justice requires might
shed little light, if any, on the sorts of questions facing us today,
such as how various feasible and politically acceptable options might
be compared and ranked as incremental steps in the direction of a just
society. In assuming complete compliance with just norms, ideal theory
ignores the costs and benefits of various actions, which will vary with
the degree of compliance. In many cases, individuals who have played
fairly for a long time according to putatively less than perfectly just
rules actually in place, may rightly feel unjustly treated by societal
efforts to abruptly redress such deviations from perfection in one fell
swoop (Simmons 2010). When contemplating two or more possible
improvements to a less than ideal status quo, ideal theory might well
fail to provide us with a reliable guide to ranking them against one
another.
3.3 Deliberation as necessary adjunct of theory


It is also doubtful that any high level philosophical theory can be
fruitfully “applied” directly so as to yield univocal
answers to complex problems of professional practice and public
policy.  As Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson have persuasively argued
(1998), whichever theory we happen to embrace—whether it be any
flavor of utilitarianism, contractarianism, or natural law—will
eventually run out of gas before it reaches the level of concrete
decision making required by practical ethics. In most cases, the
theorist will have to reluctantly conclude that several policy options
are sufficiently just according to their preferred theory, and then
rely on a procedural-political solution afforded by some variant of
so-called deliberative democracy. Perhaps the most impressive case for
the limits of philosophical theory and the necessity of a procedural
supplement is made by philosopher Norman Daniels, whose work on the
theory of just health care has constituted an attempt, sustained over
several decades, to develop an explicitly Rawlsian account of just
access to health care and the social determinants of health. Although
Daniels at first held out the hope that his theory, based upon a
robust account of equal opportunity, could provide the requisite
guidance for social policies bearing on access to health care and
rationing, he now explicitly acknowledges that philosophical theory is
not sufficiently fine-grained for such concrete policy making and must
be supplemented by justly structured political deliberation (Daniels
1996, 144–75; Daniels 2007, ch. 4).
3.4 Tension between some versions of high theory and democracy


Another problem with assigning a central role to high theory in
clinical and policy-oriented bioethics emerges from the tension between
the often rigorous and arcane formulations of high theory and the norms
ideally governing a democratic polity. As Rawls has persuasively
argued, publicity should be a fundamental norm governing the basic law
and policy of a democratic society (Rawls 1971/1999). Those norms
establishing the basic structure of rights and entitlements should be
capable of public articulation and acceptance by people of ordinary
intelligence with restricted leisure time and inclination for
theoretical pursuits. In addition to ruling out so-called
“government house utilitarianism”—i.e., versions of
utilitarianism that provide ultimate justification for law and policy
but dare not speak their own name in public—this publicity
requirement would also preclude justifications that could be
comprehended and accepted only by an elite class of philosophical
theoreticians (Bertram 1997). Thus, even if in theory, as it were, a
theory could be developed that most closely approximated the ideal
demands of morality and justice, but was incomprehensible to the
average person lacking the requisite background in the esoteric
intricacies of, e.g., decision theory, such a theory could not count,
notwithstanding its intrinsic virtues, as an ideal norm for any
democratic society. Since ex hypothesi its citizens do not
understand it, they could not accept and consent to it speaking in
their own names. They would perforce have to rely on the expertise of
others, thus defeating the purpose of democracy, which requires that
the basic principles of social cooperation be addressable to each and
every person of normal capabilities.


This point about the tension between abstruse ethical theory and the
requirements of doing bioethics in a democracy shows that one need not
be a theory skeptic in order to simultaneously demote the place of high
theory within bioethics and to substitute for it various modes of
thought, such as versions of principlism, casuistry and narrative, that
are closer to the ground and more in touch with common moral
understandings (London 2001). As we shall see, some particularists
argue against high normative theory on the ground that it is either
impossible (Dancy 2006) or of little value. While I do not intend to
affirm or deny the substance of this kind of theory skepticism here, it
should be noted in passing that one can do high level theory in
one's spare time and attach great value to it, while still
maintaining that it should not be deployed in practical domains such as
bioethics.
3.5 Vaulting theories and moral pluralism


The final problem with appeals to high philosophical theory to be
mentioned here applies only to that subset of theories resembling
vault-like structures held together by a small number of key
principles, such as the Kantian categorical imperative or the principle
of utility. Such theories have a tendency to pave over the manifest
complexity of our moral lives in order to make the world safe for one
or two principles. When confronted with values or principles of
ordinary morality that cannot be easily explained by such favored
philosophical principles, or that appear to contradict them, the
theorist is often driven to concoct explanations that have all the
immediate plausibility of Ptolemaic epicycles, a discredited, Rube
Goldberg account of planetary motion prior to
 Copernicus.[5]
In discussing the
problem of global hunger, for example, Peter Singer has been confronted
directly by a contradiction between his version of impartial
utilitarianism and common morality's permissiveness for favoring
kith and kin (Singer 2004). Should we reduce ourselves to the level of
marginal utility in the course of assisting the distant needy, as the
theory would dictate, or can we spend large amounts of our income to
support our ailing parents in decent nursing homes, as common morality
would grant? Utilitarians often try to finesse such objections by means
of various rule-based strategies—e.g., all of us will
ultimately be better off if we are allowed to favor close relatives in
certain circumstances—but such attempts to “save the
phenomena” of ordinary morality often lack plausibility. As
Bernard Williams once famously noted, in such circumstances
consequentialists usually have “one thought too many”
(Williams 1973).


In sum, then, an approach to practical ethics founded upon high
ethical theory—and especially on theories exhibiting a
vault-like structure—has proven to be a non-starter for
bioethics, especially at the levels of clinical consultation and social
policy formation. Let us now examine the antithesis of reliance upon
high theory: viz., the movement of anti-theory in bioethics.
4. The case for anti-theory in bioethics


At the other extreme, bioethics has witnessed the emergence of
several interesting varieties of anti-theory, including various strains
or combinations of casuistry, narrative ethics, feminism, and
pragmatism. Although each of these alternative methodological
approaches features more moderate variants that reserve a legitimate
place for moral principles and even for some kinds of theory, their
stronger anti-theory incarnations unite in rejecting any justificatory
role either for high moral theory or mid-level moral principles.


Whereas theorists tend to favor top-down, deductivist modes of
thinking, the anti-theorists embrace bottom-up (but not too far up)
modalities of thought, such as common law jurisprudence in which the
factual particularities of the case take center stage (Arras 1990).
Whereas theorists tend to emphasize the capacity of our ordinary moral
experience to be neatly ordered and systematized, the anti-theorists
emphasize the cultural embeddedness, particularities, and ineradicable
untidiness of our moral lives (Elliott 1999). And whereas theorists
aspire to construct symmetrical cathedrals of normative thought, the
anti-theorists tend to conceive of the moral life as Wittgenstein
conceived of language itself, i.e., as a haphazardly evolving city
consisting of a maze of ever-expanding little streets, alleyways
and
 squares.[6]


According to Robert K. Fullinwider (2007), a partisan of the
anti-theoretical wing of practical ethics, the right way to think about
public policy is to think about public policy, not about metaphysics,
epistemology, or normative theory. He believes that, apart from
training in clear analytical thinking, most of the contents of the
philosopher's standard-issue toolkit are decidedly ill-suited to
the task of practical ethics. Dismissing applied moral theory as
“an occupational hazard” of philosophers, Fullinwider
wishes to resurrect and redeem the approach to moral problems shared by
the much-maligned ancient sophists and early modern (Jesuit) casuists,
an approach defined by scrupulous attention to context and detail,
rhetorical persuasiveness, sympathetic comprehension of social and
institutional practices, an aversion to systematic reasoning, and
insouciance (or downright hostility) towards moral theory. Dismissing
philosophical theory as “cloudland,” Fullinwider argues
that common sense morality and actual social practices, positive laws,
and institutions should form the basis of practical ethics and social
criticism.
4.1 Strongly particularist casuistry


Perhaps the most promising of these anti-theoretical movements in
bioethics has been the revival of casuistry at the hands of Stephen
Toulmin and Albert Jonsen (1998). According to this rehabilitated form
of casuistry, the greatest confidence in our moral judgments resides
not at the level of theory, where we endlessly disagree, but rather at
the level of the case, where our intuitions often converge without the
benefit of theory. More precisely, moral certitude (or our best
approximation thereof) is to be found in so-called paradigm cases,
where our intuitions are most strongly reinforced. Moral analysis of a
given situation begins, then, with a scrupulous inventory of the
particular facts of the case—i.e., the who, what, where, how
much, for how long, etc.—on which our judgments so often
eventually turn. This nexus of particulars is then compared with the
details operative in one or more paradigm cases—i.e.,
clear-cut examples of right or wrong conduct. In bioethics, many of
these paradigms are famous legal cases, such as the case of Karen
Quinlan in the area of termination of treatment, or the infamous
Tuskegee syphilis study in the area of research ethics. The farther
the present case takes us from the decisive features of the paradigm,
the less confidence we may have in our judgments. And so we traverse
the moral landscape by means of triangulating between the present case
and related paradigm cases. Eventually, as we discover in the
analogous common law tradition, we end up working our way through many
related cases over time, and along the way generate a sophisticated
typology of cases and governing paradigms that provide us with a rich
repository of values for social criticism. As Fullinwider observes,
our manifest need to organize and systematize our ethical thinking,
and to give good reasons to each other, can be fully met by this kind
of casuistry instead of theory.


Importantly, bioethical casuists contend that their method of moral
reasoning, which hovers very close to the ground, offers us better
chances of reaching agreement with people of very different religious
or theoretical persuasions, and is thus ideally suited to resolving
clinical or policy disputes in a pluralistic, democratic society
(Sunstein 1996). Looking back on his experience with the first
Presidential-level commission on research ethics, Stephen Toulmin noted
that the commissioners were often able to forge agreement on some
contentious issues—for example, research on prisoners and
children—even though they never would have agreed on the deepest
theoretical/religious reasons animating their respective positions
(Toulmin 1982).


For strongly anti-theoretical casuists like Stephen Toulmin, the
suspicion of theory extends even to mid-level bioethical principles,
which, he argues, serve no justificatory function. In contrast to
mainstream bioethical thinkers like Beauchamp and Childress—and
even in contrast to more mainstream casuists, like his co-author,
Albert Jonsen (1995)—for whom justification involves, inter alia,
bringing actions or policies under various specified ethical principles
or maxims, Toulmin contends that moral principles serve only an
heuristic function; that is, they serve primarily to remind us of
salient features of past decisions. Principles are, as it were, the
ribbon we wrap around decisions we have already come to on the basis of
particularistic casuistical reasoning.
4.2 Epistemological moral particularism


It is precisely on this point that hard-core bioethical casuistry
converges with the epistemology of moral particularism as forcefully
elaborated in the work of Jonathan Dancy (2006, 2009). According to
Dancy, theories that accord an important justificatory role to moral
principles, as most methodological approaches in bioethics do, wrongly
assume that right- or wrong-making features of various situations must
remain constant from one case to another. For example, if a physician
lies to a patient, and if we regard that lying as telling against the
morality of her action, we assume that lying will be a wrong-making
element in any and all future cases. While many theorists who embrace
the importance of principles in moral argument (e.g., W.D. Ross,
Beauchamp and Childress, et al.) concede that the weight of
any given principle may vary tremendously from one set of facts to
another, moral particularists like Dancy go farther in denying that the
moral valence of any particular element must remain constant
from one case to another. In other words, they would contend that in
some situations lying might be positively good, not merely a bad to be
outweighed by some other element of the situation, so a general rule or
principle against lying would inevitably be both overbroad and
insufficiently attentive to context.


For strong particularists and hard-core bioethical casuists, then,
justification in ethics will not depend upon bringing a set of facts
under a suitably interpreted general principle; rather, justification
will be a matter of all the discrete elements of a particular decision
fitting together or “adding up” holistically in the right
way. In some cases, lying will have a positive moral valence, while in
others, truth-telling may have a negative valence; everything depends
upon the particular constellation of circumstances presented by the
case. At least with regard to the business of moral justification,
then, there's no room for generalizations of any sort within this
kind of strong particularist epistemology. Justification will thus tend
to rely upon narrative or sensitive perception rather than logical
argument; indeed, Dancy frowns upon “browbeating” people
with appeals to moral principle. We thus arrive at the most extreme
form of moral particularism. Although this view of morality is
obviously a meta-ethical theory, it is a theory that could pretty much
rule out the entirety of normative ethical theory, and most of what
passes for theory within bioethics as well.
5. Some problems for the strong casuistry / anti-theory  position


Eschewing high theory in bioethics does not necessarily commit us to
a strongly particularistic variant of casuistry. As it developed
historically, casuistry has always concerned itself with the proper
application or interpretation of moral principles or maxims to
difficult cases. Developed as it was in the context of highly
deontological religious ethical systems with strong rules against
lying, taking innocent life, etc., casuistry's primary task has
been to adjudicate between such rules or principles in complicated
cases where they conflict or their application is unclear.
Historically, at least, the task of casuistry has thus been to
interpret conflicting moral principles within the prism of individual
“cases of conscience,” not to abolish principles or maxims
as sources of moral justification (Arras 1998, Jonsen 1995).


It is also extremely unlikely that casuistry could be developed into
a completely freestanding method without any connection to moral
principles or a larger ethical vision. As an analogical method of
thinking, casuistry attempts to extend the judgments reached in
so-called paradigm cases to new cases that present somewhat different
fact patterns. The casuists' persistent questions are: (1)
“Is this new case (X) more like paradigm Y or paradigm Z?”
and (2) “If the present case better fits within the orbit of
paradigm Y than Z, is the fit with Y close enough to confer confidence
in our moral judgment?” Showing that X bears more resemblance to
Y than to Z means that an interpretation of the present case as falling
within the analogical sphere of Y will provide us with the best
justification for our present action. Our confidence in this analogical
process stems from our confidence that the moral principle(s) embedded
in Y extend to the present case, notwithstanding a certain number of
factual differences. As the factual differences mount, we might
conclude that the principle still holds, but does so only weakly, with
less confidence. And at a certain point, the differences may become so
great that the original principle animating our judgment in Y loses its
justifying force entirely, at which point we begin reaching for another
paradigm.


The crucial point here is that analogical reasoning is not
self-directed. It requires principles or maxims, a sense of
what's ethically relevant, or a background moral vision of some
sort in order to give it direction. If we think of casuistry as an
engine of moral justification, it is natural to ask about the steering
wheel that provides a sense of direction to our analogical reasoning.
In the most influential version of casuistry practiced today, as
articulated by Albert Jonsen (1995), moral principles or
generalizations provide this sense of direction. Paradigm cases are
defined here as those cases in which a given principle applies most
clearly, straightforwardly, and powerfully. To the extent that we are
at all able to approximate certainty in moral matters, it will be in
the context of a strong match between a principle and a paradigmatic
set of facts. Generalizations or principles also provide us with the
crucially important understanding of what's morally relevant and
why, which drives analogical reasoning forward. In conceding these
pivotal roles to moral principles, Jonsen both distanced himself from
Toulmin's more radically particularistic brand of casuistry and
softened the differences between casuistry and its principal
methodological rival, the principlism of Beauchamp and
 Childress.[7]


What then to make of Dancy's particularistic, anti-principled,
and anti-theoretical moral epistemology that appears to pose such a
threat to business as usual in bioethics? Although this isn't the
place for a full-blown examination of Dancy's subtle and
philosophically sophisticated
 position,[8]
we can sound a couple of cautionary
observations. First, we can all agree with Dancy that sound moral
judgment depends upon the particularities of moral situations in all
their individuality and complexity. Blundering into a situation armed
with inflexible and invariant moral principles that must hold
everywhere and always in the same way, no matter what the facts on the
ground, is, we can concede to Dancy, a big mistake, although
identifying actual theorists who are guilty of such ham-handed
blundering might prove to be a challenge.


Second, however, it is unclear that Dancy's reliance upon
nuanced moral perception and narrative epistemology can really provide
us with a plausible, let alone serviceable, notion of moral
justification. If someone asks us for a moral justification of our
stand on a particular issue, they are most likely going to be
unsatisfied with such responses as: “All the facts just seemed to
me to add up in a way that yields this conclusion,” or “My
heightened skills of moral perception indicate that this is the correct
judgment to make about this particular constellation of facts.”
Instead, we will most likely want to hold out for some sort of
inference or argument that moves from some sort of moral generalization
(e.g., “lying is wrong”) to an all-things-considered
judgment about this particular instance of lying (which might gain
justificatory support from other elements of the situation) (Lance and
Little 2006, Little 2001).


Third, the distance between Dancy's anti-principlist position and the
standard approach to moral principles taken by, e.g., W.D. Ross and
Beauchamp-Childress, is in practice not that great, and the remaining
differences tend to tell in favor of the latter position rather than
the former. Let us recall that the standard view of principles in
bioethics, following Ross, is that various elements of action (e.g.,
the fact that an action involved a lie or cruelty) might well retain
the same valence from one situation to another – i.e., lying
will be a bad-making consideration in all cases—but that their
weight will indeed vary from one situation to another, depending upon
the facts. So it is quite possible to imagine cases where the
wrong-making element of telling a lie might be vastly outweighed by
other good-making considerations. (Think of the case of the Nazis
banging on your door, asking about Jews you've been harboring.) In
cases of this sort, Dancy's strong particularist epistemology will
reach the same result, and only for a slightly different reason. While
he would discern no negative valence in such an act of lying
(“What Jews?”) and would instead see a positive valence,
the Ross-Beauchamp-Childress approach would ascribe a negative valence
to any act of lying, but would assign zero weight to that element in
coming to the conclusion that lying is permissible in this particular
context due to a host of countervailing positive factors.


Pragmatically, then, so long as the defenders of principles remain
sensitive to context, it seems there is little, if anything, to be
gained by embracing strong particularism, but perhaps something of
value may be lost. Again, according to the strong particularist, the
valence of any contextual element is not fixed in any way outside of
particular contexts. Considerations that have told in favor of past
actions might tell against other actions in the future. Although Dancy
concedes that some properties of actions (e.g., lying, killing) may
consistently present themselves to us as having a more or less stable
valence, he denies that this sort of inductively derived pattern
carries with it any justificatory force. Some particularists are
prepared to bite this bullet, steadfastly maintaining that such
“default valences” are mere summaries of moral knowledge
restricted to specific past acts of moral decision making, wherein all
the factors “added up” in a certain way; but others lament
the loss of explanatory power resulting from such a dismissal of
generalizations. For this rival particularist camp, principles and
moral generalizations give us real knowledge about certain types of
action and what makes them right or wrong (Lance and Little 2006,
Little 2001). While conceding to Dancy that the standard conditions
that make them right or wrong may not hold in aberrant or idiosyncratic
cases (e.g., lying in the Nazi case above, or perhaps killing a friend
about to be burned to death by implacable enemies, as in the film
version of Last of the Mohicans), these more moderate
particularists maintain that certain properties of action, under
standard circumstances, give us real knowledge that can and should form
the basis of inferences and arguments in particular cases.


These more moderate particularists, troubled by Dancy's moral
epistemology, would also include the advocates of “theory
modest” casuistry in bioethics. His brand of strong particularism
would threaten not only the methodology of standard issue principlists
like Beauchamp and Childress, but it would also trouble moderate
casuists like Albert Jonsen, whose method commits them to the value of
consistency in analogically passing from one case to another (G.
Dworkin 2006). If a certain general feature (e.g., deception) figured
prominently in a paradigm case, if we decided that case the way we did
because of the presence of that feature, then, the other key factors
being more or less equal, we should decide future cases in a similar
fashion. Jonsen's moderate casuistry requires consistency in such
cases, and appeals to consistency constitute a reasoned argument
offered to those who might initially disagree with our judgment in the
instant case. Were Dancy correct, consistency would drop out entirely
as a moral reason to do anything, and moral argument would be replaced
with the ability to correctly perceive a given set of situational
features as “adding up” in just the right way (whatever
that is).


In sum, then, the anti-theory position in both its strong casuist
and strong particularist incarnations is problematic. Although we can
and should learn from the anti-theorist critique, and pay special heed
to its insistence upon the importance of particular circumstances for
moral judgment, the most uncompromising versions of casuistry and
particularism threaten to replace reasoned argument by the delicate and
nuanced perceptions of sensitive moral judges. Many will find this to
be a deficient or at least incomplete mode of moral justification.
6. Towards a “theory modest” bioethics: Defining “theory” down


Having duly noted the appeal and shortcomings both of high moral
theory and of particularist anti-theory, it is time to move toward a
more plausible middle ground marking the intersection of bioethics and
philosophical theory. Is there then a role for theory in bioethics,
and, if so, what kinds of theory?
6.1 Nonideal theory in bioethics


In addition to ideal political theory, which provides us with an
objective to aim at, we also need nonideal theory, which takes account
of messy realities on the ground in charting a practical course towards
that objective. Unlike the ideal theorist, the nonideal theorist must
consider whether a proposed policy is:

Sufficiently gradual in its proposed transition from a less than fully
just society to a more just state of affairs. For example, does it
abruptly pull the rug out from under people who have heretofore
reasonably relied on less than fully just social practices in ordering
their lives? (Simmons, 2010)
Likely to be effective as part of a strategy towards the elimination of
injustice.
Politically acceptable—e.g., a single-payer health system might
be ideally just and efficient, but will it be acceptable to the public
and the wide variety of powerful interest groups within a particular
country?
Directed at remedying those social injustices with the greatest
priority. (Simmons 2010, Powers-Faden 2006)

 Notwithstanding its manifest importance for practical ethics,
there has been relatively little self-conscious scholarly work on
nonideal justice theory in either political philosophy or
bioethics. The need for such theorizing is perhaps most obvious and
compelling in the area of global bioethics, where biomedical research
is conducted against a backdrop of appalling disparities between rich
and poor nations. What norms should govern the conduct of
international research (and post-trial access to benefits flowing
therefrom) when the subjects of such research often lack access to
even the most rudimentary forms of health care and public health?
Should a single ethical standard representing perfect justice be
applied within rich and poor nations alike (Macklin 2004)? Or will the
attempt to impose rules required by perfect justice backfire, making
the worst off even worse off than they might have been under policies
that acknowledged the need to recognize and compensate for past and
present injustices (Wertheimer forthcoming)?


One important exception to the neglect of nonideal theory within
bioethics is provided by the work of Madison Powers and Ruth Faden
(2006). In developing a theory of social justice for deployment in the
areas of health care and public health, these authors begin with an
account of human well being, similar to the capabilities approach of
Sen and Nussbaum, but then insist that unjust inequalities provide the
real world context in which questions of justice arise for us. For
them, the “job of justice” in our nonideal world is to
figure out how basic social structures act independently or, more
usually, in combination to thwart the development of human well-being.
Determining priorities for health care and public health requires both
normative and empirical studies bearing on the cumulative effects of
various structural inequalities on prospects for human flourishing, and
thus cannot be accomplished within the ambit of standard-brand ideal
theories of justice.
6.2 Nonideal modalities of argument


Bioethics should also be nonideal in terms of its assumptions about
those who are engaged in the public bioethical discussion. As we saw
above in Sec. 3.4, there is potential tension between the quest for
truth in philosophical theory and the requirements of democracy. The
reasons we offer in favor of our basic social arrangements must not be
so esoteric and technical that citizens of average intelligence and
normal capacities cannot comprehend them. Democracy requires
comprehensible rationales for its basic norms as a matter of respect
for each person. “Rule by experts” is undemocratic insofar
as it fails to show such respect.


Although this kind of publicity argument is perhaps strongest when
it comes to justifying and articulating the basic rules of social
cooperation, what Rawls called the “basic structure” of
society, it also plausibly extends to the full range of issues that
encompass the field of bioethics. Patients, families, potential
research subjects, health care providers, public health officials, and
the public itself generally lack both the specialized intellectual
skills of philosophical theoreticians and the time and inclination to
develop such skills; yet, as members of a democratic polity, all those
engaged in the activities of medicine, nursing, biomedical research,
and public health deserve a set of policies whose respective rationales
can be explained to them in language that they can understand (London
2001). This is yet another reason why clinical and policy-oriented
bioethics should not be grounded in some versions of high philosophical
theory. Just as theorists must take account of various nonideal
factors, such as the existence of deeply entrenched social inequalities
within society as we know it, so too must we take account of the fact
that most people in society lack the time, inclination, and perhaps the
intellectual aptitude to engage in rigorous philosophical theorizing.
The intellectual moorings of public bioethics should, then, be sought
primarily in modes of thought and policy analysis that are more down to
earth and publicly accessible. Further, deeper justifications in terms
of esoteric philosophical theory would, of course, be welcome, but only
insofar as they remained consistent in principle with public
“mid-level” justifications of the same policies.
6.3 Convergence on method


It is no accident, then, that since its inception in the 1960s and
‘70s, the field of bioethics has largely eschewed both high moral
theory and direct application of ideal political philosophy. Instead,
most of the contributors to this field, including most
bioethicist-philosophers, have embraced one or more methods designed,
in the clumsy but accurate phrase of Cass Sunstein (1996), to
facilitate “incompletely theorized agreements” on moral
problems in medicine, public health, and biomedical research. These
mid-level methods include the principlism of Beauchamp and Childress;
the casuistry of Jonsen and Baruch Brody; the focus on “narrative
ethics” and interpretive techniques championed by Howard Brody
(2002), Katherine Montgomery (Hunter) (1991), and Rita Charon (2006);
the virtue ethics of Pellegrino (1993) and Drane (1995; the pragmatism
of Frank Miller and Joseph Fins (1996); and the feminism of Margaret
Little (1996), Susan Sherwin (2008) and many
 others.[9]
Although casuistry, narrative,
virtue ethics, pragmatism, and feminism first emerged in contemporary
debates as challengers to the regnant method of principlism during the
1980s and-90s, each claiming supremacy over both principlism and other
methods, the boundaries between these rival methodologies have blurred
significantly in the intervening years, so much so that all of these
methods might now be said to be mutually complementary, non-exclusive
modes of moral inquiry for doing ethics in the public domain.
(Beauchamp 1995, Arras 2007)


The convergence of all these initially rival methodologies into a
widely shared mid-level approach to bioethical problems has been
facilitated by two developments in the literature. First, each faction
has made a convincing case for its particular methodological emphasis.
This has required each approach to acknowledge or incorporate elements
drawn from other methodologies and, accordingly, to soften its claims
to methodological supremacy. For example, the casuistry of Jonsen and
Toulmin arose as a robust particularist challenge to the principlism of
Beauchamp and Childress. They took the latter to task for the
abstractness and deductivism allegedly on display in early editions of
the Principles of Biomedical Ethics, arguing instead for a
case-based, “bottom up” approach to ethics that resembled
the Anglo-American common law both in its emphasis upon concrete
particulars and in its conception of principles as emerging from our
engagement with cases. This challenge led Beauchamp and Childress to
concede the important role of particularized case judgments in the
identification and specification of moral principles. Following this
critical exchange, the avatars of an allegedly deductive principlism
acknowledged a two-way relationship between moral principles and case
judgments. Conversely, the exchange with principlism led the proponents
of casuistry to soften their initial claims that bioethics should be
theory free and that principles only played a heuristic (but not
justificatory) role in moral judgment. Both sides emerged from this
confrontation agreeing upon a critical role for ethical principles and
maxims, and upon a constructive role for case judgments in the
development and refinement of principles. The differences between these
rival methodologies now appeared to be more a matter of emphasis than
of principle (or the lack thereof) (Kuczewski 1998).
6.4 Converging on reflective equilibrium


The second major development leading to a convergence on a
theory-modest method within bioethics was the widespread adoption of
reflective equilibrium as a widely shared method of moral justification
(Arras 2007). Initially deployed by Rawls in the design of his
contractualist “original position” in political philosophy,
this method attempts to harmonize all the elements contributing to
moral judgment, including intuitions about cases, moral principles,
moral theories, and background theories of moral agency and social
organization. Reflective equilibrium is “holistic” and
non-foundationalist insofar as it emphasizes the importance of all
these disparate elements fitting together in a satisfactory way. In
contrast to earlier methodological formulations within bioethics that
gave foundational status to, say, moral principles or intuitions about
paradigm cases, reflective equilibrium finds justification through the
coherence of all these elements, each of which impinges on all the
others in a multi-directional dialectic. To simplify just a bit,
principles and moral theories function within this method to organize,
explain, criticize, and extend our intuitive responses to cases, but
those very responses can, in turn, help us to amend and sharpen our
principles and theories when they prove inadequate to the complexities
of emerging cases.


One important implication of adopting the method of reflective
equilibrium is a blurring of the allegedly sharp boundary between
practical ethics and ethical theory. Indeed, one common rationale for
inquiring into the relationship between bioethics and ethical theory is
the widespread presumption that these two activities must operate
within entirely different spheres: ethical theory addresses fundamental
questions at a high level, divorced from the messy reality of everyday
practice, while bioethics is thought merely to apply the ready-made
findings of ethical theory to practical problems. If we are guided by a
holistic method like reflective equilibrium, however, we should expect
theory to shed critical light on our responses to cases, but we should
also expect reflection on cases to shape the sort of principles and
theory we eventually develop. Ethical reflection is a two-way street
(Beauchamp 1984, Brock 1996).


Reflective equilibrium can, however, be interpreted in two different
ways, each of which yields a different gloss on the relationship
between bioethics and moral theory (Arras 2007). On a narrow reading,
reflective equilibrium encompasses our intuitions about cases and the
moral principles we use to explain, organize, critique, and extend such
intuitions. According to some philosopher-bioethicists, the complete
set (so far) of intuitions and principles in equilibrium just
is what we should mean by “moral theory” (DeGrazia
1996, B. Brody 1988). Accordingly denominated “narrow reflective
equilibrium” (NRE), this gloss accounts for much scholarly and
critical commentary within bioethics. One salient example was on
display in the famous “Baby Doe” controversy of the
mid-1980s in which the Reagan Justice Department attempted to impose a
“non-discrimination principle” upon health care workers in
neonatal intensive care units. Subsequent commentary debated the
appropriateness of applying a principle governing discrimination
against racial minorities and women in education, jobs, and housing to
decisions to terminate medical care for some extremely ill or malformed
newborns. Many physicians and bioethicists contended that the
nondiscrimination principle was far too blunt an instrument to do
justice to such enormously delicate and complex cases, and sought to
amend the moral principles governing such cases in a way that would
capture such complexity (Rhoden and Arras 1985).


On a much broader and ambitious reading, reflective equilibrium
encompasses not just sets of intuitive responses to cases and matching
moral principles, but also a reasoned choice among the full panoply of
live options in moral and political theory, as well as background
theories of human agency, personhood, and the workings of social
systems (Daniels 1996). The rationale for buttressing NRE with these
additional moral, political and social theories is that a relatively
narrow focus upon our most confident intuitions and the principles that
organize and explain them could engender an uncritical provincialism in
our moral outlook. As the computer scientists put it, “Garbage
in, garbage
 out.”[10]
If many of our basic, most confidently held
moral intuitions are eventually rejected by subsequent generations as
fatally flawed—see, e.g., once dominant views denying social
equality to women, minorities, and gays—a moral system based
upon such intuitions might also be fatally flawed. Hence the need to
supplement our intuitions and organizing principles with the best
moral, political, and social theories we can muster. Holding our
intuitions, principles and corrective theories together in one coherent
body of beliefs amounts to “wide reflective equilibrium”
(WRE).


Since both narrow and wide reflective equilibrium posit a
relationship characterized by mutual dependency and critical tension
among our intuitions, principles, and theories, both methods would
effectively blur the alleged dichotomy between moral theory and
practical ethics. By engaging in practical ethics via reflective
equilibrium of any sort, we are already thereby engaging in a form of
ethical theorizing, albeit perhaps at a lower level of abstraction than
traditional high theory. But because WRE would have us choose among
various live options in moral and social theory, it would yield a
different kind of relationship between bioethics and theory. By
incorporating a reasoned choice among various moral and social theories
as part of its method of justification, WRE might provide independent
theoretical discipline to our intuitions and moral
 principles,[11]
but it does so
at the cost of vastly enlarging our methodological ambitions and the
complexity of the task at hand. Rather than simply redefining
“theory” as the modest result of NRE, WRE requires a
robust, critical role for many kinds of traditional moral, political,
and social theories in constraining the results of NRE, such as those
reached at the level of fields like bioethics.


Although WRE might well be the optimal method for the
ultimate justification of our moral judgments—i.e.,
the optimal method for Dworkin's Hercules—two problems loom
for it as a method of moral inquiry in practical ethics. First, if WRE
requires reasoned choices among various live options in moral,
political and social theory, this will no doubt reintroduce many of the
problems we have already canvassed with regard to using high moral
theory in bioethics. Were the constraints of WRE taken seriously by
practitioners of bioethics, we would have to postpone judgment on the
particular case or policy question before us until we had reached
closure on the best theories governing ethics, politics, and social
organization. Needless to say, this could result in a very long delay.
It would also be a contentious delay, since the likelihood of achieving
widespread agreement on any version of high theory would be low. WRE
would most likely reintroduce the same social fissures at the level of
theory that we have already witnessed at the level of intuitions and
moral principles (Arras 2007).


Second, the most credible and philosophically sophisticated glosses
on WRE have literally nothing to say about exactly how we should go
about making choices from among the various live options in political,
moral, and social theory. They don't give us criteria for judging
what an optimal theory would look like, and they therefore make no
effort to rank the various theories against one another. In other
words, the criteria for choosing among various theories would have to
be drawn from sources outside the ambit of WRE, which, in turn, casts
doubt upon its potential as a stand-alone method of moral and political
thought, at least at the level of practice.
6.4.1 The role of mid-level theories


The field of bioethics has been fertile ground for the development of
relatively modest, mid-level theories on a vast range of topics. In
contrast to the vaulting structures so disfavored by Annette
Baier—i.e., grand theories held together by one or two norms
placed as keystones—most mid-level theorizing in bioethics more
closely resembles what Baier calls a “mosaic” approach to
theory-building, which starts closer to the ground and erects, brick
by brick, theoretical structures of modest scope (1994). Another
illuminating metaphor for this kind of theorizing is Claude
Lévi-Strauss's notion of “bricolage,”
i.e., working by hand at odd jobs with whatever resources happen to be
available within a repertoire of inherited tools and assorted
bric-a-brac. Whereas Lévi-Strauss viewed the bricoleur
as a good example of the so-called “savage mind,” in
contrast with the modern mind-set of the engineer, Jeffrey Stout has
plausibly argued that every work of moral philosophy, great or modest,
involves some degree of bricolage. Like the handyman
surrounded by a garage full of tools accumulated for past purposes,
the moral philosopher takes stock of the problem at hand, surveys her
shelves for available conceptual resources, and then attempts to solve
the problem by taking things apart, reordering, culling out, weighing,
specifying, splicing in, and putting them all back together. (Stout
1988, p. 75) Philosophers in bioethics are bricoleurs par
excellence.


Theories of limited scope, built up from materials at hand, play an
important conceptual and normative function in debates over abortion
and euthanasia (Dworkin 1993) and over such pivotal concepts as
“coercion,” “commodification,”
“harm,” and “exploitation” in the broad areas
of research and reproductive ethics. In response to a good deal of
sloppy criticism of new reproductive technologies and research in
developing countries, usually claiming that various practices should
be morally condemned for allegedly being harmful, coercive or
exploitative, words that seem to have become all-purpose terms of
abuse for disfavored practices, philosophers have engaged in fruitful
mid-level theorizing about the meaning and moral import of such
concepts. Most often, this kind of theorizing gets done without any
appeals to ultimate high-level moral theory. It begins by taking stock
of a problem at hand; the theorist then looks around for available
conceptual resources for shedding light on it. Sometimes those
resources will be culled from high theory (e.g., the Kantian notion of
respect for persons or Parfit's non-identity problem), but more often
than not they will be inspired by philosophers such as Joel Feinberg
(1984–1988) and Alan Wertheimer (forthcoming), who do not wear
their ultimate philosophical allegiances on their respective
sleeves. The analysis grows out of attentive descriptions of ordinary
linguistic usage and common moral and legal responses to various
situations, and then proceeds to ask exactly what it is about harmful,
coercive or exploitative behaviors that should merit our moral
disapprobation, and under what circumstances (Emanuel and Hawkins
2008). This kind of theorizing is both unavoidable and indispensible
in a field like bioethics, and it has done much to clarify and advance
often heretofore muddled public debates; but it need not claim
allegiance to any particular denomination of high moral theory.


Another important example of this kind of modest theorizing is
provided by philosophical reflections on the theme of “equal
opportunity” as related to the allocation of health care and the
social determinants of health (Daniels 2007). Although Norman
Daniels's influential account of “just health” is
obviously inspired by Rawlsian political theory, and although his
particular gloss on equal opportunity also happened to be favored by
Rawls, Daniels notes that one need not be a Rawlsian to agree with his
theory. All that is required to reach his conclusions, he suggests, is
a robust principle of equal opportunity, one that is compatible with a
variety of political theories and finds broad (though not universal)
acceptance in society at large.


Mid-level theorizing about equal opportunity also plays a prominent
role in important contemporary debates about social policy on
disability and the ethics of genetic enhancement . The latter topic 
is especially interesting because it provides
us with a good example of how bioethics can pose a constructive
challenge to traditional understandings in ethical-political theory
and, thus, a good example of how influence between bioethics and
theory runs in both directions. As Daniels and his colleagues have
demonstrated, the advent of genetic technologies and the promise of
direct intervention on the human genome raise a host of interesting
challenges to our standard notions of equal opportunity
(Buchanan et al. 2000). Now that our basic human capabilities
are slowly becoming matters of deliberate choice rather than the
random results of the genetic lottery, we suddenly become morally
responsible for possible actions or omissions available to us. Should
we restrict our understanding of equality of opportunity to those
standard deficiencies in the social structure (e.g., sexism, racism)
that inhibit people from enjoying opportunities for schooling,
employment, housing, etc.? Or should we expand the demands of equal
opportunity under the aegis of the new genetics to include the
possession of a normal (or perhaps enhanced) human genome? If some
people enjoy lesser life prospects due to lesser intelligence or an
unsightly appearance, why not intervene directly through genetic or
surgical technologies so as to even things out?


Many additional examples of helpful mid-level theorizing in
bioethics could be adduced and discussed at length here, but space
precludes a leisurely, comprehensive inventory. I shall, then, limit
myself here to just flagging several especially salient examples and
encouraging interested readers to consult the supplementary
document
 A Taxonomy of Theoretical Work in Bioethics, 
where many more examples of theory in bioethics are cited and
discussed.

Reflections on the nature and moral import of informed consent to
medical treatment and participation in research (Miller and Wertheimer
2009, Manson and O'Neill 2007, Blustein et al. 1999).
Roles of family in medical decision making (Nelson and Nelson
1995).
Theories focused on the ethics of research with human subjects and
the pivotal concept of “clinical equipoise” (Freedman
1987, Weijer 2003, Miller 2004, London 2007, Wertheimer
forthcoming).
Accounts of justice in international research ethics, bearing on what
researchers from developed nations owe to individuals and communities
at research sites in the developing world (Emanuel 2003, Macklin 2004,
Pogge 2008, London 2005, Wertheimer forthcoming).
Theories of suffering in the context of end-of-life care (Cassell
1991).
Accounts of personal identity and precedent autonomy developed in the
context of debates over the force of advance directives and terminal
care (Dworkin 1993, Dresser 1989, Rhoden 1988, Buchanan and Brock
1989).
Theorizing on priorities in health care allocation, focusing on the
prospects and limits of cost-effectiveness analysis (Brock, 2004).
Debates over the allocation of organs and their possible
commodification (Childress 1996, Murray 1996).
Philosophical reflection on the moral status of embryos in the context
of controversies surrounding abortion, embryo research, and parental
responsibilities for offspring (Steinbock 1996, Robertson 1996, Glover
2006).
development of a “population-based” ethic for public
health. (Powers and Faden 2006, Anand et al., 2006, Jennings and Arras
2010, Battin et al. 2009).
Feminist theories of abortion and reproductive technologies (Little
2003, Sherwin 2008).
Reflection on the ethics of enhancing human traits through genetic
manipulation (Glover 2006, Buchanan 2010, Green 2007, Harris 2007,
President's Council 2003).

7. Conclusion


Again, what's theory to bioethics, and bioethics to theory? As
we have seen all-too-well by now, there is no short answer to this
question. Everything depends upon how we characterize bioethics (i.e.,
as clinical, policy-oriented, or academic), and how we understand
theory: i.e., as high, vaulting theory, mid-level theorizing tailored
to specific problems, the result (or an element) of reflective
equilibrium, and so on. I suspect that the paradigm of high theory
inspires (or haunts) most anguished inquiries into the relationship
between practical ethics, including bioethics, and philosophical/moral
theory. But once we realize (1) that high theory, especially in its
non-pluralistic forms, is a spectacularly ill-suited medium for
bioethical reflection in the clinic and policy circles, and (2) that
ideal political theory, while providing us perhaps with a description
of Paradise Island, doesn't provide us with a map telling us how
to get there under nonideal conditions, then it becomes clear that
nonideal, mid-level theorizing is the site of the philosophical action
in bioethics and related
 fields.[12]
Understood in this more modest sense,
“theory” is a completely natural and should be an entirely
uncontroversial element of bioethics or of any practical ethical
reflection. Indeed, it's hard to imagine what the field would
look like without it.