Thomas Hill Green (1836–1882), political philosopher and radical,
temperance reformer, and the leading member of the British Idealist
movement. His principal writings are: ‘Essay on Christian
Dogma’ (CD), ‘The Conversion of Paul’ (CP),
‘Different Senses of “Freedom” as Applied to Will
and the Moral Progress of Man’ (DSF), ‘Faith’ (F),
‘Lecture on Liberal Legislation and Freedom of Contract’
(LF), ‘Incarnation’ (I), ‘Immortality’ (IM),
‘Justification by Faith’ (JF), ‘Lectures on the
Principles of Political Obligation’ (LPPO), ‘Metaphysic of
Ethics, Moral Psychology, Sociology or the Science of
Sittlichkeit’ (ME), Prolegomena to Ethics (PE),
‘Witness of God’ (WG), and ‘Word is Nigh Thee’
(WNT). The full references are given in the Bibliography.

 

1. Life


Thomas Hill Green was born on April 7, 1836 in Birkin, a tiny village
in the West Riding of Yorkshire, where his father was rector.
Together with his sisters and three brothers, Thomas was brought up by
a nanny following the death of his mother when he was only a year old.
He attended Rugby School between 1850 and 1855, having received his
earliest education from his father. Green was a lazy student, and
gained few academic or sporting distinctions. His fellow students,
including Henry Sidgwick, thought him serious, a character trait which
showed itself in his piety and earnest endorsement of philosophical
idealism (see Sidgwick's recollection of Green, in Tyler ed 2008,
pp.5–17).  In later life, Sidgwick and Green were forthright in
published criticisms of each other's work.  Sidgwick sought to clarify
his own reaction in the recollection that he sent to Charlotte Green
following Green's death: 
I ought not to omit to say that in those
later years I more than once had occasion to enter into public
controversy with him in reviews and articles: and — as I
afterwards learnt — my controversial manner gave offence to some
of his enthusiastic disciples.  But he himself never manifested the
least sense of offence by any written and spoken word: or ever changed
in the least degree for a moment the frank cordality of his
intercourse.  I was really in the wrong, this was magnanimous: in any
case, I feel it to be worthy of him and characteristic. (Tyler ed
2008, 16–17)
Green, for his part, was reported to have confided to his close
friend and later brother-in-law that “I can never think of him
but as the chubby pot-bellied little Rugby boy” (Symonds,
1968–69, vol. 2, p.774).


Green went up to Balliol College, Oxford in 1855 where he came under
the influence of Benjamin Jowett. Jowett had been one of the first to
bring a set of Hegel's writings to England, and it was through him
that, probably towards the end of his undergraduate years, Green
became enraptured by idealism. It will become clear that Green's
mature philosophical system has many affinities with the thought of
Fichte.  Yet, we do not know which idealists were having the greatest
influences on Green at this time. Nettleship records that Green read
Fichte as a young man: “The writers from whom he seems at this
time to have assimilated the most were Wordsworth, Carlyle, Maurice,
and probably Fichte in his lectures on the ‘nature’ and
‘vocation’ of ‘the scholar’ and of
‘man’” (Nettleship, p.xxv). (Nettleship records that
Green read more Fichte towards the end of his life, yet implies that
Green did not study him in depth at that time; see Nettleship,
pp.cxxv-cxxvi.) These influences helped Green to escape the baleful
influence of the British empiricist tradition of George Berkeley, John
Locke, David Hume and John Stuart Mill. He found particularly in
Hegelianism a justification for his instinctive egalitarianism, and
became firm friends with other students who were sympathetic to his
political radicalism, such as AV Dicey, John Nichol, and Edward
Caird. Soon Green was a leading member of the Old Mortality Club, a
radical university society founded by Nichol. Green's failure to apply
himself brought him a second class in Classical Moderations in 1857,
after which time he buckled down and earned a first in Literae
Humaniores in 1859 followed by a respectable third in law and
modern history six months later. He was made a college fellow towards
the end of 1860, having lectured in ancient and modern history earlier
in that year. His search for a career direction led him to act as an
assistant commissioner with the Schools Inquiry Commission in 1865 and
1866, after which time he returned to academic life at Balliol. His
first significant article appeared in 1866. ‘The Philosophy of
Aristotle’ marked the beginning of a number of Hegelian
contributions to many philosophical issues, in such works as the
‘Essay on Christian Dogma’ and ‘Popular Philosophy
in Its Relation to Life’ (both of which were later published in
the third volume of his Works). Green took charge of Balliol
Hall where reasonably priced accommodation was provided for poor and
mature students. His personal influence spread throughout the college
at this time and he taught many undergraduates who later achieved
fame, including Bernard Bosanquet, F. H. Bradley, R.  L. Nettleship
and Henry Scott Holland. In 1871, he married Charlotte Byron Symonds,
sister of his close friend John Addington Symonds. His famous
‘Introductions to Hume's Treatise of Human
Nature’ appeared in 1874. In 1866 he has been appointed to
a Balliol tutorship and in 1878 he was made Whyte's Professor of Moral
Philosophy.


Green had been involved in local politics for many years, through the
University (not least in the campaign to gain access for women to
degree-awarding programmes), temperance societies and the local Oxford
Liberal association.  During the passage of the Second Reform Act, he
campaigned for the franchise to be extended to all men living in
boroughs (all sane urban adult males not currently serving a jail
term).  In this sense, Green's position was more radical than that of
most other Advanced Liberals, including W.E. Gladstone and even John
Bright (nevertheless, one of Green's heroes).  He was also more
radical on this issue than John Stuart Mill (then Member of Parliament
for Westminster) in that Green did not advocate a property
qaulification for the vote.  (Green lagged behind Mill on the question
of votes for women though.) (See Tyler, 2006, chapter 3).)

 It was in the context of his Liberal party activities that in 1881
Green gave what became one of his most famous statements of his
liberal philosophy, the ‘Lecture on Liberal Legislation and
Freedom of Contract.’ At this time he was also lecturing on
religion, epistemology, ethics, and political philosophy.  Then, at
the height of his intellectual powers and academic career, Green died
from blood poisoning on March 15, 1882. Most of his major works were
published posthumously, including his lay sermons on Faith
and The Witness of God, the essay ‘On the Different
Senses of “Freedom” as Applied to Will and the Moral
Progress of Man’, Prolegomena to Ethics, Lectures
on the Principles of Political Obligation, and the ‘Lecture
on Liberal Legislation and Freedom of Contract’. In
addition to Green's friends from his academic life, approximately two
thousand local people attended his funeral.
2. Religious Thought


Developments in geology and evolutionary theory, as well as the
impact of Higher Criticism, led many mid-nineteenth century Christians
to question the doctrinal authority of the Church of England, and the
moral views and allegiances which it was purported to justify. Green's
pupil, Henry Scott Holland wrote of this crisis of faith and the
effects of Green's religious thought upon it.
[Many people came to believe that] Scientific Analysis held
the key to the universe. Under this intellectual dominion we had lost
all touch with the Ideals of life in Community. There was a dryness in
the Oxford air, and there was singularly little inspiration to be felt
abroad. We were frightened; we saw everything passing into the tyranny
of rational abstract mechanism … Then at last, the walls began
to break. A world of novel influences began to open to us.
Philosophically the change in Oxford thought and temper came about
mainly through the influence of T. H. Green. He broke for us the sway
of individualistic Sensationalism. He released us from the fear of
agnostic mechanism. He gave us back the language of self-sacrifice, and
taught us how we belonged to one another in the one life of high
idealism. We took life from him at its spiritual value. (quoted in
Carpenter, 1959, p. 483)


Even though Scott Holland and many others such as W. T. Davison saw
him as a potential saviour of England's religious life, Green was too
open to the unorthodox religious theories of such as Hegel, Strauss,
Baur, and Lotze, to accept the dogma of the Church of England. In fact
his own religious beliefs were so unorthodox that many people
questioned the propriety of calling him a Christian at all. One of the
main factors which antagonised believers was the depth of Green's
immanentism (Lidgett, 1897, pp. 325–348). Hence, Green's friend, Mrs.
Humphry Ward had to defend his position against sustained attacks from
William Gladstone who objected that “in proposing a substitute
for [Christianity], reached by reduction and negation, I think (forgive
me) you are dreaming the most visionary of all human dreams”
(quoted in Ward, p.xvi). Nettleship identified the key point: “To
the question which is sure to be asked by those who hear or read of
Green, Was he a christian? the answer must depend on what ‘to be
a christian’ means” (Nettleship, p.c).


One can begin to understand Green's mature religious thought via an
examination of his analysis of the history of Christian dogma. In his
very important Essay on Christian Dogma, Green characterised
the formulation of the creeds as an attempt to arrive at an
authoritative expression of those doctrines by which all Christians —
irrespective of time and place — should judge the varying
interpretations of their faith (CD 162). Yet Green objected that in
reality the creeds were not eternal truths, but devices employed by
humans to solve particular, historically contingent problems. More
specifically the creeds arose out of the need to convey the essence of
Christ's teaching once the life of Jesus passed from living memory. No
matter how pure the motives of their authors, the creeds actually did
more to legitimate the teachings of subsequent religious leaders than
they did to convey the timeless message of Jesus (CD 162–3).
Hence, the tradition of the Christian church, [-] though,
according to the original theory expressed by Tertullian, it had its
source in oral communications of Christ to his apostles, and was the
necessary complement, [-] soon came, by an insensible instinct of
self-preservation, to affiliate itself to them, and to refashion the
parent after the supposititious child's likeness. (CD 163)


The formalisation of Jesus' teaching transformed Christianity from a
fluid, developing, personal faith into a static theology authorised by
an ecclesiastical elite. Originally, Christianity had been
“penetrated to its object, as was then said, by revelation, as we
should say, by intuition, without the intervention of any system of
ideas” (CD 164). It had excluded theology — “a connected
system of ideas, each qualified by the other, each serving as a middle
term by which the rest are held together” (CD 164). Yet the
maintenance of the unity of a theological system necessitated the
dogmatic entrenchment of definite and authoritative interpretations of
Jesus' words. Such a shift altered fundamentally the Christian's
understanding of his relationships to other believers, to the church,
and to God. For example, Green observed in his lay sermon on
Faith that “[t]he death and resurrection of Christ
… became past events by which certain blessings had been
obtained for us, or divine testimony given to an authority claiming our
obedience” (F 257). In this way the creation of a theology caused
Christians to tend to look to church doctrine for spiritual guidance,
rather than looking to the inner voice of conscience. This helped
transform Christianity into a faith whose adherents saw themselves as
constrained to conceptualise their spirituality within a static
framework of authorised concepts and beliefs. This ensured that God
could only ever be conceived as external to the individual's highest
being, meaning that Christian truth could be held only in word
and not in power. It is for this reason that Green believed
that “[d]ogmatic theology is quite other than the Christian
life” (WG 238). He developed this line by arguing that the
transformation of the individual's spiritual intuition into the dogma
of the (human) church is akin to idolatry (F 257–60). In following
church dogma, the individual turns to the worship of a hypostatised
representation of God, rather than to his actual, dynamic presence in
the world.


The contrast between sight and faith is a crucial facet of Green's
religious thought. Whereas “sight” denotes the acceptance
of the divinity of Christ and the existence of God as a result of
physical evidence, “faith” can be characterised as belief
in Christ and God without the need for earthly signs: “the true
or highest faith [is] represented as that which by a purely spiritual
act takes Christ, as the manifestation of God, into the soul without
waiting for conviction by sensible signs” (F 253). Those who look
for miraculous signs of God's presence before they will believe can
only ever conceive of them as “mere wonders, not a medium for the
spirit that quickeneth” (F 255). Green regarded miracles as
unintelligible in the orthodox sense given to the idea of a miracle (CP
189). His position is essentially the same as St. Paul's. Whereas John
writes of miracles strengthening the belief of those who already
possess faith, Paul argues that miracles are the creation of
faith, rather than its cause or support. Indeed, “If we knew God
as we know anything else, if his nature had been revealed to us by
miraculous evidence of a kind with that which convinces us of matters
of fact, then would faith be no more faith” (F 268). Paul's
vision on the road to Damascus, for example, was only significant as a
revelation to his inward consciousness, and not to his senses (CD
165–7). Or again, “The resurrection of Christ is to [the
believer] not evidence of a revelation, but the thing revealed”
(F 256). The same holds true for knowledge of God's word. Studying the
Scriptures does not add totally new elements to the individual's
spiritual knowledge so much as it brings to his consciousness that
which had been present to him inchoately (CD 161).


Nevertheless, reason remains an essential element in human salvation
even though faith “is a primary formative principle” (F
263). Thus, Green argues that “this rational self-consciousness
… is an element of identity between us and a perfect being, who
is in full realisation what we only are in principle and
possibility” (F 267–8). When properly exercised reason brings the
individual to a more developed and compelling understanding of the
spiritualised world. Furthermore, it brings the believer to a clearer
recognition of his own true nature. Consequently, the individual
becomes more aware of his reliance on God for his knowledge and
existence, and his love for God grows as a result. When concerned with
moral objects, reason speaks to man in the form of conscience. God's
law is only truly found within conscience — that is, within the
conscience of every human being. Conscience is the presence of
God within man and thereby in the world: “we may say that we are
reason of his reason and spirit of his spirit” (WNT 221). Indeed,
as the voice of the divine in man, the individual should use conscience
to question church orthodoxy.


This brings us to one of the most controversial elements of Green's
religious thought: his christology. Green rejected the orthodox
Christian belief that, in Nettleship's words, Jesus “was born and
died under conditions [which are] impossible to other human
beings” (Nettleship, p.c). Hence he attacked the Nicene council
for seeking to repress the idea that Jesus was born a normal human
being. By denying this aspect of the Scriptures, “[t]he orthodox
representative of the Nicene council … is no longer conscious of
a kingdom of God within him. … Jesus of Nazareth was not divine
from his birth, but had attained to that moral perfection in which by
God's pleasure the attributes of the Son and the worship due to the Son
had been transferred to him” (CD 173, 174). In an important sense
then, Jesus became Christ because of the temporal circumstances in
which he was born and raised: “the Christian life, in its primary
[i.e. earliest] exhibition, was perhaps only possible under the
peculiar circumstances of Galilee during the Roman dominion” (CD
184).


Hence, the central message of the Scriptures is that everyone has
the potential to become Christ through the possession of faith and the
guidance of conscience as the voice of reason. The hope brought by
Jesus is explicable only when one appreciates that he was essentially
human in the same way that we all are. Jesus realised the highest human
potential: salvation through conscientious action. It is only now that
we can appreciate this truth, for,
though the religious imagination may require, as
historically it did require (whether it does [now] is not so certain),
(a) a belief in the manifestation of God under the ordinary
conditions of a human life as its starting-point, it equally requires
that this belief should pass into (b) a belief in a person now
spiritually present to and in us. (I 217)


Jesus continues to bring hope to us all precisely because he
attained salvation without standing in a unique relation to the
indwelling spirit of God (WNT). Judaism fails to offer hope in the same
way that Christianity does because the Jew believes God's will to be
expressed as an externally sanctioned commandment. The difference
between the immanent and ‘external’ conceptions of God
becomes particularly significant over time. The despair felt by the
non-Christian becomes increasingly acute as obedience to the law brings
him closer to God. It gives him a more immediate and intense sense of
his true nature, and consequently, of the implications of his imperfect
condition (WG 236). For the Jew, the believer's relationship with God
is a confused and frightening one. Firstly, having an awareness of
God's law, he sees what he should not do. Secondly, the Jew sees the
divine law as being imposed by another being who yet does not give the
necessary “strength to obey in those to whom it is
presented” (JF 203). Moreover, the Jew faces the mystery of why
following the law allows him to become divine with God (CP 187–8). The
true Christian, on the other hand, has no such difficulty as he
recognises that God is eternally with him. Man's divinity is always
present to the true Christian as his own potential. Like Paul, he is
reborn within and by his new consciousness of his inward, essential
human relationship to God. For him, the paradox disappears.


Green explores this need to internalise God in the Justification
by Faith. Man can only attain salvation when he intuitively acts
in accordance with God's will, rather than following it as a
commandment given by another. Thus, Green writes that in Christ
“[all] live in freedom, as having the mind of God for an inward
principle, not an outward restraint” (JF 196). This intuition of
Christ is the necessary awareness of the rebirth of the believer in
Christ — “the spiritual act by which the individual appropriates,
is ‘clothed upon by,’ the being of the Son of God, who is
the new man” (CD 166). This is the true meaning of salvation (CD
170).


The true Christian consults his conscience in order to discover how
best to honour and know God as an indwelling spirit (CP 188).
Nevertheless, the human predicament is that man's ability to satisfy
his innate drive to make explicit the spiritual aspect of his
existence — which is the moral goal of his being — is
constantly hindered by the physicality of human life. As Green puts
it, “the conditions of human existence in this world are such
that [the truly divine life] can never be completely attained”
(I 216). This deficiency has a number of manifestations. First, in
relation to our epistemic self, man possesses an “infirmity of
[his] … discursive understanding” (CP 145). Thus,
although he comes to recognise new facts and new relations between
facts, from studying the world, inevitably the individual
“loses” (or forgets) others.  Consequently, “we
never reach the totality of apprehension through which alone we could
know the world as it is and God in it” (CP 145). Second, every
individual is concerned to gain some level of temporal good while
still feeling the need for spiritual fulfilment. Consequently,
everyone feels torn between gaining earthly pleasure and living as an
embodiment of God in the temporal world. The former, the life of the
flesh, arises from “the animal element in man, sense and
appetite” (I 207). Yet his “senses and appetites”
are transformed by this self-awareness, thereby enabling him to live
the life of the spirit. In being self-aware in this sense, the
individual necessarily becomes self-referential, both in terms of
looking to one's own interests at the expense of other people who are
more deserving, and in seeking earthly glory (WG 233).
In the New Testament ‘flesh’ generally means
sense and appetite as these are for man, i.e. false
intellectual interpretations of sensation, and sensual pleasure
selfishly sought; in other words, delusion and vice. From this again it
comes to mean human nature as subject to delusion and vice, human
ignorance and selfishness. (I 207)


The essence of salvation is found in the life of “the
spirit.” True salvation is only found in the rejection of the
need for earthly recognition of one's temporal power and even one's
spiritual purity on the one hand, and the realisation that one must
look to one's own relationship with God as the only thing of ultimate
value on the other. This is the true meaning of Christ's message that
one must die in order to live. Indeed, Green's lack of concern with the
existence or otherwise of a life after one's physical death is itself
revealing (IM).


Even though the search for earthly glory is a result of sinful
pride, Green does not believe that the true Christian should withdraw
from society. In fact there are many reasons why he should do quite the
reverse (WNT 223). The most significant of these arises from the fact
that faith “works from within [itself] outwards … [Faith
is] revealed in one man, awakening an answer from the same spirit,
hitherto silent, in another” (F 255). Thus, the spirit of the
Lord communicates with itself to bring faith into the world, through
communication between believers. This represents “the
communication of God to himself”, as Green puts it in The
Witness of God (WG 241).
[The individual should look to] the authority of what he is
apt to call his conscience, the authority of his own moral nature. Of
this, however incompletely it may be actualised in himself, he in a
sense feels the possibilities, unless selfish interests have closed the
avenues of his heart, through sympathy with the higher life of society
about him. It is an ultimate fact of which the true interpretation is
all-important. (WNT 223)


In short, the true believer should test for himself his own beliefs
against the beliefs of the fellow members of his spiritual community.
It is in this fraternal clash of consciences that God's word becomes
clearer in the mind of men. Green's characterisation of this Christian
community is transformed into the social theory outlined below.


It should be clear by now that Nettleship was correct to ask in what
sense Green was a Christian. Green rejects the authority of the creeds
and questions the usefulness of miracles, he humanises the notion of
immortality and radically reinterprets the core article of orthodox
faith: the unique divinity of Jesus Christ. Yet, there is one area of
Green's religious thought that has not been touched on in any real
depth yet: his conception of God, or in his terms “the eternal
consciousness.” This is one of the most important and
controversial aspects of both his religious thought and his
philosophical system. Indeed we shall see in the next section that this
notion marks the transition from religion to philosophy.
3. The Eternal Consciousness


Over the years, scholars have disagreed significantly about the
relation of Green's religious thought to his wider philosophical
position.  Some of the obscurity has resulted from the lack of a
sustained discussion of the relation of substantive religious issues
to substantive philosophical ones (as opposed to the more abstract
methodological discussions about the relations between these two modes
of experience). Fortunately, this lacunae has been addressed to some
degree by the recent publication of a series of Green's lecture notes
from the late 1860s and early 1870s.  (It appears under the title of
“Metaphysic of Ethic, Moral Psychology and Sociology or the
Science of Sittlichkeit” (ME).) Together, these lectures
constitute an early version of Green's greatest philosophical
work, Prolegomena to Ethics (1883).  In these earlier
lectures, Green develops a theory of the creation of ethical subjects
and objects, before turning to issues of motivation and
responsibility, freedom, duty, the moral development of the will, the
deficiencies of the leading eighteenth century British ethical
theories, and finally the universality of the moral law.  Throughout
his lectures of individual will and Sittlichkeit, Green returns to the
question of the relation of God to the moral world.  To this extent,
he anticipates his mature writings, where he often equates the
actualisation of ‘the eternal consciousness’ with both the
unfolding of the individual's will, and the actualisation of the
Christian God in the world. Turning now to this mature position,
typically, he refers to the eternal consciousness as “the law of
nature or the will of God or its ‘idea’” (DSF 17),
or “freedom in the conscious union with God, or harmony with the
true law of one's being … freedom in devotion to self-imposed
duties” (DSF 17). He argues that what changes when one moves
between these different phrases are “the words, but not the
meaning” (DSF 17). The unfolding of the eternal consciousness is
the increasing manifestation of God in the world. That is, the growing
unity of men's will and reason with the will and reason of God. Green
argues in his lay sermon on
Faith that although that ultimate reality of God never
changes, society is “always keeping before man in various
guises, according to the degree of his development, an (unrealised)
ideal of a best which is his God, and giving divine authority to the
customs and laws by which some likeness of this ideal is wrought into
the actuality of life” (F 269–70). In this sense, “The
notions of God, of duty of an ideal life have been constantly
shifting. They have developed” (F 271). Thus, through his
society the individual tends to reach an increasingly clear and
sophisticated recognition of what is ultimately true and good (PE
319). The imperatives of divine reason are communicated to the
individual through the assimilation and reformulation of the
accumulated social wisdom by individual conscience (PE 318) (see the
previous section). In this way, God's earthly presence increases.


The thrust of Green's immanentism was clearly heretical in his day,
and this heresy underlies many of his arguments regarding the nature
and dynamics of the eternal consciousness. It appears that God has no
existence that is both complete in itself and independent of the
individual (except as the abstract idea of an unrealised potential).
Hence, Green argues that “the true lesson which [the Bible]
teaches is that God is not to be sought in nature, nor in any beginning
or end of nature, but in man himself” (F 265). “God's
fulfilment of himself”(F 265) is then the growing explicitness of
the eternal consciousness in the life of man — a growth which is
self-generating. Thus, Green argues that for God to truly exist He must
be actualised in this world. To the extent that individuals fail to be
conscious of His nature and fail to act on that consciousness in their
own lives, God does not properly exist. Hence not only is man dependent
upon God, but God is dependent on man (F 271–2). This implies that in
worshipping God, the individual is of necessity worshipping the best
parts of himself (in their potential, developing and realised
forms).
He is not merely a Being who has made us, in the sense that
we exist as an object of the divine consciousness in the same way in
which we must suppose the system of nature so to exist; with whom we
are in principle one; with whom the human spirit is identical, in the
sense that He is all which the human spirit is capable of becoming. (PE
187)


The spark of the eternal consciousness in every individual (that
aspect of the individual which is God) drives its manifestation in the
individual's consciousness and praxis. Remembering Hegel's contention
that “what is rational is actual, what is actual is
rational,” this manifestation represents an increasing
rationalisation and actualisation of God and the individual. As Olive
Anderson puts it, “Green's constant aim was the separation of the
spiritual and the supernatural … God must be sought in each
person's soul, and would be found through the life of Christian
love” (Anderson, 1991, 685).


It is beyond reasonable dispute that Green honestly felt his own
religious writings to contain a more accurate statement of the true
Christian message than that found in the various theological systems of
orthodox forms of Christianity. Yet the thrust of his argument is
sufficiently radical to make one question whether or not he retained a
serious belief in the existence of the omniscient, omnipotent supreme
being such as stands at the heart of these more traditional forms. Even
so, many commentators have claimed that the depth and sophistication of
Green's religious faith prevents his philosophy from being available to
atheists. There are good reasons for rejecting this claim. Green makes
clear that although religious inspiration can uncover certain truths
about the nature of the individual, as well as the latter's ethics and
relationships to other persons (all aspects of Green's mature
philosophical system), a radical distinction remains between the
analysis of religious intuition on the one hand and the justification
of philosophical truths on the other.
Christian dogma, then, must be retained in its
completeness, but it must be transformed into a philosophy. Its first
characteristic, as an intuition become abstract, must vanish, that it
may be assimilated by reason as an idea. The progress of thought in
general consists in its struggle to work itself free from the mere
individuality and outwardness of the object of intuition. The thing as
sensible, i.e., as presented in an individual moment in time and space,
must become the thing as known. … To the modern philosopher
… Christ is the necessary determination of the eternal subject,
the objectification by this subject of himself in the world of nature
and humanity. … If the idea of the philosopher is the truth, it
may be said the intuition of the philosopher must be delusion. On
examination, however, it will be found that there is a sense in which
the idea is at once the complement of the intuition and its
justification. (CD 182–3)


Not only does the philosopher operate according to different criteria
of meaning and truth than the religious believer, but the
philosopher's analysis and critique has precedence over religious
intuition, in the sense that ultimately specific religious intuitions
have validity only if they can be restated in philosophical terms and
then justified on purely philosophical grounds. This claim informs
Green's own exposition and defence of the eternal consciousness in the
first book of his major philosophical work, Prolegomena to
Ethics (1883). Often this book is taken as setting out an
epistemological or metaphysical theory. Yet it is better read as a
transcendental deduction of the nature of consciousness
(cf. ‘Kant’, e.g. 9–27, 70–84). Read in this way, the
first book of the Prolegomena can avoid the endlessly
disputed question of the ontological status of the objects that appear
to play a necessary role in the origination of sense data in the human
mind. This explains why even though Green stated explicitly that it is
ridiculous to doubt the existence of a mind-independent world, he did
not waste time attempting to prove or analyse the nature of its
existence. The latter task was irrelevant to his proof of the
existence of the eternal consciousness.  Nevertheless we should not go
the extreme of holding that Green thought of the eternal consciousness
as a mere presupposition of thought, a postulate to complete our
world-view and make it internally consistent (Dimova Cookson, 2002,
chapter 1). In reality Green did not bracket off the question of the
ontological status of the eternal consciousness.  His religious
thought and his conception of its relationship to the philosophy
strongly suggests that he believed the eternal consciousness did exist
within every human being, whether or not its existence was recognised
and irrespective of the apparent logic of the particular individual's
particular life-world.


So, how does Green justify his philosophical claim that every human
being is to some degree a partial manifestation of the eternal
consciousness? He begins from the assertion that the mind of the
individual experiences sensations. This particular mind examines,
categorises and then groups these sensations in accordance with the
qualities which it perceives them to share with its other perceived
sensations. It conceives of these sensations within a framework of
other categories and relations such as time and space. In this way the
individual mind understands these sensations to demonstrate the
presence of a particular object in a particular temporal and spatial
location. This object is in Green's sense a creation of the perceiving
mind (irrespective of whether or not the initial sensations were
caused by, say, a mind-independent lump of matter). Following his
great mentor Immanuel Kant, Green notes that the most basic categories
employed by the perceiver cannot be derived from experience because
they are the preconditions of there being any experiences at all. The
basic laws underlying the ways in which these basic categories can be
related cannot be derived from experience for precisely the same
reason.  Complex categories and relations on the other hand —
such as ‘gothic arch’ — are constructed by the mind
from these basic categories and laws of relation. In short again like
Kant, Green believes that the individual attempts to discover
“an objective world, … [by which] is meant a world of
ascertainable laws, as distinguished from a world of unknowable
‘things-in-themselves’” (PE 38). Green calls this
world ‘nature’.


Notice that from Green's perspective every relation must be mental
because he is concerned only with the logical structure of the
individual's ability to categorise and relate sensations that are
perceived by his own mind and to draw implications from these
perceptions. He goes on to argue that individuals feel a natural drive
to understand their perceived world as being underlain by a system of
categories and relations that is complete and internally harmonious. He
calls this system ‘the eternal consciousness’. It is
‘eternal’ in the rather unusual sense that it is the
precondition of temporal experiences, and it is a consciousness in the
sense that it concerns only mental entities. This is Green's reason for
holding it to be an “irrefragable truth involved in the [Kantian]
proposition that ‘the understanding makes nature’”
that,
a single active self-conscious principle, by whatever name
it is called, is necessary to constitute such a[n objective] world, as
the condition under which alone phenomena, i.e. appearances to
consciousness, can be related to each other in a single universe. (PE
38)


Even more strongly, Green argues a little later that, “[a]part
from the unifying principle the manifold world would be nothing at
all” (PE 75).


Possession of a partially explicit spark of the eternal consciousness
is a prerequisite for the acquisition of any knowledge.  Green
theorises the progressive element of experience (involving the
construction of complex mental objects) claiming that as more
sensations are experienced the individual comes to recognise that the
system of categories and relations ‘comprehended’ by the
eternal consciousness (‘nature’) is a unified entity. The
telos of every human is to know this system, yet this realisation can
only be achieved through the progressive development of humanity as a
species of intelligent, self-conscious beings. The individual needs
other persons to provide a basis — an inheritance of knowledge
— from which to build as well as to provide a social setting in
which there can be a rational division of labour and fruitful exchange
of ideas when the scope of knowledge becomes significantly
complex. The need for others to help us to foster the development of
the eternal consciousness within each of us as individuals is one
consequence of the fact that as individuals we are “a certain
reproduction of itself on the part of the eternal self-conscious
subject of the world — a reproduction of itself to which it makes the
processes of animal life organic, and which is qualified and limited
by the nature of the nature of those processes” (PE 99). Another
consequence is that the concrete beliefs which we hold will depend to
a large degree on the experiences we have and the bodies of knowledge
into which we are born.  Nevertheless, the eternal consciousness is
always the ultimate critical principle that tests the adequacy of
these concrete beliefs.  Interpreted in this way, the eternal
consciousness is a heuristic ideal which must be posited by every
individual rational being who holds itself to be able to possess
knowledge (rather than merely having beliefs). Its existence is, in
this sense, a logical presupposition of our respective individual
convictions that individually we can know things. Green holds that
every rational being is driven to give content to this ideal.  This
has two striking consequences.  Firstly, the eternal consciousness a
construction of individual consciousnesses.  As Green writes in
section 149 of the Prolegomena to Ethics: “we only find unity in
the world because we have an idea that it is there, an idea which we
direct our powers to realise.” Secondly, this means the
justification of the existence of the eternal consciousness relies
logically on positing the presupposition the existence of individual
consciousnesses.  Consequently, it is logically incoherent to deny the
existence of discrete individual consciousnesses while affirming the
existence of an eternal consciousness.  In other words, our individual
consciousnesses are not mere adjuncts of a single eternal
consciousness.  (This interpretation is defended at length in Tyler,
2010, especially chapter 4). 


Green extends the world of the eternal consciousness to encompass
the world of values as well as the world of facts. One must examine his
theory of the will to understand how he achieves this.
4. The Theory of the Will


This section examines the ways in which the eternal consciousness
develops through the minds of individuals and the institutions of
society. It begins by examining Green's conceptions of freedom, the
will and reason. It then sketches his theory of man's essential
reliance on society, and the latter's possibilities for interpreting
social forms at a higher level. The interlinking of social norms and
laws, individual freedom, and morality is a recurring theme of this
discussion.
what is it exactly that we mean by [the] self or man?
… We mean by it a certain reproduction of itself on the part of
the subject of the world. (PE 99)


To understand Green's position on morality, one must first
understand his analysis of the human will, for in many ways the most
fundamental question is “what makes the will free?” This
question can restated by asking, “what is the difference between
the good and bad will?”, because Green sees the truly
free will as being by definition the truly good will
(PE 154).


Green argues that desires are emotional impulses felt by the
individual and recognised by him as forming an indispensable part of
his being. In desiring, one is necessarily acknowledging one's own
existence as a person, as one is necessarily self-conscious. Usually,
individuals will desire many objects at the same time. Often, holding
them simultaneously is impossible, and so one is forced to decide which
object to actively attempt to possess; that is, one will have to choose
which object to will to possess. In this way, choice
represents the adoption of a motive by the self as the determination of
action — that is, as the will (PE 103). For example, I may desire to
own a book and a statue. However, as I can afford one but not both (and
buying them is the only way to gain either), I must choose between
them. In choosing, say, the statue, it then becomes my will to possess
the statue — it is no longer merely a desire. My motivation is one on
its own — whereas my desire can be one of many. In willing, firstly
one must desire (and by desiring acknowledge one's existence).
Secondly, one must make the object part of oneself because, in the act
of willing, one necessarily makes the chosen object impossible to
understand without reference to one's act of choice. In Green's
terminology, the nature of the object is in part created by the
individual's will to possess it. As he writes, such objects are
“objects which only the intercourse of self-conscious agents can
bring into existence” (PE 126). For this reason, my relationship
to (and hence the nature of) the object is transformed by my choice of
it; it is transformed by my act of willing, because obtaining the
willed object is then the source of my self-satisfaction (PE 154).


To understand what Green means here, one must bear in mind that he
is talking not in metaphysical, but in epistemic terms. This argument
echoes his claim that nature's ‘creation’ is an epistemic
process, not a metaphysical one. Green uses terms such as
‘creation’, ‘nature’ and ‘reality’
in very different ways to their common usages. Hence, ‘the
world’ and ‘nature’ are the ‘creation’ of
the human mind. They exist only in the consciousness of the
individual perceiver. This contention becomes relatively
uncontroversial when the way in which Green uses his terms is
understood. In this instance he is arguing that one cannot know what
the chosen object is without recognising that possession of it is
willed by a person.


Green argues that a man's will must always be free in at least one
sense: “since in all willing a man is his own object to himself,
the object by which the act is determined, the will is always free
… [that is] willing constitutes freedom” (DSF 1).
Self-satisfaction is always free and is always the object of the will.
There are several things to notice here. Firstly, in willing something,
the individual must deliberate. When willing, the individual is
“seeking to realise an idea of his own good which he is conscious
of presenting to himself” (PE 106). Action which occurs without
deliberation — unthinking action — is not an act of will and hence is
not free. Secondly, Green argues that the “motive” for the
determination of the will is part of the will itself. For this reason,
it is wrong to ask whether a man is “being himself” when he
is willing a particular course of action; for example, taking drugs for
the first time. Thus, “in being determined by a strongest motive,
in the only sense in which he is really so determined, the man …
is determined by himself — by an object of his own making” (DSF
11).


This argument can be extended. For Green, desires are not something
external to and acting on the individual — they are part of his
very essence. For example, Green warns against talking “of
Desire moving us to act in such or such a way, misleading us, or
overcoming us, conflicting with Reason, &c. — then
‘Desire’ is a logical abstraction which we are mistaking
for reality” (PE 129). By “Desire” (as opposed to
“desires”) here, Green means “the man's self, as
conscious of itself and consciously seeking in the satisfaction of
desires the satisfaction of itself” (PE 129). Desire is then
unified in the self by its relation to intellect which ensures that no
object of understanding would be what it is without the presence of
Desire, and vice versa (PE: 130). In that these elements of the
self are unified, the will is always in a sense free.


Yet, Green also claims that, “[t]he question as to the freedom
of the will we take to be a question as to the origin of [one's]
… strongest motive” (PE 97). Bearing in mind that Green
has already said that “willing constitutes freedom”, this
statement seems prblematic. He appears to be arguing that to will is to
be free at the same time as arguing that the will is not always free.
In other words, Green seems to be arguing simultaneously that the will
must be and may not be free. However, the important point to grasp here
is that up until this point Green's statements had been concerned only
with one sense of the term “freedom”. That the will
originates in the strongest motive (self-satisfaction), and that this
in turn originates in the person's “circumstances and
character” has radical implications (PE 98). Examining the
inability of one's character to determine the individual's will
sufficiently for an action to be ‘truly’ free helps to
explain why “circumstances” (as Green uses the term) are so
important to the exercise of a completely free will. Circumstances and
character determine acts of will by giving the individual his specific
motivations and by giving his motivations their relative strengths.


By “circumstances”, Green does not mean merely the
immediate situation in which the individual makes his particular
decision, together with its antecedent causes. He means in addition
“the state of [the individual's] health, the outward manner of
his life (including his family arrangements and the mode in which he
maintains himself and his family), and the standard of social
expectations on the part of those whom he recognises as his
equals” (PE 98). The individual's self-satisfaction is determined
by his circumstances. Thus, circumstances are necessarily formative of
his particular free will. At the same time, human reason shapes these
circumstances so as to foster the increasingly explicit embodiment of
the external consciousness in the world. It may seem strange that Green
is arguing that the individual's will (which is, by definition,
free) is determined at least in part by things which appear to
be external to him. However, the influence of circumstances is an
essential part of man. Without influences such as his family structure
and social expectations (and hence customs and society's values), the
individual would have to create his own character from pure thought,
which he cannot do. This claim needs to be examined in greater
depth.


By “character”, Green means the eternal consciousness'
at least partial “reproduction of itself” (PE 99) within a
particular person. (The complex question of deciding in more detail
what the eternal consciousness is is discussed later.) By
virtue of this reproduction, the individual is, and recognises himself
as being, a moral agent — as an agent who is able to act deliberately
in ways that are either praiseworthy or blameworthy. Willing involves
choice, and so Green argues reason is central to freedom, for it is by
employing one's rationality that an agent makes choices. Green holds
that “by reason, in the practical sense, [is meant] the capacity
on the part of [the individual] to conceive of a better state of
[himself] as an end to be attained by action” (PE 177). Reason
and will are then connected in such a way as to allow the individual to
seek to attain an “ideal”, understood as a state of affairs
which the individual prefers to his present situation. For example,
reason allows me to conceive of my present state as being improved by
developing my painting talents. More than this however, Green holds
that man's reason is in an underdeveloped state to the extent that it
fails to recognise man's absolute goal as the attainment of that set of
circumstances and character which accords with the ultimate harmony of
the world; that which obtains when the eternal consciousness is fully
explicit in the world. Moreover, the individual's will is only truly
free when reason draws man to chose that state which is absolutely
preferable in this way. This means that when the eternal consciousness
is not fully explicit in the world, reason and will do not
necessarily recognise the same end as good. In other words,
when the eternal consciousness is merely becoming,
“[this] self-realising principle, … in the form which it
takes as will[,] at best only tends to reconciliation with itself in
the form which it takes as reason” (DSF 21). What does this
rather obscure proposition actually mean?


The unimpeded action of the eternal consciousness via the
individual's free exercise of reason is a prerequisite for the action
of his absolutely free will. The degree to which the eternal
consciousness is merely implicit in the individual's actions determines
the degree to which the individual is capable of exercising free will.
In other words, a human's will is not free if the objects willed are
counter to “the law of his being” (DSF 1). He is free to
the extent that he wills his embodiment of the eternal
consciousness.


In more specific terms, that which is ultimately (and hence truly)
sought by the moral agent is the full realisation of his “moral
capabilities” (PE 172). This is his “permanent good”
(DSF 5). Unfortunately, as these moral capabilities are at present only
partially realised, man cannot fully understand what they are. They can
only be known “in negative” even at the civilised
individual's current stage of development (PE 172). By this, Green
means that even though one cannot know which state is absolutely the
best for man, in practice, one will usually be able to recognise which
of two options is better.


Yet, while reason remains underdeveloped, human judgement remains
imperfect. One result of this is that the eternal consciousness itself
can be the source of both virtue and vice (PE 176). It is the source of
vice when it pushes the individual to be self-seeking in a
counter-productive way, such as when he wills the attainment of
“pleasure-in-itself” as their ultimate end. Importantly,
Green argues that as reason develops, the individual will come to
recognise that there is an associated growth of “institutions and
habits which tend to make the welfare of all the welfare of each”
(PE 172). In this way, the development of reason in the world makes the
role and importance of “circumstances” in the determination
of the individual's will more obvious. The individual's capacities need
to be given content so that they can be realised, thereby making him
truly satisfied and complete as a person.


This process of self-realisation occurs only for and within
individuals.  Yet, it is not driven consciously by individuals.  In
other words initially at least it is not the result of their own
conscious choice.  The individual develops by sublimating desires and
instincts that initially he merely feels as emanations from his
unconscious (Tyler 2010, chapter 5).


It is helpful to summarise the argument to this point. The
distinguishing characteristic of the truly free will is found in the
object towards which it is directed (PE 155). That object which is
“best” will be “the end in which the effort of a
moral agent can really find rest” (PE 171). It is in attaining
this object (strictly, “state”) that the individual gains
the greatest self-satisfaction. In this sense the attainment of this
object is what the individual truly wills (PE 172). For this reason,
self-satisfaction should not be confused with satisfying one's
strongest desire. Indeed, once the individual has reached a certain
stage of development, the strongest desire cannot be followed if it is
counter to a man's character — “his strength of character
overcomes the strength of desire” (PE 105). The motive (which
determines the will) is not a desire in this case; the former is the
habitual determination for that which the individual regards as his
permanent good. The latter, when destructive, “is incompatible
with [the individual's] steady direction of himself towards certain
objects in which he habitually seeks satisfaction” (PE 105).
Consequently, it is incompatible with his true freedom, even though at
one level it may be part of the individual's will.
5. Social Theory and Conscientious Agency


Green holds that the individual's application of moral rules is
itself a form of moral education. In many ways, therefore, each new
experience tends to push men forward, which entails in turn an at least
partial development of social institutions. This development shapes the
ways in which the individual experiences the world. Thus, in the case
of law the individual should find himself faced by an external
expression of his true will. By following such a law, one is following
one's own will, for the abstract nature of law reflects, firstly, the
abstract idea of man as a “self-conscious and self-realising
subject” whose wayward tendencies (desires which do not push him
to realise his telos) must be restrained to enable the will's
“attainment of its own perfection” (DSF 21). When following
the law then, the individual acknowledges his ability to become that
which he is not at present. Secondly, law helps to form the individual
in the sense of reinforcing his values, views and the actions of the
eternal consciousness as it exists in his world at the time. In this
way, the individual is increasingly brought into line with “the
law of his being” (DSF 22).


This is the ideal. In reality, the currently existing laws (and the
underlying social institutions, values and so on) are imperfect in that
their presuppositions contradict the logical structure of the eternal
consciousness. Recognition of these imperfections awakens an innate
drive in the individual to correct them. In fact actualising the idea
of perfection found in reason increasingly becomes the source of
self-satisfaction contained in the individual's will (DSF 23).


However, Green argues that without recognition of a common good
underlying your relations with your fellow citizens, there could not
be “intelligent co-operating subjects of law and custom”
(PE 203). Only where such a common good is present will a society hold
together without the use of coercion (PE 202). There are two connected
elements here. Firstly, the individual's reason allows him to conceive
of a good towards which he should work as a person. Secondly, Green
holds that a stable society can only rest on institutions which are
based on a conception of a common good. As Aristotle writes that
“it is a characteristic of man that he alone has any sense of
good or evil, of just and unjust, and the like, and the association of
living beings who have this sense makes a family and a state”
(Politics, 1253a15–18). In fact the development of a
person's practical morality requires him to recognise through his
exercise of reason that he should pursue certain ends because they
serve the common good of his society. The individual comes to realise
that no purely private object he wills and attains can ever make him
truly happy. It becomes more obvious to him as he lives and wills that
only attaining what is good for all will bring him complete
satisfaction. This very significant contention needs to be
explained.


Green argues that it is important to recognise that the individual's
ultimate good is only fully actualised following the movement of his
society through the “lesser” ends embedded in different
earlier imperfect societies. These various ends serve to determine the
goals of the individual members of the various societies. However, the
ultimate goal of individuals as human beings is to become totally
rational, that is to perfectly embody the eternal consciousness.
Crucially, this realisation requires the individual to possess a sense
of self-worth, and recognise and understand what is of ultimate value
within their society. In this way, the individual should come to
possess “an idea of an absolute good, common to him with [all
other members of society] — an idea indefinable indeed in imagination,
but gradually defining itself in act” (PE 202). This good exists
in a sense independently of any particular impulse and is founded on
the absolute nature of man. As Kant expresses part of the idea Green
now reiterates, individuals come to recognise a “much more worthy
purpose of existence [than private pleasure] … to which …
as a supreme condition the private purposes of man must for the most
part be subordinated” (G 64). For Green, this object will be
sought because “its desirableness … is a fulfilment of the
capacities of which a man is conscious in being conscious of
himself” (PE 193). Thus, the good act will be performed because
it brings the individual to a greater awareness of himself and his
nature, and hence to a greater awareness of what it is that best serves
his most permanent interests as an embodiment of the eternal
consciousness. That object is truly good, therefore, which is internal
to the individual, and which the individual seeks as a fully
self-conscious person. Green contends that this good is pursued because
it affirms man to himself as a rational, self-satisfiable human being
(PE 279).


What is the nature of such a “good for all”?
Unfortunately, no one can truly answer this question until the good
life has been fully actualised. Until then, the life aimed at the
perfection of one's personality must be sought. Hence, Nicholson
argues that “Green … centres his moral philosophy not on
a system of all-encompassing substantive principles from which one can
deduce the acts which ought to be done, but on a type of character in
moral agents” (Nicholson, 1990, p.78). This type of character is
based on conscience in its truest sense that is, conscientious
judgement which has not been perverted by short-sighted self-interest
(PE 293).  It is in this move that the individual's liberty becomes an
essential element of moral progress.


The type of character that Green wishes to promote is based on the
individual's rational but personal evaluation of moral situations,
social norms and laws. The agent must question his motives —
self-reflection is essential for a pure conscience. Such a conscience
requires the moral agent to pursue that course of action which he truly
believes will most fully promote the embodiment of the eternal
consciousness in human life. Such self-examination should be rooted in
a real desire to act virtuously, not in self-seeking self-deception (PE
297).


Conscience operates by studying existing social conventions, and
abstracting that which is permanent in them from that which is
contingent and transient. But how does one recognise what is permanent
and what is not? Green argues that usually this can be done accurately
by the individual to the extent that he embodies the eternal
consciousness. The eternal consciousness shows men what are necessary
parts of the moral ideal (PE 279). The degree to which the eternal
consciousness is already explicit in the mind of the conscientious
citizen determines the degree to which he is able to recognise the
true permanency or transitoriness of specific customs and
institutions.  Moreover it determines the extent to which the ideal
can be approached from its present basis given a limited life
span. (By this logic, therefore, the closer one is to the ideal the
faster one moves towards it.)


But is man's understanding of the eternal consciousness so vague
that Green's theory is useless as a practical guide to individuals?
Nicholson notes commentators' frequent accusations of vagueness, but
argues such accusations are often based on misunderstandings of Green's
thought (Nicholson, 1990, pp.71–80). This is something I wish to
examine now.


The true reformer seeks to actualise that state of affairs which he
honestly feels to be an improvement on the current state of the world.
He acts from a personal motive, which is a natural outgrowth
of his possession of the eternal consciousness. As Green writes
“he feels a personal responsibility for realising … [that
which] is part and parcel of the practical idea itself, of the form of
consciousness which we so describe” (PE 299). Thus, in most
cases the truly contentious man knows instinctively which rules and
practices to follow in society and which to seek to change, because of
the partially developed eternal consciousness within himself (PE
308). Just as the initial progress of man requires the spark of the
eternal consciousness, so the good man's actions grow out of the
self-realising principle embodied in his nature (his character) and
his social background (his circumstances).


The accusation may be made that this merely gives each individual
license to act as they happen to prefer at the time. Yet, Green need
not be drawn to this conclusion. As has been said, the eternal
consciousness is alive in everyone as a voice of guidance (although
muffled to varying degrees depending on the individual). Also, it is
present although imperfectly in the social institutions which make up
society. The fact that the individual may resist the conclusions of his
moral sense, and so may follow his short-sighted
“self-serving” egoism is an important point, but
it is not an objection to Green's theory unless it is also an objection
to nearly every other ethical theory as well. Indeed, Green argues that
as humanity progresses individuals will naturally come to truly follow
their consciences more easily (PE 328).


Nevertheless, the criticism of vagueness may persist. The argument
that the eternal consciousness is imperfect in everyone, but more
developed in some, has important consequences for such criticisms.
Firstly, there will be some people who are able to “in a certain
sense … [transcend] ‘the law of opinion’ of social
expectation, … [but they] only [do] so by interpreting it
according to its higher spirit” (PE 301). It is in this way that
new duties come to be recognised in the world and man progresses (PE
301). These individuals are saints and reformers. Yet, depending on the
past effects of the eternal consciousness on the mind of the
individual, different interpretations of this higher spirit will be
made by each particular reformer: “It speaks with different
voices” (PE 301). However, every interpretation when made by a
contentious individual tends to uncover aspects of the underlying
rationality of these “social opinions”. Here Green echoes
Mill's contention that, “[i]n proportion to the development of
his individuality, each person becomes more valuable to himself, and is
therefore capable of being more valuable to others” (Mill, 1972
131).


Secondly, when living “their” good life most people will
merely follow the accepted social norms, feeling unable to find fault
with or improve upon them. The reformer and the saint are the
exceptions in society. Hence, Green writes that “[i]n fulfilling
the duties which would be recognised as belonging to his station in
life by any one who considered the matter dispassionately … we
can seldom go wrong and when we have done this fully, there will seldom
be much more that we can do” (PE 313). On the rare occasions that
the individual suffers a “perplexity of conscience”, the
difficulties can be traced either to differing conceptions of the man's
telos, or differing ideas of the best means of actualising the
individual's socially endorsed telos (PE 314).


Yet, it is still the case that people frequently expect too much. To
reiterate, “Moral philosophy as [Green] conceives it can take one
only so far: it cannot resolve every moral issue and practical
dilemma” (Nicholson, 1990, p.79). As the eternal consciousness is
variously manifested in people, philosophy can provide no general rules
for guidance except that one should examine one's motives carefully in
each particular instance. The ultimate goal must be the actualisation
of one's conception of the moral end of man (PE 316). The individual's
rules of conduct are then in a sense present within himself.


It is in this way that for Green, “[t]here is no such thing as
a conflict of duties” (PE 324). Given more than one possible
course of action, the problem is in deciding which course of action it
is truly one's duty to follow, and this problem is often one of
choosing between inconsistent “injunctions given by external
authorities” (PE 324). In a sense, the philosopher's task is to
allow the individual to decide which “authority” is false
and therefore external, and which is good and therefore internal, in
that it best serves the unfolding of the eternal consciousness (PE
325). The philosopher performs this function by making the individual
aware of the ends served by the norms, customs, institutions and laws
of his society (PE 326), and by helping him recognise that,
“[r]ules are made for man, not man for rules” (PE 316).
Nevertheless, the philosopher must not merely attempt to knock down
existing institutions and replace them with “an improvised
[purely personal] conscience” which sets up the individual as the
only practical source of law (PE 326). We should not forget that the
individual must have a society if he is to have a conscience at all (PE
327). “No individual can make a conscience for himself. He always
needs a society to make it for him” (PE 321). Thus, in many ways,
the philosopher's task is to promote understanding and rational harmony
in society by allowing individuals to come to their own recognition of
the rationality which is inherent in themselves and their society (PE
327/8). They should encourage personal liberty, rather than personal
license.
6. The Principles of State Action


Yet there remains a fundamental tension between individual freedom
and the necessity for political structures which must be faced by any
philosophical doctrine. It is to Green's statement of this problem and
his proposed solution to it that we should turn now.


Green holds that the state should foster and protect the social,
political and economic environments in which individuals will have the
best chance of acting according to their consciences. Notice that in
principle Green is not concerned to allow all actions, no matter what
their origin. He himself was a temperance reform for example, and
stated time and again that the state could legitimately curtail the
individual's freedom to accept the slavery of alcoholism (LFC). Yet,
the state must be careful when deciding which liberties to curtail and
in which ways to curtail them. Over-enthusiastic or clumsy state
intervention could easily close down opportunities for conscientious
action thereby stiffling the moral development of the individual. The
state should intervene only where there was a clear, proven and strong
tendency of a liberty to enslave the individual. Even when such a
hazard had been identified, Green tended to favour action by the
affected community itself rather than national state action itself
— local councils and municipal authorities tended to produce
measures that were more imaginative and better suited to the daily
reality of a social problem. Hence he favoured the ‘local
option’ where local people decided on the issuing of liquor
licences in their area, through their town councils (see Nicholson,
1985).


Green stressed the need for specific solutions to be tailored to fit
specific problems. This is not to say that all problems would be dealt
with most effectively at the local or municipal levels. The national
state was the only political institution powerful enough to wage war
internationally for example. Moreover it was the institution most
likely to be able to resist vested interests such as those found in the
manufacturing sector, meaning that it was the national government that
should pass regulations on terms and conditions at work say, or on the
sale and control of land. Yet, Green stressed that there are no eternal
solutions, no timeless division of responsibilities. The distribution
of responsibilities should be guided by the imperative to enable as
many individuals as possible to exercise their conscientious wills in
particular contingent circumstances, as only in this way was it
possible to foster individual self-realisation in the long-run. Hence
deciding on the distribution of responsibilities was more a matter for
practical politics than for ethical or political philosophy. Experience
may show that the local and municipal levels are unable to control the
harmful influences of, say, the brewery industry. When it did show
this, the national state should take responsibility for this area of
public policy.


Green held that the ultimate power to decide on the allocation of
such tasks should rest with the national state (in Britain, embodied in
Parliament). The national state itself is legitimate for Green to the
extent that it upholds a system of rights and obligations that is most
likely to foster individual self-realisation. Yet, the most appropriate
structure of this system is determined neither by purely political
calculation nor by philosophical speculation. As we shall see, it is
more accurate to say that it arose from the underlying conceptual and
normative structure of one's particular society.
7. Theory of Rights


If the individual is to follow his conscience, then he must be free
from external interference. He needs “fences” to protect
his freedom of thought, action, and so on. In Western societies these
fences are rights, and one of the most important parts of Green's
political philosophy is his theory of rights. The sense of
“rights” with which Green is fundamentally concerned in his
Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation can be
understood as Kant understood “ein Recht”; that
is, “[to have] a title … to coerce others through [one's]
mere will to do or omit something that is otherwise indifferent to
freedom” (Kant, quoted in Mulholland, 1990, 5). More
specifically, Green argues that,
A right is a power of which the exercise by the individual
or by some body of men is recognised by a society either as itself
directly essential to a common good or as conferred by an authority of
which the maintenance is recognised as so essential (LPPO
103).


Green is primarily concerned with what I shall call for the moment
“moral rights”: that is, those rights which are justified
and recognised on ethical and not purely legal grounds. Moral rights
exist prior to the law. We shall see that even though moral
rights are conceptually distinct from legal rights, they
should still find expression in law in order to make them effective
regulators of human action. Therefore, the role of the state is to
uphold the rights which originate in society as part of the unfolding
of the eternal consciousness.


Green attacks the view that there are moral rights which people
possess merely as individuals: that is, moral rights which they possess
without reference to their existence as members of a society founded on
a common purpose. In this sense, moral rights are necessarily social.
The idea that men could possess (“natural”) rights in a
“state of nature” is ridiculous for Green (LPPO 9).
Particular rights are only “natural” in the sense that they
are “necessary to the end which it is the vocation of human
society to realise” (LPPO 9). Hence, “A law is not good
because it enforces ‘natural rights’, but because it
contributes to the realisation of a certain end. We only discover what
rights are natural by considering what powers must be secured to a man
in order to the attainment of this end” (LPPO 20). Yet, rights
only truly exist when they are the basis of “the control of the
conduct of men according to certain regular principles by a society
recognising common interests” (LPPO 103). Before the slave comes
to see his life as part of a goal-determined, rationally-ordered
co-operative scheme, he has no true rights then. His rights are
“in suspense” (LPPO 103). Having said this, there does
remain a sense in which certain rights have always existed where there
was any society, even though it may take many generations for these
rights to be recognised by and granted to anyone — “just as one
may hold reason to be eternal, and yet hold that it takes time for this
or that being to become rational” (LPPO 103). What does this
mean?


A shared conception of a collective end — a common good — is the
basis of society's existence, and is also the basis of the individual's
existence as a moral agent (LPPO 114). Hence, achieving the moral end
of man is dependant on the recognition of one's self as a purposeful
agent who can only progress within a society of other purposeful moral
agents. This echoes the Kantian idea that a fundamental element of
rights is adherence to the categorical imperative. A violation of my
rights is “an infringement upon my freedom that can co-exist with
the freedom of everyone in accordance with a universal law”
(Kant, 1991, p.5). Rights represent means of bringing about the correct
regulation of human interaction by giving formal expression to this
fundamental human equality. Thus, rights only extend as far as
individuals recognise the rights of others. The possession of a right
hence marks an individual out as a person who is worthy of respect
(because he is a developing entity), and who also respects the
“personhood” of his fellows (LPPO 140). Green extends this
argument to claim that, by virtue of his possession of rights within a
particular society, the individual has the right to non-interference
from all members of all societies (to the extent that he recognises
their rights to non-interference). He extends it in this manner because
he holds that all individuals should respect the moral agency of anyone
who is recognised as a moral agent by anyone else. Such actual
recognition implies and requires the possibility of recognition by
everyone. As Green writes, “[m]embership of any community is so
far in principle membership of all communities as to constitute a right
to be treated as a freeman by all other men, to be exempt from
subjection to force except for prevention of force” (LPPO
140).


From this, Green adopts the Hegelian line that a slave has a right
to his freedom in that he is engaged in social relations founded on the
movement to attain a common good. The slave's partial recognition of
equality within society comes from the influence of the “signs
and effects of this system [of social interrelations] all about
him” (LPPO 114) which acquaint him with certain abstract
concepts, and which place him in certain relationships to other members
of that society. He goes some way to conceiving of the abstract
possibility of an agent's life based on the pursuit of a common good in
society. He then comes to recognise himself and his fellow slaves (and
possibly his masters) as potentially or actually sharing a common
purpose in their lives. This necessarily creates the slave's right to
equal freedom with all other persons. The slave's rights become real
when they are embodied in social institutions; that is, when they are
actualised in formalised social relations (LPPO 114). The slave-owner's
right to the free use of his possession — that is, the slave — is,
thus, nullified as it rests on the non-recognition of the slave's right
to freedom (LPPO 146).


Moral rights should be used to criticize legal rights. For a start,
“[n]o one would seriously maintain that the system of rights and
obligations, as it is enforced by law, … is all that it ought to
be” (LPPO 9). For this reason “actual states at best fulfil
but partially their ideal function” (LPPO 143). In fact Green
argues that the individual has a duty to resist the law when
his conscience tells him that the law fails to foster the development
of his fellow citizens. Green enters one qualification to this. The
state may, on balance, serve the eternal consciousness more than it
hinders it. It should only be resisted where the effect on the state
would not be so severe as to seriously undermine the social development
which it generally supports (LPPO 104).


Green argues that where there are severe conflicts between groups
which were subject to the same political sovereign — such as in the
former Yugoslavia — no true rights exist. That is, in times of total
social disharmony there are no true rights for there is no true control
of society. In these cases, one should decide which of the possible
courses of action is better or worse by referring to attaining the
ideal of developing the eternal consciousness (LPPO 104).


One may question Green's consistency here. He appears to be arguing,
firstly, that societies are defined by the possession of a common end;
and, secondly, that conflicts between social groups can lead to the
break-up of society. However, he has defined these social groups as
collections of individuals united by a common purpose — at worst,
their particular — but, in Green's eyes, temporary —
self-advancement. Thus, they are, from Green's perspective, still
societies. In a sense, what has happened is that the original society
has been destroyed and the former members have formed into other
smaller societies which are then in conflict. As they are still in
societies, their members possess rights which no one should violate.
All that Green can consistently argue is that the political unit —
such as the nation-state — has broken down without being replaced by
another political unit (but by social groupings). However, rights are
dependant not on the existence of any political unit, but on the
existence of social units.


So far, Green has only been concerned with rights as they existed in
Europe in the late nineteenth century (LPPO 5). However, the gradual
unfolding of the eternal consciousness is evidenced in the historical
movement from family-, to tribe-, and then to state-centred ethics.
Green does not make it clear how significant this movement (in its
“rights-aspect”) actually is (PE 206-217). That is what I
want to do now.


Families and tribes begin to interact with one another giving rise
to more complex forms of social interconnections (PE 207). Social
instability increases as social realities increasingly come into
conflict with established moral values. Eventually, rights arise which
are not based on the primacy of these earlier, less developed social
institutions, but on the idea of persons as discrete and potentially
rational individuals. Green believes that in this way the world tends
to become more rational and more harmonious. This rational harmony must
be based on the correct treatment of all humans as equals, which in
turn is founded on the correct understanding of the individual as a
self-determining agent (PE 208).


There are several elements to such an understanding. First, each
moral agent should be recognised as an end in himself (PE 199). Kant
articulates this fundamental idea as follows, “Act in such a
way that you always treat humanity, whether in your own person or in
the person of any other, never simply as a means, but always at the
same time as an end” (Kant, 1964, p.96 Prussian Academy),
Kant's italics). In willing his own good then, the individual should
recognise himself as a human being and therefore an end-in-himself. Yet
on grounds of consistency he should also recognise all other humans as
ends-in-themselves (PE 195). In this way it should be recognised that
all of humanity is owed duties by virtue of its inherent rationality,
irrespective of its members' particular gender, “race, religion
or status” (PE 207). The understanding of who is one's
“neighbour” gradually comes to be widened, and gradually
“the exclusive dependence of moral claims on relations of family,
status or citizenship disappears” (PE 208). Also, the widening of
the practical conception of a “neighbour” gives an extra
spur to the explicit development of the eternal consciousness in that
it leads to the extension to everyone of the same right to freedom.
Thus, “[f]aculties which social repression and separation prevent
from development, take new life from the enlarged co-operation which
recognition of equal claims in all men brings with it” (PE 208).
Thus, the process is self-promoting. The inherent logic of treating
people as equals is the increasing recognition of the moral centrality
of the species as a whole, rather than one of its sub-groups.


This last move gives some content to the end which should be
promoted, even if only by excluding some options for moral action.
Thus, the interests which must be fulfilled are not, for example, the
maximisation of pleasure, because this would mean that some end other
than the inherent nature of man is being served (PE 194). Also,
real interests and self-satisfaction cannot be found in
“animal impulses” as such, because these impulses are not
founded of necessity on respect for the person as an end in itself (PE
200). It is only by helping individuals to actualise their telos that
one truly shows them respect, and thus, truly treats them as
ends-in-themselves. Consequently, as individuals come to be recognised
as ends-in-themselves, larger groups such as the family and tribes tend
to be seen as less worthy of respect in themselves. Ultimately,
“it is human society as a whole that we must look upon as the
organism in which the capacities of the human soul are unfolded”
(PE 273).


Now, this process of history is evidenced in the widening of the
moral community which must necessarily accompany the growing
recognition that it is ultimately the spark of humanity which requires
respect — not national or class allegiance. As Kant puts it, the
“perfect political constitution” is perfect precisely
because its existence is essential to the realisation of “all [of
the] natural capacities of mankind” (Kant, 1991a, p.50). For this
reason, the individual comes to recognise more people as his moral
equals by virtue of their sharing his (implicit and ultimate)
conception of the common good. Green does not make totally clear how
radical this line of argument actually is; indeed, he may not have
recognised it himself.


The form of the modern state and its laws is dependant on the stage
of development reached by the society from which it springs. The state
makes explicit in legal terms then, the moral views and relations which
are already present within society. (The laws may lag behind the social
mores, but they are still ultimately brought closer to the full
embodiment of the eternal consciousness by these values.) As history
progresses, rights and all other expressions of the current stage of
social development tend to become universalised — that is, extended to
more and more groups. Hence, slavery is abolished and women come to
gain the same rights as men. This also extends to members of other
nation-states. A nation is defined by its members' possession of the
perception of a common telos, and the basis of attaining rights becomes
the perceived potential for attaining this common telos. Hence, rights
tend to be universalised (importantly, across nations) as the telos of
each nation converges. Nations merge and nationhood declines as a
motivating force of human action.


The thrust of Green's argument is that it is historically inevitable
that the nation-state will disappear as a form of political
organisation, as the eternal consciousness becomes more explicit in the
world. The ultimate reference is “universal Christian
citizenship” (PE 206). This is a human's truly rational
community, whose common goal is to live in full accord with the eternal
consciousness. It will be a community of free individuals, each
possessing the same rights, the same duties, and the same
allegiances.


This section has examined Green's claim that rights are necessarily
social. It has been shown that moral rights only exist where they are
recognised as contributing to the common good; that is, where they are
seen to push society to attain its telos. Legal rights may or may not
embody moral rights, but the ideal is the empowering of all and only
moral rights through law. An essential part of rights is their rational
coherence — that is, they must conform to Kant's categorical
imperative. The second part of this section examined the effect of this
argument when combined with the growing explicitness of the eternal
consciousness in the world. The Kantian respect for persons, thus,
spreads from families to tribes, and, finally, to individuals as
members of the human species. Implicit in this, it has been argued, is
the supercession of the nation-state.
8. The Principles of Green's Political Economy


Green writes that “[a]ppropriation is an expression of
… [the individual's] consciousness of a possible
self-satisfaction as an object to be attained” (LPPO 213). The
individual is thus conscious of himself as a “permanent
subject” to be served by his own use of material things (LPPO
214). In this way, man comes to recognise nature as a pool of raw
materials and resources which he can use to express his own
personality, development, and moral value (LPPO 223). So, by labouring
on an object, the individual gains a greater sense of his own
potentials, thereby becoming more likely to develop them and so to
become a more complete being. This means many things in practice. It is
inextricably linked to Green's understanding of the will. Green
writes:
[t]he rationale of property, in short, requires that
everyone who will conform to the positive condition of possessing it,
viz. labour, and the negative condition, viz. respect for it as
possessed by others, should, so far as social arrangements can make him
so, be a possessor of property himself — and of such property as will
at least enable him to develop a sense of responsibility, as distinct
from mere property in the immediate necessaries of life. (LPPO
221)


This passage sets out Green's reasons for believing that private
property is morally important in his society. Negatively, one cannot
rationally claim a right for one's self on the strength of one's
ability to freely determine the course of one's own life while denying
the same right to anyone else who also possesses these qualities. This
is an application of Kant's categorical imperative in exactly the same
way that Kant and Hegel applied in their respective theories of
property. The positive condition initially seems to echo the Lockeian
argument that the individual's right to hold private property is
established through the exercise of his labour. However, for Locke, the
mixing of one's labour with an object is understood in far more
physical terms than either Green or Hegel understand it. For them, the
fundamental point is that deliberately forming an object is a process
of externalising one's will.


In part, Green is concerned to show that property is an expression
of one's being and worth. In appropriating something, one is able to
say “this shall be mine to do as I like with, to satisfy
my wants and express my emotions as they arise” (LPPO
213). Owning private property is a sign of the individual's power to
will and be self-creating. The individual becomes aware that the object
he owns and controls is present because of his labour and talents. This
labour and these talents are, in turn, understood as the outward
expression of his own will and capacities — in a sense, his power —
and, hence, worth. This recognition enables the individual to conceive
of future wants and desires which it is possible for him to satisfy,
thereby representing a development of his will and reason. From this
stage, the individual can conceive of himself as a being possessing
self-satisfiable desires and needs as a generic category — that is, in
abstraction from any particular need. It is in this sense that the
individual becomes increasingly conscious of himself as a being that is
at least potentially self-actualising and so self-fulfilling.


However, the development of the will necessarily entails the growing
tendency to recognise “an idea of an absolute good, common to
[the individual] … with [all other members of society]”
(PE 202). It is with this mind that one can understand Green's
assertion that holding private property tends to develop a man's
“a sense of responsibility” (LPPO 221). In part Green is
arguing that through holding property privately, humans increasingly
come to recognise the value of Kant's maxim that people should never be
treated “simply as a means, but always at the same time as an
end” (Kant, 1964, p.96, Prussian Academy).


Yet, Green argues that the way to reach this stage of rational
respect and personal development will vary between individuals.
Partially for this reason, property should be held privately. Communal
ownership of resources necessarily inhibits individual choice and
imposes certain allocations and uses, whilst restraining others (LPPO
218). Private property relations allow the individual to choose which
things to labour on and with, and hence how to develop. As Green notes,
“[t]his appropriation must vary in its effects according to
talent and opportunity, and from that variation again result
differences in the form which personality takes in different
men” (PE 191). Here, firstly Green advocates a system of property
based on distribution according to the use of one's “talents and
opportunity”, in line with the above argument. Secondly, he
adopts Hegel's argument that different distributions of material goods
to specific individuals tend to make explicit different personalities
in these individuals. This is different from but does not contradict
what was argued previously. Green is now also saying that property is
important to human development in a non-neutral way. For example, an
artist as an artist requires access to certain resources that a farmer
as a farmer would find useless. Hence, if individuals wish to control
their own development according to their will, they need to control the
distribution of resources through a system of private property
relations.


It is important to remember Green's argument that the truly moral
life must be self-imposed. A person who is forced to live in a certain
way, for example, by communal property relations and communal rights of
appropriation, cannot live a truly morally life. This is because
without the experience of choosing bad ways to live, the individual
cannot value or know what better living is (LPPO 219). This is the case
even if the outward appearance is perfection, because even then the way
of life has not been internalised, it has not been freely chosen (PE
219).


Yet, in many ways the most significant benefit of a system of
private property relations is the self-discipline it produces in the
individual (LFC 194–196). If the individual does not learn to act in
such a way that he can achieve his long-term goals, then he will be
unable to develop the strength of character needed to overcome the
short-sighted desires which he experiences but which if followed would
prevent him from gaining true self-satisfaction (LFC 200).


Notice that Green is not concerned merely with private
ownership, but with ownership resulting from the individual's own free
labour. Hence, Green writes of the individual taking part in “a
process in which each, while working freely or for himself, i.e., as
determined by a conception of his own good, at the same time
contributes to the social good” (LPPO 223). The state should not
freely distribute goods to people who are capable of working for it
themselves. The state should only distribute goods in this way when the
individual cannot gain the resources for himself, for example, because
he is disabled. Striving to attain private property is instrumentally
valuable.


The consequences of this freedom include the creation of different
levels of resource-holdings between individuals. That is, the resulting
society is not egalitarian (LPPO 223). However, an unequal distribution
of resources is morally defensible in Green's eyes, because it is in
this way that the different talents possessed by different people are
actualised to the greatest possible extent (LPPO 220). Hence, both rich
and poor are best served in this way. Green recognises the naivety of
supporting extreme inequality of wealth on the grounds that the system
which has allowed it is essential for the poor's moral development
(LPPO 221). His point is that these inequalities are necessary to raise
everyone's standard of living to a level sufficient for moral
development.


Why does Green believe this? It could be argued that the capitalist
market necessarily operates in such a way that some people inevitably
suffer such extreme poverty that their lives will be meaningless. This
is an argument that Green acknowledges and tries to explore (LPPO
220–232). He recognises that there are many people who, while being
formally able to appropriate, have no real power to do so. They are
left with no way of “providing means for a free moral life, of
developing and giving reality or expression to a good will, an interest
in social well-being” (LPPO 228). Hence, Green refers to the
growth “of an impoverished and reckless proletariate” (LPPO
227). The workers are “too badly reared and fed to be efficient
labourers” (LPPO 220). For this reason, they cannot command a
wage in the market which is sufficient to empower their formal ability
to appropriate. They will not bother to save as they are so cynical
about their prospects for self-advancement and breed so quickly that
they merely perpetuate these evils (LPPO 228). Furthermore their
poverty forces them to accept a state of near-slavery — enduring bad
working conditions, hours and housing which causes which cause
ill-health and even death. They are thereby forced to seek comfort in
alcohol and shallow past-times, and to neglect their own education and
that of their children (LFC 201–204). In short, there is “a
lowering of the moral forces of society” (LFC 201). This
situation is particularly important in that “[l]eft to itself, or
to the operation of casual benevolence, a degraded population
perpetuates and increases itself” (LFC 203).


Green's criterion for assessing the illegitimacy of any economic
practice is whether “one set of men are secured in the power of
getting and keeping the means of realising their will, in such a way
that others are practically denied the power” (LPPO 221). Indeed,
this is the ground on which he analyses, for example, his contemporary
factory legislation (LFC 195–200) and licensing laws (LFC 209–212).


He argues that the fundamental cause of the conditions of the
working classes is the manner in which current land holdings were
acquired. He notes that, for the most part, “[t]he original
landlords have been conquerors” (LPPO 228). This has had at least
two effects. Firstly, it has meant that, “[l]andless countrymen,
whose ancestors were serfs, are the parents of the proletariate of
great towns” (LPPO 229). The workers have been conditioned to
take orders and not to exercise their own judgement. They are forced to
accept any work they can find and so to endure low wages and poor
conditions. This leads to little incentive to either save or make
long-term plans. Thus, the proletariat have not come to see themselves
as capable of or deserving of freedom, nor as having any real family
responsibilities. In this way, workers have been denied the power to
develop. They cannot actualise their potential to become self-conscious
and self-determining beings.


Secondly, landlords have been given rights which they should not
possess; that is, rights which are contrary to the development of the
species. One example is the right to unlimited appropriation of the
land. Thus, although things other than land can be legitimately
appropriated without restraint, the acquisition of land must be
regulated. Land is the precondition of all other forms of ownership,
and so must be granted to everybody to some degree (LPPO 229). A
fundamental difference between land and other things (particularly
capital) is that “one man cannot acquire more land without others
having less” (LPPO 229). For example, everyone must occupy some
area of land, even if it is merely the land under your feet. If all
land was (privately) owned by landlords, everyone else could justly be
excluded from the world. This would be an incredible infringement of
the development of the eternal consciousness.


In more realistic terms, private control of land allows private
control of what happens on that land. The landlords would then have
the power to restrict the workers' free exercise of their consciences
and the free execution of their life plans. These restrictions on the
free exercise and hence the development of their will include
“building houses in unhealthy places or of unhealthy structure,
… stopping up means of communication, or forbidding the
erection of dissenting chapels” (LPPO 229). Also, Green draws
attention to the infringement of workers' freedom under the system of
“open” and “closed” villages. The basis of
rights — the service of the eternal consciousness — is
contradicted.  Without real freedom, individuals are denied the chance
to realise their personal conception of the good. They do not have the
opportunity to implement long-term plans, nor the self-discipline
which an autonomous life brings. This is yet another reason why rights
to land cannot be absolute — “no man's land is his own for
purposes incompatible with the public convenience” (LFC
206). One interesting point is that landlords could and sometimes did
serve the eternal consciousness by banning public houses from their
land.  However, this furtherance of the eternal consciousness does not
affect Green's basic and very valid point.


The common benefits which private control of land — interestingly,
“if it is to be allowed at all” (LPPO 229) — have been
lost, because of these illegitimate rights and bad customs which
paradoxically restrict landlords' freedom to use the land (LPPO 229).
Yet, exactly how the state should regulate private property in land
will depend on national circumstances and history (LPPO 231). Given
Green's ambivalence to private ownership of land, systems of communal
ownership with private use may well have been acceptable to him They
are at least broadly consistent with his wider moral theory.


Does this apply to wealth? As was shown, Green's presumption is for
private ownership. Land was special because of its limited supply and
its importance for all other property holdings. Hence, he argues that
the problem is not with having wealth as such, but is with producing
and distributing it. In his discussion, he highlights two difficult
areas — freedom of bequest and free trade (LPPO 222). The problem is
that they may both lead to great concentrations of wealth, and hence of
power to restrict others' liberty (LPPO 224).


Green argues that a necessary part of planning one's future for
one's self is deciding the fate of one's wealth (LPPO 222). For
example, part of holding private property is being able to act
benevolently through giving to charity and other gifts. This includes
the right to determine the distribution of one's wealth immediately
after one's death. For example, Green argues that a man's children are
“included in his forecast of his future” (LPPO 224). By
this, Green means that a man's actions are partially geared towards
certain goals which are based on the existence and life of his children
and friends. The removal of the individual's ability to execute his
Will is, thus, a restriction on his will.


Now, Reeve argues that it is uncertain whether Green sees “the
primary right” as “inheritance or bequest”, for Green
does also argue that children have a prima facie claim on
their parents for a certain level of care and consideration (Reeve,
1986; 160). In fact, Green is only really concerned with bequest. He is
less sympathetic to inheritance for many reasons. For example, no child
has laboured for the wealth he inherits. This is important because, as
was shown, the positive condition for holding property is labour. Also,
Green states explicitly that a man is perfectly justified in not
leaving his wealth to a child whose actions he disapproves of (LPPO
225). The right of the child in this passage (LPPO 225) is couched far
more in terms of the right to being correctly brought up. Indeed, the
right of bequest is vital here as it allows the possibility of
not letting one's children inherit equally or at all, and
hence, exercising a man's mind in such a way as to create a sense of
“family responsibility” in him — one of the main benefits
of freedom of bequest is that it fosters his care and respect for
others and allows him to make long-term plans by which he can actualise
his true will.


Reeve is also wrong to argue that Green's theory of bequest says
nothing “about the position of the childless” (Reeve, 1986
160). Green explicitly says that a man should be free to distribute his
wealth “as he likes among his children (or, if he has none,
among others)” (LPPO 224, my italics). He must argue this to
be consistent. The important point about the right of bequest is that
it enables a person to make a certain sort of plan which affects the
manner in which he lives his life, and in which he raises his children,
and makes explicit judgements about those he believes will outlive
him.


Still, there is a problem in that such freedom of bequest helps to
maintain the inequalities of wealth in society. The poor are apparently
condemned to remain in poverty, because wealth can be kept within the
same family, or, at best, class. Green argues that there are several
reasons for believing that this concentration of wealth will be
avoided, reduced or offset in society. Firstly, natural family
affection will counter customs and laws which support the giving of
wealth to one child only — usually the eldest son (LPPO 225). Indeed,
a law of primogeniture is illegitimate as it inhibits a man's right to
distribute his wealth as he wishes (LPPO 224). Secondly, the inheritor
“may yet by his labour contribute largely to the social good, and
a well-organised state will in various ways elicit such labour from
possessors of inherited wealth” (LPPO 224). Presumably, this is a
larger contribution than he would have made if he had not inherited the
wealth.


The third reason, and the most promising for Green, is that it is
legitimate for the state to tax the individual's income and wealth, on
the grounds that it provides security for his holdings and acquisitions
(LPPO 224). This is an important and powerful argument. Yet,
interestingly, Green's benefit theory denies an individual's
absolute right to private property in capital. For taxation to
be consistent with purely private property, the individual
must in some sense give his consent for his money to be taken. However,
for Green, there need not be even tacit consent for taxation to be
legitimate. The state has a right to raise taxation from inheritance
because of the benefits it gives, rather than the consent it receives.
He argues that redistributive taxation is legitimate, because
the state protects the individual's rights to inheritance and bequest.
Rights are only legitimate when they serve the development of the
eternal consciousness. Taxation can do this, and when it does, the
state has right to tax the individual which overrides the latter's
right to private property. There is a call for a right to gain
private property at the same time as it is partially denied. Yet,
Green's justification is always explicitly limited by the need to be of
service to the eternal consciousness. Thus, Green states that
“[i]t is only through the guarantee which society gives him that
[a man] … has property at all, or, strictly speaking, any right
to his possessions” (LFC 200). Green's advocacy of redistributive
taxation is, thus, consistent with his wider teleological theory.


Green begins his discussion of free trade in the Lectures on the
Principles of Political Obligation by arguing that it produces a
redistribution of resources from “where they are of least use
… [to] where they are of most use” (LPPO 224). I assume
that Green broadly equates “use” with personal need as
judged by the particular individual. In this way, the
self-interested activities of businessmen also serve the social good.
However, this is an incredible oversimplification of what actually
happens in the market. For Green's assertion to be valid, he must
assume that each individual has the same purchasing power. Only in this
way will each pound which is spent represent the same level of need.
The problem is that given inequalities of wealth in the economy (which
Green sees as inevitable and often beneficial under capitalism), the
value of each pound does not represent the same level of need
irrespective of who spends it. For example, an extra hundred pounds is
worth far more to a poor man than it is to a rich one. The distribution
of goods within the capitalist market is, thus, far more concerned with
demand from blocks of wealth rather than genuine need. The
inequalities of wealth which arise in capitalism are too great for his
present argument to be taken seriously.


Also, he argues that there is no formal block on workers setting up
their own co-operative societies “for the investment of
savings”, and, so in England, “the better sort of labourers
do become capitalists” (LPPO 227). This is good, because in
becoming a successful capitalist, the worker must learn to plan and
execute his actions coherently. This requires rational thought and
self-discipline. Green admits that in practice there may be blocks on
this “development”, but says that these are the result of
non-capitalist practices. For example, the poor are so
“impoverished and reckless” (LPPO 227) that often they
cannot form such societies.


Green's last justification of capitalism to be discussed here is his
most powerful. It must be remembered, Green argues, “that the
increased wealth of one man does not naturally mean the diminished
wealth of another” (LPPO 226); and capitalism benefits everyone
in the long-run. Even the poor are made better off because the wealth
held by the rich is used in such a way that is raises the standard of
living of everyone in society. The significant rise in the standard of
living of the British working classes since the Industrial Revolution
has been the result of free trade and government legislation to protect
the workers' from exploitation (LFC 201–204). This is Green's most
powerful justification for private property.


It has been shown that Green's theory of property is — or, at
least, tries to be — based squarely on his teleology. Thus, he argues
that generally a system of private property is the best arrangement for
promoting the eternal consciousness in society as a whole. Where it
contradicts this end, private property is illegitimate. This creates
his ambivalence about the private ownership of land and his call for
the taxation of bequests. Whilst his arguments for free trade are
interesting, they are also often limited by his economic naivety. For
example, he underestimates the power of the rich to exclude the poor
from economic success. Bearing this in mind, one must question the
consistency of his attachment to private property. Although he
argues, as Nicholson writes, that “private property is necessary
to morality because it is necessary to will (which is necessary to
morality)” (Nicholson, 1990, p. 97), one should not forget the
developmental nature of the will. It may well be that communal property
“is not available as a present resource”, as Mill puts it,
merely because the human will is not developed enough. Rights to
property may have moved from the family to the individual, but that
does not mean that they cannot move on to the species. Indeed, this
would seem to be the logical conclusion of Green's argument that the
individual must come to recognise that their truly common telos is in
living as members of the human race.


Despite this, Green's discussions of property are always based on
his assessment of whether, in general, a given practice or property
right serves the development of the eternal consciousness. In this way,
his argument is consistent.
9. General Assessment


Green's influence and philosophical reputation remained strong well
into the early years of the twentieth century. Followers such as
Edward Caird, Bernard Bosanquet and Francis H Bradley did much refine
Green's thought and to extend his principles to the circumstances of a
new epoch. The resulting British Idealist movement was eventually
transformed into the ‘New Liberalism’ of L. T. Hobhouse
and J. A. Hobson amidst growing dissatisfaction with Idealist
metaphysics and a general reaction in Britain against ‘all
things German’ that resulted from the First World War. The
mid-twentieth century saw a number of influential attacks being
launched against the movement, most notably from H. A. Prichard, John
Plamenatz, Isaiah Berlin, and Melvin Richter. Interest in Green's
thought has gradually revived not least due to the work of Alan Milne
and Peter Nicholson. A number of new works on Green and Idealism have
been produced in recent years (see the bibliographical entries for
David Brink, Thom Brooks, Matt Carter, Alberto de Sanctis, Maria
Dimova-Cookson, Michael Freeden, Denys P. Leighton, Rex Martin, Avital
Simhony, Geoffrey Thomas, Colin Tyler, David Weinstein, Ben Wempe, and
Andrew Vincent, amongst many others).  An important collections of new
essays appeared in 2006 (Dimova-Cookson and Mander, eds.). A new
edition of Green's Works was published in 1997, which
includes over 500 pages of previously unpublished material edited by
Peter Nicholson.  Alberto de Sanctis has edited Green's remaining
undergraduate essays (de Sanctis, 2005, pp.175–196.) I have
edited a number of previously-unavailable manuscripts, including the
remaining parts of Green's lectures on the John's Gospel (‘The
Incarnation’), Romans ('The Pauline conception of justification
by faith') and Galatians ('The Incarnation') (Tyler, ed., 2005,
vol. 1, pp.1–188). Clarendon reprinted the fifth edition of
Green's Prolegomena to Ethics in 2003, replacing Edward
Caird's preface with an introductory essay by David Brink.
Conferences are held frequently on the thought of Green and the other
Idealists in Britain, Canada and the USA, many of which are organised
by the Centre for Idealism and the New Liberalism at the University of
Hull, the British Idealism Specialist Group of the Political Studies
Association, and the British Idealism and Collingwood Centre, Cardiff
University.