Discussions of the nature of time, and of various issues related to 
time, have always featured prominently in philosophy, but they have 
been especially important since the beginning of the 20th Century. 
This article contains a brief overview of some of the main topics in 
the philosophy of time — Fatalism; Reductionism and Platonism 
with respect to time; the topology of time; McTaggart's arguments; 
The A Theory and The B Theory; Presentism, Eternalism, and The 
Growing Universe Theory; time travel; and the 3D/4D controversy 
— together with some suggestions for further reading on each 
topic, and a bibliography.

Note: This entry does not discuss the consciousness, perception,
experience, or phenomenology of time. An historical overview and
general presentation of the various views is available in the entry
on temporal consciousness. 
 Further coverage can be found in the SEP entry on
 the experience and perception of time. 
For those interested specifically in phenomenological views,
see the entries on
 Husserl (Section 6), and
 Heidegger (Section 2: Being and Time).

 
1. Fatalism


A good deal of work in the philosophy of time has been produced by 
people worried about Fatalism, which can be understood as the thesis 
that whatever will happen in the future is already unavoidable (where
to say that an event is unavoidable is to say that no human 
is able to prevent it from occurring). Here is a typical argument for
Fatalism.


(1)
There exist now propositions about everything that might happen in
the future.[1]


(2)
Every proposition is either true or else false.


(3)
If (1) and (2), then there exists now a set of true propositions
that, taken together, correctly predict everything that will happen in
the future.


(4)
If there exists now a set of true propositions that, taken
together, correctly predict everything that will happen in the future,
then whatever will happen in the future is already unavoidable.


∴ (5)
Whatever will happen in the future is already unavoidable.




The main objections to arguments like this have been to premises (2) 
and (4). The rationale for premise (2) is that it appears to be a 
fundamental principle of semantics, sometimes referred to as The 
Principle of Bivalence. The rationale for premise (4) is the claim 
that no one is able to make a true prediction turn out false.


A proper discussion of Fatalism would include a lengthy consideration
of premise (4), and that would take us beyond the scope of this 
article. For our purposes it is important to note that many writers 
have been motivated by this kind of argument to deny Bivalence. 
According to this line, there are many propositions — namely, 
propositions about matters that are both future and contingent 
— that are neither true nor false right now. Take, for example,
the proposition that you will have lunch tomorrow. On this view, that
proposition either has no truth value right now, or else has the 
value indeterminate. When the relevant time comes, and you 
either have lunch or don't, then, on the view in question, the 
proposition that you have lunch on the relevant day will come to be 
either true or false (as the case may be), and from then on that 
proposition will forever retain its truth 
 value.[2]



The view that Bivalence is false, and that, in particular, there are 
sometimes propositions about the future that are neither true nor 
false, is sometimes referred to as the “Open Future” 
response to arguments for Fatalism. One important presupposition of 
the Open Future response is that it makes sense to talk about a 
proposition's having a truth value at a time, and that, moreover, it 
is possible for a proposition to have different truth values at 
different times. Thus, the Open Future response to arguments for 
Fatalism entails the following semantical thesis.
The Tensed View of Semantics:

Propositions have truth values at times rather than just
having truth values simpliciter.
The fundamental semantical locution is ‘p is
v at t’ (where the expression in place of
‘p’ refers to a proposition, the expression in
place of ‘v’ refers to a truth value, and the
expression in place of ‘t’ refers to a time).
It is possible for a proposition to have different truth values at
different times.




The Tensed View of Semantics can be contrasted with the following 
semantical view.
The Tenseless View of Semantics:

Propositions have truth values simpliciter rather than
having truth values at times.
The fundamental semantical locution is ‘p is
v’ (where the expression in place of
‘p’ refers to a proposition and the expression in
place of ‘v’ refers to a truth value).
It is not possible for a proposition to have different truth values
at different times.




Other views that have (at least sometimes) been associated with the 
Open Future response to Fatalism include Taking Tense Seriously and 
The Growing Universe Theory, which will be discussed below.

Suggestions for Further Reading: Aristotle, De
Interpretatione, Ch. 9; Besson and Hattiangadi forthcoming; Lewis
1986a; Markosian 1995; McCall 1994; Miller 2005; Sullivan forthcoming;
Taylor 1992, Ch. 6; Torre 2011; van Inwagen 1983, Ch. 2.
2. Reductionism and Platonism with Respect to Time


What if one day things everywhere ground to a halt? What if birds 
froze in mid-flight, people froze in mid-sentence, and planets and 
subatomic particles alike froze in mid-orbit? What if all change, 
throughout the entire universe, completely ceased for a period of, 
say, one year? Is such a thing possible?


If the answer to this last question is Yes — if it is possible 
for there to be a period of time during which nothing changes, 
anywhere (except, perhaps, for the pure passage of time itself, if 
there is such a thing) — then it is possible that a worldwide 
“freeze” will occur between the time you finish reading 
this sentence and the time you start the next sentence. In fact, if 
it's possible for there to be a period of time without change, then 
it may well be that a million years have passed since you finished 
reading the last sentence.


The question of whether there could be time without change has 
traditionally been thought to be closely tied to the question of 
whether time exists independently of the events that occur in time. 
For, the thinking goes, if there could be a period of time without 
change, then it follows that time could exist without any events to 
fill it; but if, on the other hand, there could not be a period of 
time without change, then it must be that time exists only if there 
are some events to fill it.


Aristotle and others (including, especially, Leibniz) have argued 
that time does not exist independently of the events that occur in 
time. This view is typically called either “Reductionism with 
Respect to Time” or “Relationism with Respect to 
Time,” since according to this view, all talk that appears to 
be about time can somehow be reduced to talk about temporal relations
among things and events. The opposing view, normally referred to 
either as “Platonism with Respect to Time” or as 
“Substantivalism with Respect to Time” or as 
“Absolutism with Respect to Time,” has been defended by 
Plato, Newton, and others. On this view, time is like an empty 
container into which things and events may be placed; but it is a 
container that exists independently of what (if anything) is placed 
in it.


Why would someone endorse the reductionist view about time? 
Historically, two main arguments have played the biggest roles in 
convincing people. One is conceptual: time, according to this 
argument, is by definition nothing more than a system of temporal 
relations among things and events, so that the idea of a period of 
time without change turns out to be incoherent. The other main 
argument for Reductionism is epistemological: we could never have any
reason, according to this argument, to posit a period of empty time; 
and, moreover, even if there were such a period, we would not have 
any way of knowing about either its existence or its length.


What about Platonism with Respect to Time — why would someone 
endorse that view? One reason is that the empty container metaphor 
has a lot of intuitive appeal. (This is no doubt true of both the 
temporal and spatial versions of Platonism.) And another reason is 
that some people do not find the main arguments against Platonism 
with Respect to Time compelling. For example, it has been suggested 
by Sydney Shoemaker that there are possible circumstances in which it
would make perfect sense to posit periods of empty time, and even to 
claim to know just how long those periods are.


Here is a simplified version of Shoemaker's argument. Consider a 
small, spatially finite possible world that is divided into three 
zones, A, B, and C. In Zone A, there is a complete freeze — a 
cessation of all change — for one hour every 2 years. These 
local freezes in Zone A are preceded by a short period in which every
object in A takes on a reddish glow (observable to the occupants of 
all three zones), while at the same time a temporary force field 
develops at the boundary of Zone A, preventing anything from entering
or exiting that zone during the freeze. While the freeze in Zone A is
taking place, Zone A appears to those in Zones B and C to be pitch 
black, since no light can enter or exit the frozen zone; but as soon 
as the local freeze in Zone A is over, the people in the other two 
zones can again see everything in Zone A, and can in fact see those 
things resuming their normal behaviors without missing a beat. To 
those who remain in Zone A for the freeze, it appears that the 
reddish glowing and the development of the force field are 
immediately followed, not by any cessation of change, but, instead, 
by a large number of sudden and discontinuous changes in the other 
two zones.


Meanwhile, In Zone B there is a similar freeze for one hour every 3 
years, and in Zone C there is a freeze for one hour every 5 years. 
The inhabitants of this strange world quickly become aware of the 
local freezes, and they have no trouble calculating the “freeze
function” for each of the three zones. What's more, they also 
calculate that there is a global freeze — a period during which
each one of the three zones undergoes a local freeze — exactly 
once every 30 years. Whenever a global freeze occurs, of course, no 
one is able to see any frozen objects or blacked-out zones, since 
everyone and everything is frozen at the same time. But the reddish 
glowing and the development of temporary force fields that precede 
each world-wide freeze are observable to everyone; and so the global 
freeze times come to be celebrated by “empty time 
parties” all over the world.


No doubt the inhabitants of this unusual world could come up with a 
theory that explains the local freezes in a way that doesn't posit 
any empty time. For they could theorize that in Zone A there is a 
local freeze every two years, except for the 30th year, when there is
no freeze; and similarly for the other zones. But such a theory would
involve freezing functions that are more complicated than those that 
entail a global freeze every 30 years.


What is this thought experiment supposed to show? Well, it can't be 
taken to show that global freezes are possible, because (at least the
way the story has been told here) they are simply a stipulated detail
of the story, and we can't show that something is possible merely by 
stipulating that it is the case in some possible world. What the 
thought experiment does seem to show, however, is that it is possible
for rational beings to have at least some evidence for the existence 
of periods of empty time in their world. For we can describe the 
possible world of the thought experiment in a neutral way that 
specifies how things in the world appear to its denizens, without 
specifying whether the real freeze functions for Zones A, B, and C 
are the simpler ones described above that entail a global freeze 
every 30 years or the more complicated ones that do not have that 
entailment. And a possible world that appears this way to its 
inhabitants is surely a world in which those inhabitants have some 
reason to take seriously the possibility that there are periods of 
empty time in their world, that they know when those periods occur, 
and even that they know exactly how long the periods of empty time 
last.


Reductionism with Respect to Time and Platonism with Respect to Time 
have spatial analogues, and the views about time have traditionally 
been taken to stand or fall with their spatial counterparts. Indeed, 
although there is considerable controversy over the degree to which 
time is similar to the dimensions of space, the Reductionism vs. 
Platonism dispute is widely thought to be one area in which the two 
dimensions are perfectly analogous. (But it is worth noting that if 
Shoemaker's argument is sound, then this conventional wisdom should 
perhaps be challenged. For it does not appear that there will be 
anything like a spatial analogue of that argument.)

Suggestions for Further Reading: Alexander 1956k;
Arntzenius 2012; Coope 2001; Newton-Smith 1980; Shoemaker 1969.
3. The Topology of Time


It's natural to think that time can be represented by a line. But a 
line has a shape. What shape should we give to the line that 
represents time? This is a question about the topology, or structure,
of time.


One natural way to answer our question is to say that time should be 
represented by a single, straight, non-branching, continuous line 
that extends without end in each of its two directions. This is the 
“standard topology” for time. But for each of the 
features attributed to time in the standard topology, two interesting
questions arise: (a) does time in fact have that feature? and (b) if 
time does have the feature in question, is this a necessary or a 
contingent fact about time?


Questions about the topology of time appear to be closely connected 
to the issue of Platonism versus Reductionism with Respect to Time. 
For if Reductionism is true, then it seems likely that time's 
topological features will depend on contingent facts about the 
relations among things and events in the world, whereas if Platonism 
is true, so that time exists independently of whatever is in time, 
then time will presumably have its topological properties as a matter
of necessity. But even if we assume that Platonism is true, it's not 
clear just what topological properties should be attributed to time.


Consider the question of whether time should be represented by a line
without a beginning. Aristotle has argued (roughly) that time cannot 
have a beginning on the grounds that in order for time to have a 
beginning, there must be a first moment of time, but that in order to
count as a moment of time, that allegedly first moment would have to 
come between an earlier period of time and a later period of time, 
which is inconsistent with its being the first moment of time. 
(Aristotle argues in the same way that time cannot have an end.)


It is also worth asking whether time must be represented by a single 
line. Perhaps we should take seriously the possibility of time's 
consisting of multiple time streams, each one of which is isolated 
from each other, so that every moment of time stands in temporal 
relations to other moments in its own time stream, but does not bear 
any temporal relations to any moment from another time stream. 
Likewise we can ask whether time could correspond to a branching 
line, or to a closed loop, or to a discontinuous line. And we can 
also wonder whether one of the two directions of time is in some way 
priveleged, in a way that makes time itself asymmetrical.

Suggestions for Further Reading: On the beginning and
end of time: Aristotle, Physics, Bk. VIII; Kant, The
Critique of Pure Reason, esp. pp. 75ff; Newton-Smith 1980, Ch. V;
Swinburne 1966. On the linearity of time: Newton-Smith 1980, Ch. III;
Swinburne 1966, 1968.  On the direction of time: Price 1994, 1996;
Savitt 1995; and Sklar 1974. And finally, on all of these topics:
Newton-Smith 1980.
4. McTaggart's Argument


In a famous paper published in 1908, J.M.E. McTaggart argued that 
there is in fact no such thing as time, and that the appearance of a 
temporal order to the world is a mere appearance. Other philosophers 
before and since (including, especially, F.H. Bradley) have argued 
for the same conclusion. We will focus here only on McTaggart's 
argument against the reality of time, which has been by far the most 
influential.


McTaggart begins his argument by distinguishing two ways in which 
positions in time can be ordered. First, he says, positions in time 
can be ordered according to their possession of properties like 
being two days future, being one day future, 
being present, being one day past, etc. (These 
properties are often referred to now as “A properties.”) 
McTaggart calls the series of times ordered by these properties 
“the A series.” But he says that positions in time can 
also be ordered by two-place relations like two days earlier 
than, one day earlier than, simultaneous with,
etc. (These relations are now often called “B 
relations.”) McTaggart calls the series of times ordered by 
these relations “the B series.”


(An odd but seldom noticed consequence of McTaggart's 
characterization of the A series and the B series is that, on that 
characterization, the A series is identical to the B series. For the 
items that make up the B series (namely, moments of time) are the 
same items that make up the A series, and the order of the items in 
the B series is the same as the order of the items in the A series; 
but there is nothing more to a series than some specific items in a 
particular order.)


In any case, McTaggart argues that the B series alone does not 
constitute a proper time series. I.e., McTaggart says that the A 
series is essential to time. His reason for this is that change (he 
says) is essential to time, and the B series without the A series 
does not involve genuine change (since B series positions are forever
“fixed,” whereas A series positions are constantly 
changing).


McTaggart also argues that the A series is inherently contradictory. 
For (he says) the different A properties are incompatible with one 
another. (No time can be both future and past, for example.) 
Nevertheless, he insists, each time in the A series must possess all 
of the different A properties. (Since a time that is future will be 
present and past, and so on.)


One response to this argument that McTaggart anticipates involves 
claiming that it's not true of any time, t, that t 
is both future and past. Rather, the objection goes, we must say that
t was future at some moment of past time and will be past at
some moment of future time. But this objection fails, according to 
McTaggart, because the additional times that are invoked in order to 
explain t's possession of the incompatible A properties must
themselves possess all of the same A properties (as must any further 
times invoked on account of these additional times, and so on ad 
infinitum). Thus, according to McTaggart, we never resolve the 
original contradiction inherent in the A series, but, instead, merely
generate an infinite regress of more and more contradictions.


Since, according to McTaggart, the supposition that there is an A 
series leads to contradiction, and since (he says) there can be no 
time without an A series, McTaggart concludes that time itself, 
including both the A series and the B series, is unreal.


Philosophers like McTaggart who claim that time is unreal are aware 
of the seemingly paradoxical nature of their claim. They generally 
take the line that all appearances suggesting that there is a 
temporal order to things are somehow illusory.

Suggestions for Further Reading: Bradley 1893; Dyke
2002; McTaggart 1908; Mellor 1998; Prior 1967, 1968b.
5. The A Theory and The B Theory


Needless to say, despite arguments such as McTaggart's, many 
philosophers have remained convinced of the reality of time (for it 
certainly seems like there is a temporal order to the world). But a 
number of philosophers have been convinced by at least one part of 
McTaggart's argument, namely, the part about the contradiction 
inherent in the A series. That is, some philosophers have been 
persuaded by McTaggart that the A series is not real, even though 
they have not gone so far as to deny the reality of time itself. 
These philosophers accept the view (sometimes called “The B 
Theory”) that the B series is all there is to time. According 
to The B Theory, there are no genuine, unanalyzable A properties, and
all talk that appears to be about A properties is really reducible to
talk about B relations. For example, when we say that the year 1900 
has the property of being past, all we really mean is that 1900 is 
earlier than the time at which we are speaking. On this view, there 
is no sense in which it is true to say that time really passes, and 
any appearance to the contrary is merely a result of the way we 
humans happen to perceive the world.


The opponents of The B Theory accept the view (often referred to as 
“The A Theory”) that there are genuine properties such as
being two days past, being present, etc.; that 
facts about these A properties are not in any way reducible to facts 
about B relations; and that times and events are constantly changing 
with respect to their A properties (first becoming less and less 
future, then becoming present, and subsequently becoming more and 
more past). According to The A Theory, the passage of time is a very 
real and inexorable feature of the world, and not merely some 
mind-dependent phenomenon.


(It is worth noting that some discussions of these issues employ 
terminology that is different from the A series/B series terminology 
used here. For example, some discussions frame the issue in terms of 
a question about the reality of tense (roughly, the 
irreducible possession by times, events, and things of genuine A 
properties), with A Theorists characterized as those who affirm the 
reality of tense and B Theorists characterized as those who deny the 
reality of tense.)


The A Theorist is normally happy to concede McTaggart's claim that 
there can be no time without an A series, but the typical A Theorist 
will want to reject the part of McTaggart's argument that says that 
the A series is inherently contradictory. For the typical A Theorist 
will deny McTaggart's claim that each time in the A series must 
possess all of the different A properties. That is, she will deny 
that it is true of any time, t, that t is 
past, present, and future. Instead, she will insist, the closest 
thing to this that can be true of a time, t, is (for 
example) that t was future, is present, 
and will be past, where the verbal tenses of the verb 
‘to be’ in this claim are not to be analyzed away (just 
as the apparent references to the putative A properties pastness, 
presentness, and futurity are not to be analyzed away in favor of 
reference to B relations).


Thus the standard A Theorist's response to McTaggart's argument 
involves the notion that we must “take tense seriously,” 
in the sense that there is a fundamental distinction between (for 
example) saying that x is F and saying 
that x was F. The thesis can be put this 
way.
Taking Tense Seriously: The verbal tenses
of ordinary language (expressions like ‘it is the case
that’, ‘it was the case that’, and ‘it will be
the case that’) must be taken as primitive and
unanalyzable.[3]


In virtue of her commitment to Taking Tense Seriously, the A Theorist
will say that no time ever possesses all of the different A 
properties. Thus, according to the A Theorist, there is no 
contradiction in the A series — i.e., no contradiction in 
saying of a time, t, that t was future, is present,
and will be past — and, hence, no contradiction to be passed 
along to the different times at which t was future, is 
present, and will be past.


In effect, then, the typical A Theorist makes exactly the move in 
response to McTaggart's argument that McTaggart anticipated, and 
explicitly rejected. Not surprisingly, then, many supporters of 
McTaggart's argument feel that the A Theorist's response fails.


Although some B Theorists deny that time really passes as a result of
considering McTaggart's argument, many B Theorists have different 
reasons for saying that time doesn't really pass. Two other arguments
against The A Theory (besides McTaggart's argument, that is) have 
been especially influential. The first of these is an argument from 
the special theory of relativity in physics. According to that theory
(the argument goes), there is no such thing as absolute simultaneity.
But if there is no such thing as absolute simultaneity, then there 
cannot be objective facts of the form “t is 
present” or “t is 12 seconds past”. Thus, 
according to this line of argument, there cannot be objective facts 
about A properties, and so the passage of time cannot be an objective
feature of the world.


It looks as if the A Theorist must choose between two possible 
responses to the argument from relativity: (1) deny the theory of 
relativity, or (2) deny that the theory of relativity actually 
entails that there can be no such thing as absolute simultaneity. 
Option (1) has had its proponents (including Arthur Prior), but in 
general has not proven to be widely popular. This may be on account 
of the enormous respect philosophers typically have for leading 
theories in the empirical sciences. Option (2) seems like a promising
approach for A Theorists, but A Theorists who opt for this line are 
faced with the task of giving some account of just what the theory of
relativity does entail with respect to absolute 
simultaneity. (Perhaps it can be plausibly argued that while 
relativity entails that it is physically impossible to 
observe whether two events are absolutely simultaneous, the 
theory nevertheless has no bearing on whether there is such 
a phenomenon as absolute simultaneity.)


The second of the two other influential arguments against The A 
Theory concerns the rate of the alleged passage of time. According to
this argument, if it is true to say that time really passes, then it 
makes sense to ask how fast time passes. But (the argument goes) if 
it makes sense to ask how fast time passes, then it is possible for 
there to be a coherent answer to that question. Yet, according to the
argument, there is no rate that can be coherently assigned to the 
passage of time. (“One hour per hour,” for example, is 
said not to be a coherent answer to the question “How fast does
time pass?”) Thus, the argument concludes, it cannot be true to
say that time really passes.


This argument raises important questions concerning the correct way 
to talk about rates, but it has been argued that the A Theorist can 
answer those questions in a way that allows her to avoid any untoward
consequences.

Suggestions for Further Reading: For general
discussion of The A Theory and The B Theory: Frischut forthcoming; Le
Poidevin 1998; Le Poidevin and McBeath 1993; Markosian 1993; Maudlin
2007 (especially Chapter 4); McTaggart 1908; Mellor 1998; Paul 2010;
Prior 1967, 1968a, 1968b, 1970, 1976, 1996; Sider 2001; Skow 2009;
Smart 1963, 1949; Smith 1993; Sullivan 2012a; Williams 1951; Zimmerman
2005; Zwart 1976.
For discussion of the argument from relativity against The A
Theory: Godfrey-Smith 1979; Hinchliff 1996; Markosian 2003; Maxwell
1985; Prior 1970, 1996; Putnam 1967; Savitt 2000; Sklar 1974; Skow
2009; Stein 1968m, 1970; Weingard 1972.
For discussion of the argument concerning the rate of the alleged
passage of time: Markosian 1993; Maudlin 2007 (especially Chapter 4);
Prior 1968a; Skow 2011, 2012; Smart 1949; Williams 1951; Zwart
1976.
6. Presentism, Eternalism, and The Growing Universe Theory


According to The B Theory, time is very much like the dimensions of 
space. Just as there are no genuine spatial properties (like 
being north), but, rather, only two-place, spatial relations
(like north of), so too, according to the B Theorist, there 
are no genuine A properties. According to The A Theory, on the other 
hand, time is very different from the dimensions of space. For even 
though there are no genuine spatial properties like being 
north, there are, according to the A Theorist, genuine A 
properties; and time, unlike space, can truly be said to pass, 
according to The A Theory.


There is another important respect in which some (but not all) A 
Theorists believe time to be unlike the dimensions of space. Some A 
Theorists believe that there are crucial ontological differences 
between time and the dimensions of space. For some A Theorists also 
endorse a view known as “Presentism,” and others endorse 
a view that we will call “The Growing Universe Theory.”


Presentism is the view that only present objects exist. More 
precisely, it is the view that, necessarily, it is always true that 
only present objects exist. (At least, that is how the name 
‘Presentism’ will be used here. Some writers have used 
the name differently. Note that, unless otherwise indicated, what is 
meant here by ‘present’ is temporally present, 
as opposed to spatially present.) According to Presentism, 
if we were to make an accurate list of all the things that exist 
— i.e., a list of all the things that our most unrestricted 
quantifiers range over — there would be not a single 
non-present object on the list. Thus, you and the Taj Mahal 
would be on the list, but neither Socrates nor any future Martian 
outposts would be included. (Assuming, that is, both (i) that each 
person is identical to his or her body, and (ii) that Socrates's body
ceased to be present — thereby going out of existence, 
according to Presentism — shortly after he died. Those who 
reject the first of these assumptions should simply replace the 
examples in this article involving allegedly non-present people with 
appropriate examples involving the non-present bodies of those 
people.) And it's not just Socrates and future Martian outposts, 
either — the same goes for any other putative object that lacks
the property of being present. All such objects are unreal, according
to Presentism.


Presentism is opposed by Non-presentism, which is the view that there
are some non-present objects. More precisely, Non-presentism is the 
view that, possibly, it is sometimes true that there are some 
non-present objects.


‘Non-presentism’ is an umbrella term that covers several 
different, more specific versions of the view. One version of 
Non-presentism is Eternalism, which says that objects from both the 
past and the future exist just as much as present objects. According 
to Eternalism, non-present objects like Socrates and future Martian 
outposts exist right now, even though they are not currently present.
We may not be able to see them at the moment, on this view, and they 
may not be in the same space-time vicinity that we find ourselves in 
right now, but they should nevertheless be on the list of all 
existing things.


It might be objected that there is something odd about attributing to
a Non-presentist the claim that Socrates exists right now, since 
there is a sense in which that claim is clearly false. In order to 
forestall this objection, let us distinguish between two senses of 
‘x exists now’. In one sense, which we can call 
the temporal location sense, this expression is synonymous 
with ‘x is present’. The Non-presentist will 
admit that, in the temporal location sense of ‘x 
exists now’, it is true that no non-present objects exist right
now. But in the other sense of ‘x exists now’, 
which we can call the ontological sense, to say that 
x exists now is just to say that x is now in the 
domain of our most unrestricted quantifiers, whether x 
happens to be present, like you and me, or non-present, like 
Socrates. When we attribute to Non-presentists the claim that 
non-present objects like Socrates exist right now, we commit the 
Non-presentist only to the claim that these non-present objects exist
now in the ontological sense (the one involving the most unrestricted
quantifiers).


According to the Eternalist, temporal location matters not at all 
when it comes to ontology. But according to a somewhat less popular 
version of Non-presentism, temporal location does matter when it 
comes to ontology, because only objects that are either past or 
present — but not objects that are future — exist. On 
this view, which we can call “The Growing Universe 
Theory,” the universe is always increasing in size, as more and
more things are added on to the front end (temporally speaking).


Despite the claim by some Presentists that theirs is the common sense
view, it is pretty clear that there are some major problems facing 
Presentism (and, to a lesser extent, The Growing Universe Theory; but
in what follows we will focus on the problems facing Presentism). One
problem has to do with what appears to be perfectly meaningful talk 
about non-present objects, such as Socrates and the year 3000. If 
there really are no non-present objects, then it is hard to see what 
we are referring to when we use expressions such as 
‘Socrates’ and ‘the year 3000’.


Another problem for the Presentist has to do with relations involving
non-present objects. It is natural to say, for example, that Abraham 
Lincoln was taller than Napoleon Bonaparte, and that World War II was
a cause of the end of The Depression. But how can we make sense of 
such talk, if there really are no non-present objects?


A third problem for the Presentist has to do with the very plausible 
principle that for every truth, there is a truth-maker. The problem 
is that it is hard to see what the truth-makers could be for such 
truths as that there were dinosaurs and that there will be Martian 
outposts.


Finally, the Presentist, in virtue of being an A Theorist, must deal 
with the arguments against The A Theory that were discussed above.

Suggestions for Further Reading: Adams 1986; Bourne
2006; Bigelow 1996; Hinchliff 1996; Keller and Nelson 2001; Markosian
2003, forthcoming; McCall 1994; Rini and Cresswell 2012; Sider 1999,
2001; Sullivan 2012b; Tooley 1997; Zimmerman 1996, 1998.
7. Time Travel


We are all familiar with time travel stories, and there are few among
us who have not imagined traveling back in time to experience some 
particular period or meet some notable person from the past. But is 
time travel even possible?


One question that is relevant here is whether time travel is 
permitted by the prevailing laws of nature. This is presumably a 
matter of empirical science (or perhaps the correct philosophical 
interpretation of our best theories from the empirical sciences). But
a further question, and one that falls squarely under the heading of 
philosophy, is whether time travel is permitted by the laws of logic 
and metaphysics. For it has been argued that various absurdities 
follow from the supposition that time travel is (logically and 
metaphysically) possible. Here is an example of such an argument.


(1)
If you could travel back in time, then you could kill your
grandfather before your father was ever conceived. (For what's to stop
you from bringing a gun with you and simply shooting him?)


(2)
It's not the case that you could kill your grandfather before your
father was ever conceived. (Because if you did, then you would ensure
that you never existed, and that is not something that you
could ensure.)


∴ (3)
You cannot travel back in time.




Another argument that might be raised against the possibility of time
travel depends on the claim that Presentism is true. For if 
Presentism is true, then neither past nor future objects exist. And 
in that case, it is hard to see how anyone could travel to the past 
or the future.


A third argument, against the possibility of time travel to the past, has to do with the claim that backward causation is impossible. For if there can be no backward causation, then it is not possible that, for example, your pushing the button in your time machine in 2020 can cause your appearance, seemingly out of nowhere, in, say, 1900. And yet it seems that any story about time travel to the past would have to include such backward casuation, or else it would not really be a story about time travel.


Despite the existence of these and other arguments against the 
possibility of time travel, there may also be problems associated 
with the claim that time travel is not possible. For one 
thing, many scientists and philosophers believe that the actual laws 
of physics are in fact compatible with time travel. And for another 
thing, as I mentioned at the beginning of this section, we often 
think about time travel stories; but when we do so, those thoughts do not have the characteristic, glitchy feeling that is normally associated with considering an impossible story. To get a sense of the relevant glitchy feeling, consider this story: Once upon a time there was a young girl, and two plus two was equal to five. When one tries to consider that literary gem, one mainly has a feeling that something has gone wrong (one immediately wants to respond, “No, it wasn’t”), and the source of that feeling seems to be the metaphysical impossibility of the story being told. But nothing like this happens when one considers a story about time travel (if it is one of the logically consistent stories about time travel, that is, such as the one depicted in the movie Los Cronocrímenes (Timecrimes)). One task facing the philosopher who claims that 
time travel is impossible, then, is to explain the existence of a 
large number of well-known stories that appear to be specifically 
about time travel, and that do not cause any particular cognitive dissonance.

Suggestions for Further Reading: Dyke 2005; Earman
1995; Keller and Nelson 2001; Lewis 1986a; Meiland 1974; Sider 2001;
Thorne 1994; Vihvelin 1996; Yourgrau 1999.
8. The 3D/4D Controversy


It is uncontroversial that physical objects are typically extended in
both space and time. But there is some controversy in the philosophy 
of time over whether extension in time is analogous to extension in 
space. Spatial extension is normally thought of as necessarily 
involving different spatial parts at different locations in space. 
(Although it should be noted that those who believe in extended 
mereological simples (i.e., objects without proper parts) 
would deny this.) A bicycle, for example, can be extended across a 
doorway in virtue of having some spatial parts inside the doorway and
other spatial parts outside the doorway. Is temporal extension 
necessarily like this? That is, when a bicycle is extended from time 
t1 to time t2, does it have 
its temporal extension in virtue of having different temporal 
parts at the different times? Or does a bicycle manage to be 
extended in time from t1 to 
t2 in virtue of being “wholly 
present” (as opposed to merely partly present) at each of those
times?


According to The 4D View, temporally extended objects have temporal 
parts, temporal extension is perfectly analogous to spatial 
extension, and time is one of four dimensions that are on a par, at 
least with respect to the manner in which objects are spread out in 
space-time. On The 3D View, however, temporally extended objects do 
not have temporal parts, temporal extension is very different from 
spatial extension, and time is unique among the four dimensions of 
the world, at least with respect to the manner in which objects are 
spread out in space-time.


On The 4D View, objects are to be thought of as four-dimensional 
“space-time worms,” each of which is made up of many 
different temporal parts, like the different spatial segments of an 
earthworm. An object at a time — Descartes in 1625, for example
— is not the whole object but, rather, a mere part (a temporal 
part) of that object; and the relation between Descartes in 1625 and 
Descartes in 1635 is like the relation between the two wheels of a 
bicycle: they are different parts of a bigger whole. By contrast, on 
The 3D View, objects are to be thought of as three-dimensional things
that are not made up of different temporal parts. On this view, an 
object at a time — Descartes in 1625, for example — is 
the same thing as the whole object — Descartes. Thus, according
to The 3D View, the relation between Descartes in 1625 and Descartes 
in 1635 is the relation of identity: each one is just the same thing 
as Descartes.


As in the case of the disputes between A Theorists and B Theorists, 
on the one hand, and Presentists and Non-presentists, on the other 
hand, the 3D/4D controversy is part of a general disagreement among 
philosophers of time concerning the degree to which time is 
dissimilar from the dimensions of space. That general disagreement 
has been an important theme in the philosophy of time during the last
one hundred years, and will most likely continue to be so for some 
time to come.

Suggestions for Further Reading: Haslanger 1989a,
1989b, 1994; Hawley 2001, 2006; Heller 1990; Lewis 1986b; Markosian
1994; Moss 2012; Rea 1998; Quine 1960; Sider 2001; Thomson 1983; van
Inwagen 1990; Williams 1951; Zimmerman 1996.