Trust is important, but it is also dangerous. It is important because
it allows us to form relationships with people and to depend on
them—for love, for advice, for help with our plumbing, or what
have you—especially when we know that no outside force compels
them to give us such things. But trust also involves the risk that
people we trust will not pull through for us; for, if there were some
guarantee that they would pull through, then we would have no
need to trust
 them.[1]
 Thus, trust is also dangerous. What we risk
while trusting is the loss of the things that we entrust to others,
including our self-respect, perhaps, which can be shattered by the
betrayal of our trust. 


Because trust is risky, the question of when it is warranted is of
particular importance. In this context, “warranted” means
justified or well-grounded (where well-grounded trust successfully
targets a trustworthy person). If trust is warranted in these senses,
then the danger of it is either minimized, as with justified trust, or
eliminated altogether, as with well-grounded trust. Leaving the danger
of trust aside, one could also ask whether trust is warranted in the
sense of being plausible. Trust may not be warranted in a particular
situation because it is simply not plausible: the conditions necessary
for it do not exist, as is the case when people feel only pessimism
toward one another. This entry on trust is framed as a response to the
general question of when or whether trust is warranted, where
“warranted” is broadly construed to include
“justified,” “well-grounded” and
“plausible.”


A complete philosophical answer to this question must explore the
various philosophical dimensions of trust, including the conceptual
nature of trust and trustworthiness, the epistemology of trust, the
value of trust, and the kind of mental attitude trust is. To
illustrate how each of these concerns is relevant, note that trust is
warranted, that is, 

Plausible, again, only if the conditions required for trust exist
(e.g. optimism about one another’s ability). Knowing what these
conditions are requires understanding the nature of trust. 
Well-grounded, only if the trustee is trustworthy, which makes
the nature of trustworthiness important in determining when trust is
warranted.
Justified, sometimes when the trustee is not in fact trustworthy,
which suggests that the epistemology of trust is relevant.
Justified, often because some value will emerge from the trust or
because it is valuable in and of itself. Thus, the value of trust is
important.
Plausible, only when it is possible for one to develop trust,
given one’s circumstances and the sort of mental attitude trust
is. For example, trust may not be the sort of attitude that one can
will oneself to have without any evidence of a person’s
trustworthiness.



This piece explores these different philosophical issues about
trust. It also deals predominantly with interpersonal trust, which I
take to be the dominant paradigm of trust. Although some philosophers
write about trust that is not interpersonal, including
“institutional trust” (i.e. trust in institutions; see
e.g. Potter 2002, Govier 1997, Townley and Garfield 2013), trust in government (Hardin 2002) or in artificial intelligence (which may only be person-like; see e.g. Coeckelbergh 2012, Taddeo and Floridi 2011), and
“self-trust” (Govier 1993, Lehrer 1997, Foley 2001, McLeod
2002, Goering 2009, Jones 2012b, Potter 2013), most would agree that these forms of
“trust” are coherent only if they share important features
of (i.e. can be modeled on) interpersonal trust. Hence, I assume that
the dominant paradigm is interpersonal.
 
1. The Nature of Trust and Trustworthiness


Trust is an attitude that we have towards people whom we hope will be
trustworthy, where trustworthiness is a property, not an attitude.
Trust and trustworthiness are therefore distinct although, ideally,
those whom we trust will be trustworthy, and those who are trustworthy
will be trusted. For trust to be warranted (i.e. plausible) in a
relationship, the parties to that relationship must have attitudes
toward one another that permit trust. Moreover, for trust to be
warranted (i.e. well-grounded), both parties must be trustworthy.


Trusting requires that we can, 1) be vulnerable to others (vulnerable
to betrayal in particular); 2) think well of others, at least in
certain domains; and 3) be optimistic that they are, or at least will
be, competent in certain respects. Each of these conditions for trust
is relatively
 uncontroversial.[2]
 There is a further condition which is
controversial, however: that the trustor is optimistic that the trustee
will have a certain kind of motive for acting.  Controversy surrounds
this last criterion, because it is unclear what, if any, sort of
motive we expect from people we trust.


Likewise, it is unclear what, if any, sort of motive a
trustworthy person must have. Clear conditions for trustworthiness
are that the trustworthy person is competent and committed to do what
s/he is trusted to do. But this person may also have to be committed in
a certain way or for a certain reason (e.g. s/he cares about the
trustor). This section explains these various conditions for trust and
trustworthiness, and focuses in particular on the controversy that
surrounds the condition about motive.


One important criterion for trust is that the trustor can accept some
level of risk or vulnerability (Becker 1996). Minimally, what this
person risks, or is vulnerable to, is the failure by the trustee to do
what s/he depends on that person to do. The truster might try to reduce
this risk by monitoring or imposing certain constraints on the behavior
of the trustee; yet after a certain threshold perhaps, the more
monitoring and constraining s/he does, the less s/he trusts
that person. Trust is relevant “before one can monitor the
actions of … others” (Dasgupta 1988, 51) or when out of
respect for others one refuses to monitor them. One must be content with them having some discretionary power or freedom (Baier 1986; Dasgupta 1988). Hence, one cannot reject being  vulnerable.


A related condition for trust is the potential for betrayal (and, as
noted below, the corresponding condition for trustworthiness is the
power to betray). Annette Baier writes that “trusting can be
betrayed, or at least let down, and not just disappointed”
(1986, 235). In her view, disappointment is the appropriate response
when one merely relied on someone to do something, but did
not trust him or her to do it. Although people who monitor and
constrain other people’s behavior and do not allow them to prove their
own trustworthiness may rely on others, they do not trust them. For,
while their reliance could be disappointed, it could not be betrayed.
Consider that one can rely on inanimate objects, such as alarm clocks;
but when they break, one is not betrayed, although one may be
disappointed. Reliance without the possibility of betrayal is not
trust. Thus, people who rely on one another in a way that makes
betrayal impossible do not trust one another. (For some resistance to this view, see O’Neil 2012, 307.)


People also do not, or cannot, trust one another if they are easily
suspicious of one another (Govier 1997, 6). If one assumes the worst
about someone—“she is late because she has no regard for
my feelings,” or “I bet he is talking about me behind my
back”—then one distrusts, rather than trusts the person.
Paradigmatically, trust involves being optimistic, rather than
pessimistic, that the trustee will do something for us (or for others
perhaps), which is in part what makes us vulnerable by trusting. As
Karen Jones writes, such optimism “restricts the inferences we
will make about the likely actions of another. Trusting thus opens one
up to harm, for it gives rise to selective interpretation, which means
that one can be fooled, that the truth might lie, as it were, outside
one’s gaze” (Jones 1996, 12).


Some—including Jones in her later work on trust—argue that optimism
about the trusted person is present in typical instances of trust, but
not in all instances of it (Jones 2004, McGeer 2008, Walker 2006 cited
in McGeer). Such optimism is absent, for example, in cases of
“therapeutic trust” (Horsburgh 1960). To illustrate this
type of trust, consider parents who “trust their teenagers with
the house or the family car, believing that their offspring may well
abuse their trust, but hoping by such trust to elicit, in the
fullness of time, more responsible and responsive trustworthy
behaviour” (McGeer 241, her emphasis; see also Pettit 1995). The
claim of Jones and others is that such trust involves the normative
attitude that the trustee ought to do what one
trusts him or her to do, rather than optimism that s/he will
do it. Therapeutic trust is unusual in this respect and in others
(which will become evident later on in this entry). The rest of this section deals
with usual rather than unusual forms of trust and trustworthiness.


Failing to be optimistic about people’s competence also makes trust
impossible. Without being confident that people will display some
competence, we cannot trust them.  We usually trust people to
do certain things—for example, to look after our children,
to give us advice, or to be honest with us—but we would not do
so if we thought they had none of the relevant skills (including moral
skills of knowing what it means to be honest or caring; Jones 1996, 7; McLeod 2002,
19). Rarely, if ever, do we trust people completely (i.e. A simply
trusts B). Instead, “trust is generally a three-part relation: A
trusts B to do X” (Hardin 2002, 
9).[3]
 To have trust in a relationship, therefore,
we do not need to assume that the other person will be competent
in every way. Optimism about the person’s competence in at
least one area, however, is essential.


When we trust people, we are optimistic not only that they are
competent to do what we trust them to do, but also that they are
committed to doing it. One can talk about this commitment either in
terms of what the trustor expects of the trustee or in terms of what
the trustee possesses: that is, as a condition for trust or as a
condition for trustworthiness (and the same is true, of course, of the
competence condition). For simplicity’s sake and to focus some of
this section on trustworthiness rather than on trust, I will refer to
the commitment mostly as a condition for trustworthiness.


Although both the competence and motivational elements of trustworthiness
are crucial, the exact nature of the latter is unclear.  For some
philosophers, it matters only that the trustee is
committed. The central problem of trustworthiness in their view
concerns the ongoing commitment of the trustee, and in particular,
under what circumstances, if any, one could expect such a commitment
from another person (see, e.g., Hardin 2002, 28). By contrast, for
other philosophers, an ongoing commitment from another person is not
sufficient for trustworthiness; according to them, the origins of the
commitment matter, not just its existence or duration. The central
problem of trustworthiness for these philosophers is not
just whether but also how the trustee is motivated
to act. Some motives are simply incompatible with trustworthiness, on
this view. To determine which view is correct, we need to consider
different possible motives that could underlie trustworthy
behavior.


Some philosophers believe that trustworthiness can be
“compelled by the force of norms” or, more generally, by
the force of social constraints (Hardin 2002, 53; see also
O’Neill 2002, Dasgupta 1988). In an effort to be trustworthy,
people can subject themselves to social constraints, as someone does
when she publicly declares her intention to lose weight, putting
herself at risk of public censure if she fails. Alternatively, the
trustor in a relationship can introduce the constraints by
requiring that the trustee sign a contract, for example. The constraint
imposed could be the primary motivation for being trustworthy. It would
compel on ongoing commitment grounded in self-interest. Call this view
of trustworthiness “the social contract view.”


Many philosophers would agree that the social contract view is only
a partial account of what could motivate trustworthiness. While social
constraints can shore up trustworthiness, they cannot account for
trustworthiness altogether. For, if they could, then the following sort
of person would be trustworthy: a sexist employer who treats female
employees well only because he believes that he would face legal
sanctions if he did not (Potter 2002, 5). Many would argue that while
this person’s behavior is predictable or reliable, it is not
trustworthy in any genuine sense. These theorists may distinguish mere
reliability from trustworthiness on the grounds that people known or
considered to be trustworthy have the power to betray us, whereas
people known or considered to be merely reliable can only disappoint
us (Holton 1994). The female employees might know that their employer
treats them well only because he fears social sanctioning. In that
case, he could not betray them, although he could disappoint them. And
if that were true, he would not be trustworthy for them.


An alternative to the social contract view is a view according to
which trustworthy people are motivated by their own interest to
maintain the relationship they have with the trustor, which in turn
encourages them to encapsulate the interests of that person in their
own interests. Russell Hardin defends this “encapsulated
interest” view (2002). However, it too is problematic. To see why,
consider how it applies to the sexist employer. He is not
motivated by an interest to sustain his relationships with female
employees: if he could easily fire them, or even avoid hiring them
altogether, then he would do that. He is therefore not
trustworthy. Imagine, however, that he did have an interest in
maintaining these relationships and as a result he treated the women
well, yet his interest stemmed from a desire to keep them around
mainly so that he could daydream about having sex with them. (Hence,
he remains a sexist employer.) To satisfy this interest, he would have
to encapsulate enough of their interests in his own to keep the
relationships going.  And this would make him trustworthy on Hardin’s
account. But
is he trustworthy? The answer is surely “no,” if
the women have an interest in being treated well in more than just a
surface manner. My point here is that being motivated by a desire to
maintain a relationship (the central motivation of a trustworthy person
on the encapsulated interests view) may not require one to adopt all of
the interests of the trustor that would actually make one trustworthy
to that person. In the end, like the social contract view, the
encapsulated interests view might describe only reliability, not
trustworthiness.


The social contract view and the encapsulated interests view are both
instances of what Karen Jones calls “risk-assessment
views” of trust or trustworthiness (1999, 68). According to
them, people trust other people whenever they assume that the risk of
relying on other people to act a certain way is low—because it
is in the self-interest of these people to act that way—and so
they rely on them. Self-interest determines trustworthiness on these
accounts. Risk-assessment theories in general are popular among
rational decision theorists and social contract theorists who presume
that people are naturally self-interested.


A different type of view is what Jones calls a
“will-based” account of trustworthiness, which finds trustworthiness only
where the trustee is motivated by goodwill (Jones 1999, 68). This view originates in the work of Annette
Baier and it is influential, even outside of moral philosophy (e.g. in bioethics and law, especially fiduciary law; see e.g. Pellegrino and Thomasma 1993, O’Neill 2002, and Fox-Decent 2005). According to it, a trustee who is actually trustworthy will act
out of goodwill toward the trustor, to what or to whom the trustee is
entrusted with, or both. While proponents of risk-assessment views
would likely find the goodwill view too narrow—surely we can
trust people without presuming their goodwill!—it does seem
immune to criticisms that apply to those views. To summarize those
criticisms: these accounts, unlike the goodwill account, fail to
demand that the trustworthy person care at all about the trustor, or
care about what he or she cares about. As we have seen, such caring
appears to be central to a complete account of trustworthiness.


The particular reason why care is central is that it allows us to
distinguish between trust and mere reliance. I have said the two
differ, putatively, because only the former can be betrayed. But why
is that true? Why can trust be betrayed, while mere reliance can only
be disappointed? The answer Baier gives is that betrayal is the
appropriate response to someone on whom one relied to act out of
goodwill, as opposed to ill will, selfishness, or habit bred out of
indifference (1986, 234–5). Those who say trusting could involve
relying on people to act on any of these motives cannot
distinguish trust from reliance. Examples are risk-assessments
theorists, who, again, make trustworthiness a matter of
self-interest. Although self-interest as a motive is compatible with
goodwill toward others, it is also compatible with ill will and
selfishness. The question is: how would trustworthiness be different
from mere reliability if trust could target any of these
attitudes?


While useful in distinguishing trustworthiness from reliability, or
trust from reliance, Baier’s will-based account is not perfect,
however. Criticisms have been made of it that suggest goodwill is
neither necessary nor sufficient for trustworthiness. It is not
necessary, some say, because we can trust other people without
presuming that they have goodwill. In fact, “[w]e are often
content to trust without knowing much about the psychology of the
one-trusted, supposing merely that they have psychological traits
sufficient to get the job done” (Jones 2004, 4; citing Blackburn
1998). This objection implies that trust is compatible with relying on
different kinds of motives, which is the case on a risk-assessment
view of trust, but not on Baier’s will-based view. Although they are
problematic, risk-assessment accounts do have their merits. For
example, they seem to make better sense of trusting that strangers
will be morally decent toward us, which presumably can occur without
assuming that strangers feel goodwill toward us.


One could make sense of trust in strangers without adopting a
risk-assessment view, however, or in other words, without assuming
that self-interest would be the motive of the trustworthy
stranger. Motives that could underlie trustworthiness in the absence
of goodwill include the motive to stand by one’s moral commitments, to
fulfill a moral obligation, or to adhere to a social norm. For
example, I could trust a stranger to be decent simply by presuming
that he is committed to common decency.  Ultimately, what I am
presuming about the stranger is moral integrity, which some say is the
relevant motive for trust relations (McLeod 2002, 21–27). Others
similarly identify this motive as moral obligation, and say it is
ascribed to the trustee by the very act of trusting him or her
(Nickel 2007; and for a similar account, see Cohen and Dienhart 2013). Out of concern that such views “moralize” trust
inappropriately, Amy Mullin argues that trustworthy people are
actually motivated by a commitment that may not be moral: a commitment
to a particular social norm (2005, 316).


As well as being unnecessary, goodwill may not be sufficient for
trustworthiness for three reasons. First, someone trying to
manipulate “you”—a “confidence trickster” (Baier
1986)—could “rely on your goodwill without trusting
you” (Holton 1994, 65). Hence, Zac Cogley claims that trust involves the belief not simply that trustees will display goodwill but that they owe it to us (2012). Second, basing trustworthiness on
goodwill alone cannot explain unwelcome trust. When people do not
welcome your trust, they object not to your optimism about their
goodwill (who would object to that?), but only to the fact that you are
counting on them. Thus, optimism about goodwill is insufficient and,
according to Karen Jones, needs to be coupled with the expectation that
the trustee is “favorably moved by the thought that [you are]
counting on her” (1996, 9). Third, you can expect people to be
reliably benevolent toward you without trusting them (Jones 1996, 10).
You can think that their benevolence is not shaped by the sorts of
values that, for you, are essential to
 trustworthiness.[4]
 It follows that some expectation
about shared values or norms may be an important element of trust
(Lahno 2001, McLeod 2002, Mullin 2005, Smith 2008).


Further criticism of will-based accounts concerns how “goodwill” ought to be interpreted. In much of the discussion above, it is narrowly conceived so that it must involve friendly feeling or personal liking. Yet Jones urges us in her earlier work to understand goodwill so that it could be grounded in benevolence, conscientiousness, or the like, or in friendly feeling (1996, 7). In her later work, however, she worries that by defining goodwill so broadly we "turn it into a meaningless catchall that merely reports the presence of some positive motive, and one that may or may not even be directed toward the truster" (2012, 67). If this claim is correct, and the narrow understanding of goodwill is indeed too narrow, then will-based theories are in serious trouble. 


To recapitulate on the topic of motive, although will-based theories are influential, they are still open to substantial criticisms. Philosophers who
are less concerned with distinguishing trustworthiness from reliability
reject such accounts on the grounds that they are too narrow. By
contrast, those who think this distinction is important follow Baier in
identifying the relevant motive as goodwill (e.g. Potter 2002); or
combine reliance on goodwill with certain expectations (Jones 1996), including in one case a normative expectation of goodwill (Cogley 2012); or abandon the
goodwill requirement altogether and replace it with something else,
such as moral integrity or moral obligation. In addition, the literature includes some debate about just how to understand “goodwill”.


Notably, the majority of views discussed so far describe
trustworthiness as a relation between the trustee and some attitude,
commitment, or structuring condition (e.g. a social constraint). According to a different position, found in the work of Richard Holton (1994), the conditions giving rise to trustworthiness reside not
in the trustee’s relationship to certain of his or her attitudes,
commitments, etc., but rather in the stance that the trustor takes
toward the trustee. Holton argues that this stance (a
“participant stance”; Strawson 1974) involves a readiness
on the part of the trustor to feel betrayal. Although this view has
garnered positive attention (e.g. by Hieronymi 2008, McGeer
2008), some find it dissatisfying because it does not obviously
explain what would justify a reaction of betrayal, rather than mere
disappointment, when someone fails to honor one’s trust (see Nickel
2007, 318). By contrast, others say that the participant stance does not do “any distinctive work” in some cases, such as when a son trusts his mother simply because he knows she loves him; and hence, a participant-stance theory of trust is subject to counter examples (Simpson 2012, 553).


However, some have expanded on Holton’s theory in a way that deflects at least some of the criticism of it. Margaret Urban Walker explains that in taking a participant stance toward others, we hold them responsible (2006, 79). Thus, we expect them to act not simply as we assume they will, but as they should. In other words, we have normative, rather than merely predictive, expectations of them. Walker believes that all trust, at bottom--not just therapeutic trust--involves having normative expectations (and Jones, in her later work, agrees; 2012a). If that is right, then to be trustworthy is to live up to these expectations, and a failure to do so can result in betrayal. This is how a participant-stance theory can explain how trust can be betrayed. 
 

One last view about trustworthiness is that it is a virtue. Consider first why will-based accounts
do not capture this view. Someone can show goodwill towards another
and be trustworthy within the scope of their relationship (think of a
convicted felon with his mother) without being someone who we would
describe as trustworthy (Potter 2002, 8).  Sometimes, we
think of trustworthiness as a character trait that virtuous people
possess. Nancy Nyquist Potter refers to the trait as “full
trustworthiness,” and distinguishes it from “specific
trustworthiness”: trustworthiness that is specific to certain
relationships (25). To be fully trustworthy, one must have a
disposition to be trustworthy toward everyone. Call this the
“virtue” account.


It may sound odd to insist that trustworthiness is a
virtue or, in other words, a moral disposition to be trustworthy
(Potter 2002, 25; Hardin 2002, 32). What disposition exactly is it
meant to be? Is it a disposition normally to honor people’s
trust? That would be strange, since trust can be unwanted if the
trust is immoral (e.g., being trusted to hide a murder) or if it
misinterprets the nature of one’s relationship with the trusted
person (e.g., being trusted to be friends with a mere acquaintance).
Perhaps trustworthiness is instead a disposition to respond to trust in
appropriate ways, given “who one is in relation” to the
trustor and given other virtues that one possesses or ought to possess
(e.g., justice, compassion) (Potter 25). This is essentially
Potter’s view of trustworthiness. Modeling trustworthiness on
an Aristotelian conception of virtue, she defines a trustworthy person
as “one who can be counted on, as a matter of the sort of
person he or she is, to take care of those things that others entrust
to one and (following the Doctrine of the Mean) whose ways of
caring are neither excessive nor deficient” (her
 emphasis;
 16).[5]


Recent criticism of a virtue account comes from Karen Jones (2012a). As she explains, if being trustworthy were a virtue, then being untrustworthy would be a vice, but that cannot be right because we can never be required to exhibit a vice, yet we can be required to be untrustworthy (84). An example occurs when we are counted on by two different people to do two incompatible things and being trustworthy to the one requires that we are untrustworthy to the other (83). To defend her virtue theory, Potter would have to insist that in such a situation, either one is required simply to disappoint someone’s trust rather than to be untrustworthy, or that the kind of trustworthiness at issue is specific not full trustworthiness. 




But rather than cling to a virtue theory, why not just endorse the thin conception of trustworthiness (i.e. “specific trustworthiness”), according to
which X is trustworthy for me just in case I can trust X? Two things
can be said. First, the thick conception––that is, of trustworthiness as a virtue––is not meant to displace the thin conception. We can and do refer to
some people as trustworthy in the specific or thin sense and others as
trustworthy in the full or thick sense. Second, one could argue that
the thick conception explains better than the thin one why fully
trustworthy people are as dependable as they are. It is ingrained in
their character. Hence, they must have an ongoing commitment, and
better still, their commitment must come from a source that is
compatible with trustworthiness (i.e. virtue as opposed to mere
self-interest).


An account of trustworthiness that includes the idea that
trustworthiness is a virtue will seem ideal only if one thinks that
the genesis of the trustworthy person’s commitment is important.
If one thinks that it matters only whether—not how—the
trustor will be motivated to act, then one could assume that social
constraints and self-interest will do the job as well as a moral
disposition. Such controversy explains why philosophical accounts of
trustworthiness diverge from one another on the question of what could
motivate a trustworthy person (e.g. social constraints, interests, goodwill, a moral
 disposition?).[6]
 Not surprisingly, a similar divergence occurs
in accounts of trust, as those accounts bear on the issue of
what sort of motivation we seek from people we trust.


Recent work on trust has taken one or more of the following paths in dealing with the controversy about motive. 1) It has given “genealogical” accounts of trust or trustworthiness, which involve asking why we have these concepts, given the kinds of beings we are (e.g. social, reflective; see Jones 2012a, Simpson 2012). For example, Jones argues that the concepts exist essentially because of the need we have to be able to count on one another. Hence, in her view, trustworthiness involves a willingness to factor into our practical deliberation the likelihood that others are counting on us; and it can even require that we signal this willingness to others. 2) Some philosophers have adopted a pluralist view, according to which there are different forms of trust or trustworthiness, rather than a single variant or concept of them (e.g. Simpson 2012). And 3), some have investigated the nature of betrayal closely as a way to get clearer on what trust is like, in particular its normative dimensions (O’Neil 2012, Cogley 2012, Harding 2011). This last development is particularly welcome, given how little philosophical work there has been on betrayal. 



The controversy about motive still persists, however. Thankfully, in spite of it, there are things we can say for
certain about trust, which are relevant to deciding
when it is warranted. The trustor must be able to accept that by trusting,
s/he is vulnerable, usually to betrayal. The trustee must be
competent and committed to do what the trustor expects of him or her,
and may have to be committed in a particular way. Last, in cases
of paradigmatic trust at least, the trustor must be optimistic that
the trustee is indeed competent and committed.
2. The Epistemology of Trust


Writings on the epistemology of trust obviously bear on the issue of
when trust is warranted (i.e. justified). The central epistemological
question about trust is, “Ought I to trust or not?” That
is, given the way things seem to me, is it reasonable for me to trust?
People tend to ask this sort of question only in situations where they
cannot take trustworthiness for granted—that is, where they are
conscious of the fact that trusting could get them into trouble.
Examples are situations similar to those in which they have been
betrayed in the past or unlike any they have ever been in before. Thus,
the question, “Ought I to trust?” is particularly pertinent
(though not restricted) to a somewhat odd mix of people that includes
victims of infidelity, abuse, or the like, as well as foreign
immigrants and travelers.


What guidance, if any, could one offer to these people who struggle
with when to trust? Philosophical work on this question appears either
under the general heading of the epistemology or rationality of trust (e.g. Baker
1987, Webb 1992, Wanderer and Townsend 2013) or under the specific heading of testimony—that
is, of putting one’s trust in the testimony of others (e.g. Fricker 1995,
Hardwig 1991, Coady 1992, Jones 1999, Goldman 2001, Foley 2001, Daukas
2006, Faulkner 2007 and 2011, Koenig and Harris 2007, McMyler 2011, Zagzebski 2012). This section focuses on the epistemology of trust generally, rather than on trust in testimony specifically. For discussion of the latter, see related entry on testimony.


Philosophers sometimes ask whether it could ever
be rational to trust other people. This question arises for two main
reasons. First, it appears that trust and rational reflection (e.g. on
whether one should be trusting) are in tension with one another. Since
trust inherently involves risk, any attempt to eliminate the risk
through rational reflection could eliminate the trust at the same time.
Second, trust tends to give us
blinkered vision: it makes us resistant to evidence that may contradict
our optimism about the trustee (Baker 1987; Jones 1996). For example,
if I trust my brother not to harm anyone, I will resist the truth of
any evidence to the contrary. Here, trust and rationality seem to come apart.


But even if some of our trust could be rational, one might insist that
not all of it could be rational for a number of reasons. First, if we
trust people in a myriad of ways every single day, as some claim that
we do (e.g. Baier 1986, 234), then we could not possibly subject
all of our trust to rational reflection. We certainly could
not reflect on every bit of knowledge we have acquired through the
testimony of others, such as that the earth is round or that
Afghanistan exists (Webb 1993, Fricker 1995, Coady 1992). Second,
bioethicists point out that some trust is unavoidable and occurs in
the absence of rational reflection (e.g. trust in emergency room
nurses and physicians; see Zaner 1991). Lastly, some
trust—namely therapeutic trust—purposefully leaps beyond
any evidence of trustworthiness in an effort to engender
trustworthiness in the trustee. Is this sort of trust rational? One
might say “no,” given that there is not sufficient
evidence for it.


Philosophers have responded to such skepticism about the rationality
of trust by saying that rationality, when applied to trust, needs to
be understood differently than it is in each of the skeptical points
above. There, ‘rationality’ means something like this: it
is rational to believe in something only if one has verified that it
will happen or done as much as possible to verify it. For example, it
is rational for me to believe that my brother has not harmed anyone
only if the evidence points in that direction and I have discovered
that to be the case. However, problems exist with applying this view of rationality to trust. And the rationality of trust need not be understood according to it. While this view is both “truth-directed” and “internalist,” for instance, the rationality of trust could––as discussed below––be “end-directed” or “externalist.”


In discussing the rationality of trust, some authors distinguish between
truth-directed (or epistemic) rationality and end-directed (or
strategic) rationality (e.g. Baker 1987). One could say
that one is rational in trusting emergency room physicians, for example,
not necessarily because one has good reason to believe that they are trustworthy, but
because by trusting them, one can remain calm in a situation over
which one has little control. Similarly, it may be rational for me to
trust my brother not because I have good evidence of his trustworthiness but
rather because trusting him is essential to our having a loving
 relationship.[7]


Thus, trust can be rational depending on whether one conceives
of rationality as truth-directed or end-directed. But notice that
it also matters how one conceives of trust. For example, if trust is
a belief in someone’s trustworthiness (see Trust and the Will),
then whether the rationality of trust can be end-directed will depend on whether the rationality of a belief can be end-directed. To put the point more generally, how trust is
rationally justified will depend on how beliefs are rationally justified (Jones 1996). 


Some work on trust and rationality concerns whether the
rationality of trust can indeed be end-directed and also what could
make therapeutic trust and the like rational. Pamela Hieronymi argues
that the ends for which we trust cannot provide reasons for us to
trust in the first place (2008). Considerations about how useful or
valuable trust is do not bear on the truth of a trusting belief, that
is, a belief in someone’s trustworthiness. But Hieronymi claims that
trust, in a pure sense at least, always involves a trusting
belief. How then does she account for trust that is motivated by how
therapeutic (i.e. useful) the trust will be? She believes that trust
of this sort is not pure or full-fledged trust. As she explains,
people can legitimately complain about not being trusted fully when
they are trusted in this way, which occurs only when other people lack
confidence in them but trust them nonetheless (230; see also Lahno
2001, 184–185). 


By contrast, Victoria McGeer believes that trust is more substantial
or pure when the available evidence does not support it
(2008). She describes how trust of this sort—what she calls
“substantial trust”—could be rational, and does so
without appealing to how important it might be or, in other words, to
the ends it might serve, but instead to whether the trustee will be
trustworthy.[8]
According to McGeer, what makes “substantial trust”
rational is that it involves hope that the trustees will do what they
are trusted to do, which “can have a galvanizing effect on how
[they] see themselves, as trustors avowedly do, in the fullness of
their potential” (252). Rather than complain (as Hieronymi would
assume that trustees might) about trustors being merely hopeful about rather
than confident in their trustworthiness, they could respond well to
the trustors’ attitude toward them. Moreover, if it is likely that
they will respond well, then the trust in them must be rational.


Philosophers who agree that trust can be rational—regardless,
perhaps, of whether it is “substantial” (to use McGeer’s
language)—tend to disagree about the extent to which reasons
that confer rationality must be accessible to the trustor. Some say
that all of these reasons must be available to this person in order
for the trust to be rational; in that case, the person is or could be
internally justified in trusting as s/he does. Others say
that the reasons need not be internal, but can instead
be external to the trustor and can lie in what caused the
trust, or, more specifically, in the epistemic reliability of what
caused it. Furthermore, the trustor need not have access to, or be aware
of the reliability of, such reasons. The latter’s epistemology of
trust is therefore externalist, while the former’s is
internalist. 


Some epistemologists of trust write as though trust is only rational
if the trustor him or herself has rationally estimated the likely
trustworthiness of the trustee. For example, Russell Hardin implies
that if my trust in you is rational, then “I make a rough
estimate of the truth of [the] claim … that you will be
trustworthy under certain conditions … and then I correct my
estimate, or ‘update,’ as I obtain new evidence on
you” (2002, 112). On this view, I must have reasons for my
estimate or for my updates (Hardin 130), which could come from
inductive generalizations I have made about my past experience, from
my knowledge that social constraints exist that will encourage your
trustworthiness or what have you. Such an internalist epistemology of
trust is valuable because it coheres with the common sense idea that
one ought to have good or at least decent reasons for trusting other
people, especially when something important is at stake (Fricker
1995).


But such an epistemology is also open to criticisms. For example, it
suggests that rational trust will always be partial rather than
complete, given that the rational trustor is open to evidence that
contradicts his or her trust on this theory, while someone who trusts
completely in someone else lacks such openness. The theory also
implies that the reasons for trusting well (i.e. in a justified way)
are accessible to the trustor, at some point or another, which may be
false. Some reasons for trust may be too “cunning” for this to be the case. Here, I have in mind a reason for trusting others that Philip Pettit discusses (1995): trust signals to people that they are being held in esteem, which is something that they will want to maintain; they will honor our trust because they are naturally “esteem-seeking.” However, consciously having this reason for trust is incompatible with actually trusting (Wanderer and Townsend 2013, 9), that is, if trust involves being optimistic that people will act out of motive other than self-interest. 


Others suggest that reasons for trust are often too numerous and
varied to be open to the conscious consideration of the trustor (e.g.
Baier 1986). There can be very subtle reasons to trust or distrust
someone—for example, reasons that have to do with body language,
with systematic yet veiled forms of oppression, or with a complicated
history of trusting others about which one could not easily
generalize.  Such factors may influence the trustor without him or her
knowing it.


The above worries explain why some philosophers defend externalist
epistemologies of trust. Some do so explicitly (e.g. McLeod 2002).
They argue for reliabilist theories that make trust rationally
justified if and only if it is formed and sustained by reliable
processes (i.e. “processes that tend to produce accurate
representations of the world”; Goldman
1992, 113). Others gesture towards externalism (Webb 1993; Baier 1986),
as Baier does with what she calls “a moral test for trust.”
The test is that “knowledge of what the other party is relying on
for the continuance of the trust relationship would … itself
destabilize the relation” (1986, 255). The other party might be
relying on concealment of untrustworthiness or on a threat advantage,
in which case the trust would probably fail the test. Because
Baier’s test focuses on the causal basis for trust, or for what
maintains the trust relation, it is externalist. Moreover, because the
trustor often cannot gather the information needed for the test without
ceasing to trust the other person (Baier 1986, 260), the test cannot be
internalist.


Although an externalist theory of trust deals well with some of the worries
one might have with an internalist theory, it has problems of its own.
The most serious problem, perhaps, is the absence of any requirement
that trustors themselves have good reasons for trusting, especially
when their trust makes them seriously vulnerable. Again, it appears
that common sense dictates the opposite: that sometimes we, as
trustors, ought to be able to back up our decisions about when to
trust.


Presumably to avoid having to defend either internalism or
externalism, some philosophers simply provide a list of common
“justifiers” for trust (i.e. “facts or states of
affairs that determine the justification status of [trust]”;
Goldman 1999, 274), which a trusting agent
could take into account in deciding when to trust (Govier 1998, Jones
1996). The lists include such factors as the social role of the
trustee, the domain in which the trust occurs, an
“agent-specific” factor that concerns how good a trustor
the agent tends to be (Jones 1996, 21), and the social or political
climate in which the trust occurs. Philosophers have tended to
emphasize that last factor as a justification condition for trust, and
so I will describe it in some detail.


While, paradigmatically, trust is a relation that holds between two
individuals, forces larger than those individuals inevitably shape
their trust in one another. Social or political climate contributes to
how trustworthy people tend to be and therefore to whether trust is
justified. A climate of virtue, for example, is one in which
trustworthiness tends to be pervasive, because the virtues (i.e. those
other than trustworthiness) tend to enhance trustworthiness (Baier
2004). Similarly, a democratic society is one in which people can trust
one another more often than in other sorts of political societies, such
as totalitarian ones (Uslaner 1999). Alternatively, societies that are
oppressive make it irrational in general for the people who are
oppressed to trust those who oppress them (Baier 1986, 259; Potter
2002, 24). “Social trust,” as some call it, is low in these circumstances (Govier 1997, Welch 2013).


Social or political climate has a significant influence on the
default stance that one ought to take toward people’s
trustworthiness (see e.g. Walker 2006). One needs such a stance because one cannot always stop
to reflect carefully on when trust is appropriate. For example, some
say that the correct stance toward the testimony of others is always
trust: that people always have a prima facie right to trust
what other people say (e.g. Coady 1992). Others disagree that the
correct stance could be so universal and claim instead that it is
relative to climate, as well as to other factors listed above, such as
domain (Jones 1999).


Our trust or distrust may be prima facie justified if we have
the correct default stance, although most philosophers assume that it could only be fully justified either by reasons that are internal to us or by the causal processes
that created the attitude in the first place. (Lately, however, an alternative to pure internalism or externalism about trust has been developed, though only with respect to trust in people’s testimony. The theory is an “inheritance model” of testimony, according to which “by trusting a speaker, audiences allow their beliefs to inherit the evidential support enjoyed by the speaker’s belief” (Keren 2014, 2612, citing McMyler 2011). The trustor/hearer does not gather this support him or herself, and thus is not aware of the reasons it provides in favour of his or her beliefs. Nevertheless, s/he must have reasons for thinking that the speaker is speaking knowledgeably and sincerely. In this way, some, but not all, of the reasons that justify her trust are internal to him or her.)   



But whichever epistemology of trust we
choose, it ought to be sensitive to the tension that exists between
trusting somebody and rationally reflecting on the grounds for that
trust. It would be odd, to say the least, if what made an attitude
justified destroyed that attitude. At the same time, however, if
possible, our epistemology ought to cohere with common sense, insofar
as common sense requires that we inspect rather than have pure faith
in whatever makes us seriously vulnerable to other people, which trust
can most definitely do.
3. The Value of Trust


The one who asks, “When is trust warranted?” might be
interested in knowing what the point of trust is. In other words, what
value does it have? Although the value it has for a particular person
will depend on his or her circumstances, the value it could
have for any particular person will depend on why trust is valuable,
generally speaking. Trust can have enormous instrumental value and may
also have some intrinsic value. In discussing its instrumental value,
I will refer to the “goods of trust,” which include opportunities for cooperative activity, meaningful relationships, knowledge, autonomy,
self-respect, and overall moral maturity. Because these goods may
benefit the trustor, the trustee, or society in general, they are
therefore social as well as individual goods, where the most relevant
individuals tend to be parties to the trust relationship. A further
point about these goods is that they accompany
justified trust, rather than any old
 trust.[9]


However, if trust produced no goods independent of it, then would
there be no point in trusting? One might say “no,” on the
grounds that trust is (or at least can be; O’Neil 2012, 311) a sign of respect for others which makes it
intrinsically worthwhile. This idea is closely linked to the view that
trustworthiness is a virtue, which makes it intrinsically worthwhile
(see The Nature of Trust and Trustworthiness). Trust would be
a sign of respect for others if it were an attitude of optimism
about the trustee’s character: that is, if it assumed that virtue
resided within this person’s character. Moreover, trust that has intrinsic
value of this sort presumably must be justified. If optimism about the
person’s character was inappropriate, then the respect would be
misplaced and the intrinsic value would be lost. But I am speculating
here. Philosophers have said comparatively little about trust being
worthwhile in itself as opposed to worthwhile because of what it
produces, or because of what accompanies it. Thus, I will say no more
about the former and focus on the latter, in particular, on the goods
of trust.


Turning first to the instrumental value of trust to the trustor, some
argue that trusting vastly increases our opportunities for cooperating
with others and for benefiting from that cooperation, although of
course we would only benefit if people we trusted cooperated
as well (Gambetta 1988; Hardin 2002). Trust enhances cooperation (but
may not be necessary for it; Cook et al 2005, Skyrms
2008). Because trust removes the incentive to check up on other
people, it makes cooperation with trust less complicated than
cooperation without it (Luhmann 1979). This point applies to
justified trust only if trust is justified in external rather
than internal ways, however (see The Epistemology of Trust). If trust
were only justified when the trustor could produce legitimate reasons
for why the trustee is trustworthy, then cooperation with justified
trust would not be a whole lot easier than cooperation without it. That
is true, at least, if having proper reasons required frequently
checking up on the trustee.


Trust makes cooperation possible, rather than simply easier, if trust is essential to promising. Daniel Friedrich and Nicholas Southwood defend what they call the “Trust View” of promissory obligation (2011), according to which “making a promise involves inviting another individual to trust one to do something” (Friedrich and Southwood 277). If this view is correct, then cooperation through promising is impossible without trust. Moreover, cooperation of this sort will not be fruitful unless the trust is justified. 


Trusting provides us with goods beyond those that come with
cooperation, although again, for these goods to materialize, the trust must
be justified. Sometimes, trust involves little or no cooperation, so
that the trustor is completely dependent on the trustee, although the
reverse is not true. Examples are the trust of young children in their
parents and the trust of severely ill or disabled people in their care
providers. Trust is particularly important for these people, because
they tend to be powerless to exercise their rights or to enforce any
kind of contract (which is not to say they could not be parties to a
contract, including the social contract; see Silvers and Francis
2005). Moreover, since the trust that the ill or disabled place in
their care providers contributes to them being vulnerable, it is
essential that they can trust these people; that is, it is
important that their trust be justified. The goods at stake for them
are all the goods involved in having a good or decent life.


Among the specific goods that philosophers associate with trusting are meaningful relationships with others (rather than simply cooperative relationships that further individual self-interest; Harding 2011),
knowledge, and
 autonomy.[10] Let me expand on the points about knowledge and autonomy. Philosophers writing on testimony argue
that scientific knowledge (Hardwig 1991), moral knowledge (Jones
1999), or almost all knowledge in fact (Webb 1993) depends for its
acquisition on trust in the testimony of others. The basic argument
for the need to trust what others say is that no one person has the
time, intellect, and experience necessary to learn, independently,
facts about the world that many of us do know. Examples include the
scientific fact that the earth is round, the moral fact that the
oppression of people from social groups different from our own can be
severe (Jones 1999), and the mundane fact that we were born on
such-in-such a day (Webb 1993, 261). Of course, trusting the people
who testify to these facts could only generate knowledge if that trust
were justified. If we were told our date of birth by people who were
determined, oddly, to deceive us about when we were born, then we
would not know when we were born.


Autonomy is another good that flows from trust, at least insofar as
being autonomous is a skill that we acquire and exercise only in social
environments where we can trust people to support it. Feminists in
particular tend to conceive of autonomy this way—that is, as a
relational, or socially-constituted, property (Mackenzie and Stoljar
2000). Many feminists note that sexist or oppressive social
environments can inhibit autonomy, and some say explicitly that conditions
necessary for autonomy (e.g. adequate options, knowledge relevant to
one’s decisions) can exist only with the help of people or
institutions that are trustworthy (McLeod 2002, Oshana 2014). Justified trust in others to ensure
that these conditions exist is essential for autonomy, if in fact
autonomy is relational.


The kind of trust that is necessary for both knowledge and autonomy is
arguably self-directed as well as other-directed. Keith Lehrer claims
that to be able to do the epistemic work that his internalist
epistemology requires of us (i.e. evaluating the truth of our beliefs
and the worth of our desires), we need to trust ourselves to do this
work (1997). Richard Foley similarly argues that to have knowledge,
including knowledge acquired through others’ opinions and through our
own past opinions, we need ultimately to be able to trust ourselves
(2005). (For a related view, one that links self-trust with the
“diachronic exercise of practical reason,” see Hinchman
2003). Trudy Govier (1993) and Carolyn McLeod (2002) both assert that
to be motivated to choose and act in accordance with our own
values—that is, to choose and act autonomously—we need to
trust ourselves to do so. Although some self-trust might be better
than none at all as far as knowledge and autonomy go (for no
self-trust would leave us incapacitated and with no opportunity to
learn from our mistakes), justified self-trust is best
overall. Without being justified in trusting ourselves to be good
epistemic or autonomous agents, we cannot be either.


Specific goods of trust that are instrumental to the well-being of the
trustee also materialize only if the trust is justified.
Trust can improve the self-respect and moral maturity of this person.
In particular, if trust involves optimism about a person’s moral
character, it can engender self-respect in that person. (For on such
an account of trust, to trust is to show respect, which can then be
internalized.) To be trusted can allow us to be more respectful not
only toward ourselves, but also toward others. It can therefore
enhance our overall moral maturity. The explicit goal of therapeutic
trust is precisely to bring about such maturity (see The Epistemology
of Trust). Therapeutic trust leaps ahead of the evidence, which means
that it is hard to justify epistemically.  But as suggested above (The
Epistemology), perhaps it can be justified in a truth-directed way
over time, provided that the trust has its intended effect of making
the trustee more trustworthy (McGeer 2008; Baker 1987, 12). Clearly,
for therapeutic trust to benefit trusted people, it
would have to be justified in this way (i.e. the therapy would
normally have to work).


The social goods of trust are linked with the individual goods that
concern moral maturity and cooperation. These social goods include the
practice of morality, the very existence of society perhaps, as well
as strong social networks. Morality itself is a cooperative activity,
which can only get off the ground if people can trust one another to
try, at least, to be moral. Yet to be able to make meaningful attempts
in this regard, people have to be somewhat morally mature, which can
only come from a moral education grounded in trust. For such reasons,
Baier claims that trust is “the very basis of morality”
(2004, 180). It could also be the very basis of society, insofar as
trust in fellow citizens to honor social contracts makes those
contracts possible. Even if trust did not make society possible,
however, it certainly makes it better or more livable. Some argue that
trust is a form of “social capital,” meaning roughly that
it enables “people to work together for common purposes in
groups and organizations” (Fukuyama 1995, 10; quoted in Hardin
2002, 83). Hence, “high-trust” societies have stronger
economies and stronger social networks in general than
“low-trust” societies (Fukuyama; Inglehart 1999). Of
course, these facts could only be true of these societies if, on the
whole, the trust within them was justified (that is, if trustees
tended not to “defect” and destroy chances for cooperating
in the future).


If without trusting or being trusted in justified ways, we could not
have morality or society and could not be morally mature, autonomous,
knowledgeable, or invested with opportunities for collaborating with
others, then the value of justified trust is hard to over-estimate. The
same is not true, however, of trust in general (Baier 1986). People can
trust too much or too little; and either way, their trust can be
harmful since it can deprive them of the goods that go along with
justified trust. Too much trust in particular leaves people
open to betrayal, abuse, terror, and deception. And since there are people who
tend to elicit too much trust from others, the question, “Why be
distrusting?” is as legitimate as “Why be
trusting?” (For responses to the former question, see Hardin 2004.)
4. Trust and the Will


Trust may not be warranted (i.e. plausible) because the agent has lost
the ability to trust. People lose this ability often as a result of
trauma (Herman 1991). The trauma caused by rape, for example, can
profoundly reduce one’s sense that the world is a safe place, with
caring people in it. How can people ever recover this trusting
sensibility?  A similar but broader question, “How can trust be
restored once it has been lost?”, is relevant to people who lose
trust not in everyone or everything, but rather in particular people
or particular institutions. For example, in some parts of the world
people tend to trust the medical profession much less than they did in
the past (O’Neill 2002; Pellegrino 1991b). How could their trust in
this profession be restored? Although often destroying trust is quick
and dirty, creating trust is slow and painful (Uslaner 1999; Baier
1986).  The reasons have to do with what kind of mental attitude trust
is.  It is not the sort of attitude that we can simply will ourselves
to have, although we can cultivate it.


While the cultivation of any trust depends on what sort of mental
attitude trust is, the cultivation of justified trust depends
on how trust is justified (see The Epistemology of Trust). Some
philosophers, most notably Baier, deny that useful rules exist for
when to trust so that one’s trust will be justified. The process of
trusting well is too complicated for that to be the case. Even so,
giving some guidance on how to trust well is possible: for example,
Baier and others list factors that will at least improve our chances
of trusting well, if we take them into account (see The
Epistemology). This section focuses on how to trust at all, rather
than on how to trust well. To receive the goods of trust, one has to
do both: trust and trust well.


Under the heading “how to trust,” consider why trust
cannot be willed but can be cultivated. Baier questions whether people
are able “to trust simply because of encouragement to
trust” (1986, 244; my emphasis). She writes, “‘Trust
me!’ is for most of us an invitation which we cannot accept at
will—either we do already trust the one who says it, in which
case it serves at best as reassurance, or it is properly responded to
with, ‘Why should and how can I, until I have cause
to?’” (my emphasis; 1986, 244). Baier is not a voluntarist
about trust, just as most people are not voluntarists about belief. In
other words, she thinks that we cannot simply decide to trust for
purely motivational rather than epistemic reasons (i.e., merely
because we want to, rather than because we have reason to think that
the other person is actually trustworthy; Mills 1998).  That many
people feel compelled to say, “I wish I could trust you,”
suggests that Baier’s view is correct: wishing or wanting is not
enough. But Holton interprets Baier’s view differently. According to
him, Baier’s point is that we can never decide to trust, not that we
can never decide to trust for motivational purposes (1994). This
interpretation ignores, however, the attention that Baier gives to
situations in which all we have is encouragement (trusting
“simply because of encouragement”). The
“cause” she refers to (‘Why should and how can I,
until I have cause to [trust]?’) is an epistemic
cause. Once we have one of those, we can presumably decide whether to
trust on the basis of it. But we cannot decide to trust simply because
we want to, according to Baier.


Thus, trust resembles belief in being non-voluntary in the above
sense. Is trust a belief then (i.e., a belief in someone’s
trustworthiness)? While many philosophers believe that it is (e.g.,
Hieronymi 2008), others insist that it is not (e.g. Faulkner
2007). The latter say it is possible to trust without believing that
the trustee is trustworthy. Holton gives the nice example of trusting
a friend to be sincere without believing that the friend will be
sincere (75). Arguably, if one already believed that to be the
case, one would have no need to trust the friend. It is also possible
to believe that someone is trustworthy without trusting that person,
which suggests that trust could not merely be a belief in
someone’s trustworthiness (McLeod 2002, 85). I might think that a
particular person is trustworthy without trusting him or her because I
have no cause to do so.


One reason for thinking that trust is not a belief, but is instead an
emotion, is that trust resembles an emotion in having characteristics
that are unique to emotions, at least according to an influential
account of them (de Sousa 1987, Calhoun 1984, Rorty 1980, Lahno 2001).
These characteristics concern how emotions narrow our perception to
certain “fields of evidence”: those fields that support
the emotion (Jones 1996, 11). Thus, when we are in the grip of an
emotion, we tend to see those facts that affirm its existence and are
resistant to facts that negate it. To illustrate, if I am really angry at my
mother, then I tend to think about the things that justify my anger
while ignoring or refusing to see the things that make it
unjustified. I can only see those other things once my anger subsides.
Similarly with trust: if I truly trust my mother in certain domains,
my attention falls on those aspects of her that justify my trust and
is averted from evidence that suggests she is untrustworthy in these
domains (Baker 1987). (For a view about how trust could be a belief yet still possess such a characteristic––that is, an insensitivity to counter evidence––see Keren 2014.)


The characteristics of trust that indicate it might be an emotion are ones
that we can try to mimic in our attitude toward other people, in an
effort to be more trusting. In other words, we could purposefully try
to focus our attention on what makes other people trustworthy, and in
doing so cultivate trust in them. Our goal could simply be
self-improvement: that is, becoming more trusting, hopefully in a good
way, so that we reap the benefits of justified trust. Alternatively,
we might strive for the improvement of others: that is, making them
more trustworthy. (See the above discussions of therapeutic
trust.)


Institutions or groups trying to restore public trust could also use
the above method of cultivating trust. For example, the medical
profession could try to hammer home to the public the message that most
physicians and other medical professionals help people and
care about them. For many, such a campaign could make it impossible for them
not to think that these professionals are trustworthy. (However, for others such as Black people in the United States who have social histories of serious harm, including exploitation, by the medical profession, the result may be very different. See e.g. Almassi 2014.) 


Whether such a campaign is even morally appropriate would depend on whether the resulting trust would be justified. In
general, cultivating trust is only morally wise if trusting would be wise in
the circumstances, which in turn would depend on whether factors are
present that roughly indicate that trust would be justified. Is, for
example, the social or political climate of one’s society conducive to
one trusting well? It may not be. Consider a woman who has been raped
in a society that effectively condones such acts toward women. For her
to cultivate the trust that was lost as a result of the rape may be
imprudent, especially if she continues to live in such a sexist
place.
5. Conclusion


This entry has centered on an important practical question about
trust: “When is trust warranted?” Different answers to
this question give rise to different philosophical puzzles. For
example, in responding to the question, one might appeal to the nature of trust
and trustworthiness, and consider whether the attitude of the proposed
trustor could support trust, and whether the qualities of the proposed
trustee indicate that this person is trustworthy. But to decide such matters, one
must first settle the difficult issue of whether, to be trustworthy,
a person must have a particular kind of motive for acting.


Alternatively, in deciding whether trust is warranted, one might
consider whether the trust would either be rationally justified or
valuable. The two can overlap, and do overlap when rational
justification is understood in an end-directed way—that is,
where trust is rationally justified because it is instrumentally
valuable, or because it serves one’s ends. Regardless of whether the
justification of trust is end-or truth-directed, however, the exact
nature of its justification is puzzling. Should the rationality of
trust or distrust be interpreted using an internalist epistemology or
an externalist one (or an epistemology that combines aspects of the two)? Because good arguments exist on different sides, it is
not clear how trust is rationally justified. Neither is it entirely
clear what sort of value trust can have, given the nature of
trust. For example, trust may or may not have intrinsic moral value depending on
whether it signals respect for others.


Lastly, one might focus on the fact that trust cannot be warranted
when it is impossible, which is the case when the agent does not
already trust and cannot simply will him or herself to do so. While it
appears that trust is not the sort of attitude that one can will
oneself to have, trust can still be cultivated. The manner in which it
is cultivated, however, would depend again on what sort of attitude it
is.


Since one can respond to the question, “When is trust
warranted?” by referring to each of the above dimensions of
trust, a complete philosophical answer to this question is inevitably
complex. But such an answer would also be philosophically intriguing and
socially important. It would be intriguing both because of its
complexity and because it would draw on a number of philosophical
areas, including epistemology, philosophy of mind, and value
theory. It would be important because trust that is warranted
contributes to the foundation of a good society. It helps people to
thrive through healthy cooperation with others and to be morally
mature human beings.