Two-dimensional (2D) semantics is a formal framework that is used to
characterize the meaning of certain linguistic expressions and the
entailment relations among sentences containing them. Two-dimensional
semantics has also been applied to thought contents. In contrast with
standard possible worlds semantics, 2D semantics assigns extensions
and truth-values to expressions relative to two possible world
parameters, rather than just one. So a 2D semantic framework provides
finer-grained semantic values than those available within standard
possible world semantics, while using the same basic model-theoretic
resources. The 2D framework itself is just a formal tool. To develop a
semantic theory for someone’s language, a proponent of 2D semantics
must do three things: (i) explain what exactly the two possible world
parameters represent, (ii) explain the rules for assigning 2D semantic
values to a person’s words and sentences, and (iii) explain how 2D
semantic values help in understanding the meanings of the person’s
words and sentences.

The two-dimensional framework has been interpreted in different ways
for different explanatory purposes. The two most widely accepted
applications of two-dimensional semantics target restricted classes of
expressions. David Kaplan’s 2D semantic framework for indexicals is
widely used to explain conventional semantic rules governing
context-dependent expressions like ‘I’,
‘that’, or ‘here’, which pick out different
things depending on the context in which the expression is used. And
logicians working on tense and modal logic use 2D semantics to
characterize the logical implications of operators like
‘now’, ‘actually’, and
‘necessarily’. Such restricted applications of 2D
semantics are intended to systematize and explain uncontroversial
aspects of linguistic understanding.

Two-dimensional semantics has also been used for more ambitious
philosophical purposes. Influential theorists like David Lewis, Frank
Jackson and David Chalmers argue that a generalized 2D semantic
framework can be used to isolate an apriori aspect of meaning.
Roughly, the idea is that speakers always have apriori access to the
truth-conditions associated with their own sentences. On the face of
it, this apriority claim seems to conflict with the observation that
certain necessary truths, such as ‘water =
H2O’, can be known only on the basis of empirical
inquiry. But proponents of generalized 2D semantics argue that the 2D
framework undercuts this objection, by showing how such aposteriori
necessities are consistent with apriori access to truth-conditions.
The positive reasons to accept generalized 2D semantics, however, are
bound up with larger (and partly disjoint) explanatory projects. As a
consequence, debates over the merits of generalized 2D semantics touch
on broader controversies about apriority, modality, semantic theory
and philosophical methodology.

The two-dimensional framework can also figure in a theory of ad
hoc language use, instead of a theory of literal meanings. Robert
Stalnaker’s influential 2D account of assertion falls in this
category. His “metasemantic” interpretation of the 2D
framework is intended to characterize what is communicated when
conversational partners are partially ignorant or mistaken about the
literal meaning of their own words. Although it is formally similar to
generalized 2D semantics, Stalnaker’s use of the 2D framework avoids
apriori accessible truth-conditions of the sort posited by generalized
2D semantics.

Readers who are unfamiliar with the 2D framework and want to get an
overall sense of the formalism and its philosophical applications
should read section 1 plus the subsequent “overview”
sections. Those already familiar with the basic 2D framework may skip
section 1 and move directly to sections 2 and 3, which contrast recent
philosophical applications of the framework.
 
1. Indexicals
1.1 Introducing a 2D framework

A good way to get an intuitive feel for the basic structure of a
two-dimensional semantic framework is to consider the semantics of
context-dependent “indexical” expressions like
‘I’ or ‘this’.

Semantic theories explain how the truth or falsity of whole sentences
depends on the meanings of their parts by stating rules governing the
interpretation of subsentential expressions and their modes of
combination. A semantic framework provides a standard formalism for
stating such rules. The simplest (0-dimensional) semantic frameworks
work by assigning extensions as the semantic values of
particular expressions. Intuitively, the extension includes those
things in the actual world to which the expression applies: e.g., the
extension of the name ‘Barack Obama’ is the man Obama, the
extension of the predicate ‘is cool’ is the set of all the
actual cool things, and the extension of a two-place predicate
‘is cooler than’ is the set of pairs of actually existing
things the first of which is cooler than the second. A whole sentence
is assigned a truth-value (True or False) as its extension, which is
computed on the basis of the extensions of the component expressions:
e.g., the sentence, ‘Barack Obama is cool’, will have the
semantic value True just in case Obama is a member of the set of
actual cool things. A two-dimensional semantic framework is the result
of enriching this simple extensional framework in two distinct
ways.

The first enrichment, standard possible worlds semantics, is
introduced in order to explain the meaning of modal operators like
‘possible’ and ‘necessary’ and to distinguish
the intuitive subject matter represented by particular subsentential
expressions. Consider the expressions ‘Roger Federer’,
‘the greatest tennis player of all time’, and ‘the
most famous Swiss citizen in 2010’. All three expressions happen
to have exactly the same extension: a particular individual RF. So a
simple extensional semantics will assign exactly the same semantic
value to all three expressions. But clearly they differ in meaning: if
events had unfolded only slightly differently than they actually did,
the three expressions would pick out different people. For instance,
if Federer had decided to go into banking instead of tennis, Jean
Piaget might have been the best known Swiss citizen and Rod Laver the
greatest tennis player; but of course Federer would still have been
Federer. In general, definite descriptions like ‘the greatest
tennis player’ or ‘the most famous Swiss citizen’
pick out different individuals depending on who happens to have the
relevant properties in counterfactual situations; whereas proper names
like ‘Roger Federer’ rigidly pick out the very
same individual in every possible
 situation.[1]
 [See entry on
 rigid designators.]
 Moreover, such differences in what expressions pick out in
counterfactual situations affect the truth of modal claims: e.g.,
‘Federer is necessarily Federer’ is true, but
‘Federer is necessarily the greatest tennis player’ is
false. So there seems to be an aspect of meaning that is not captured
in simple extensional semantics. The basic idea behind possible world
semantics is to map out such differences in meaning by specifying what
an expression picks out relative to every possible way the world
could be (every “possible world”).

In standard (1-dimensional) possible worlds semantics, the semantic
value of an expression is an intension, a function that
assigns an extension to the expression “at” every possible
world. For instance, the semantic value of a definite description like
‘the best known Swiss citizen’ is a function that takes as
input a possible world and yields as output whoever happens to satisfy
that description in that world, and the semantic value of a proper
name like ‘Roger Federer’ is a constant function that maps
every possible world to the very same individual, RF. Such intensions
allow the semantic theorist to capture commonsense intuitions about
the nature of the objects, kinds, or properties picked out by
particular expressions. The nature of Federer is reflected in the
different properties he could have in different possible situations,
and the nature of being the greatest tennis player is reflected in the
properties of the individuals who satisfy that description in
different possible situations. Standard possible worlds semantics
provides a unified framework for keeping track of such modal
intuitions—intuitions about the “modal profile” of
the objects, kinds and properties picked out by our
 words.[2]
 The possible worlds framework also helps explain the meaning of modal
operators like ‘necessarily’ and ‘possibly’: a
sentence is necessarily true just in case it is true at every possible
world, and it is possibly true just in case it is true at some
possible world. So we can think of the semantic value of the modal
operator ‘necessarily’ as a function that maps necessarily
true sentences to the truth value True and all other sentences to the
value False. This sort of possible worlds semantics is the standard
formal framework for clarifying the content of modal claims and the
logical relations among them. [See the entries on
 intensional Logic
 and
 modal logic.]

The second enrichment of the basic extensional semantic
framework—the one that is distinctive of two-dimensional
semantics—requires us to take possible worlds into account in a
different way. To see why this might be necessary for an adequate
account of meaning, let’s focus on context sensitive expressions like
‘I’, ‘here’ or ‘this’. In one
respect, these terms function like names, picking out the very same
thing in every possible world. For instance, if Hillary Rodham Clinton
says ‘I could have been president’, her word
‘I’ refers rigidly to the very same woman, HRC, in every
possible world and her claim is true just in case there is a possible
way the world could be in which that very woman is president. In
standard possible worlds semantics, then, the semantic value of
Clinton’s utterance of ‘I’ will be exactly the same as an
utterance of the name ‘Hillary Rodham Clinton’: a function
that yields the individual HRC for every possible world. But clearly
the English word ‘I’ is not synonymous with the name
‘Hillary Rodham Clinton’—for John McCain might utter
the sentence ‘I could have been president’ and in his
mouth the word ‘I’ would refer rigidly to a different
person, JM, in every possible world. What’s distinctive of
context-sensitive expressions like ‘I’ or
‘this’ is that they represent different things depending
on the context in which they are used. David Kaplan
 (1989)[3]
 first brought widespread attention to this phenomenon of
context-dependence by proposing a highly influential two-dimensional
semantic theory to clarify the rules governing such expressions [see
the entry on
 indexicals].

Kaplan distinguishes two different aspects of the meaning of
expressions in a public language. The first aspect, content,
reflects the modal profile of the object, kind or property
represented. This is the aspect of meaning that is modeled by standard
possible world semantics. The second aspect of meaning,
character, reflects semantic rules governing how the content
of an expression may vary from one context of use to the next. A
proper name like ‘Hillary Rodham Clinton’ (or indeed any
non-indexical expression) has a constant character, picking out the
very same object in every context in which it’s used, whereas
indexical expressions like ‘I’ or ‘this’ have
variable character, picking out different things in different contexts
of use.

Formally, character is defined as a function that maps possible
contexts of use to contents, and content is defined as a function
mapping possible worlds to extensions. Thus, a character is a function
that takes as input a context and yields as output a function from
possible worlds to extensions. This is a two-dimensional
intension, since there are two distinct roles that possibilities
play here: as a context of use, and as a circumstance of evaluation (a
possible situation relative to which we evaluate whether the relevant
object exists or the relevant kind or property is instantiated). A
possible context of use is just a possible situation in which someone
uses the relevant expression. Contexts can be thought of as
“centered” possible worlds: possible worlds with a
designated agent and time within that world, which serve to locate a
particular situation in which the expression is used. We can then
represent a context as an ordered triple ⟨w,a,t⟩⟨w,a,t⟩\langle w, a,
t\rangle of a possible world, an agent within that world, and a
time when the agent exists in that
 world.[4]
 With this formalism, it’s clear that the set of possible worlds must
be taken into account twice over in Kaplan’s account of character:
once in their role in determining possible contexts of use, and once
in their normal role as possible circumstances of evaluation.

The conventional semantic rules governing the indexical
‘I’ can be easily represented using this 2D semantic
framework. The rules governing ‘I’ in English are modeled
by a particular character: in any possible context of use
⟨w,a,t⟩\langle w, a, t\rangle, an utterance of
‘I’ rigidly designates the agent of that context,
a, picking out that very individual in all possible circumstances of
evaluation. Kaplan analyzes the semantic rules governing the
demonstrative ‘that’ in a similar way: relative to any
possible context of use ⟨w,a,t⟩\langle w, a, t\rangle, an
utterance of ‘that’ rigidly designates the object (if any)
that is made salient by a’s pointing gesture in that context [see the
entry on
 indexicals
 for a more detailed discussion].
1.2 Introducing 2D matrices

A useful way of visualizing the dual role played by possible worlds in
a 2D framework is to construct a two-dimensional matrix
(Stalnaker 1978). To represent Kaplan’s theory of indexicals, we array
possible circumstances of evaluation along the horizontal axis and
possible contexts of utterance along the vertical axis. Each
horizontal row of the matrix represents the content the
target expression would have if used in the context specified for that
row. This content is (partially) represented by recording the
extension of the term at each possible circumstance arrayed along the
horizontal axis. This procedure is then repeated for each context
listed along the vertical axis.

For instance, consider a particular utterance of ‘I’ made
by Barack Obama during his inaugural presidential address. This
context of use can be represented as the world w1w_1,
centered on the man BO, at time t0t_0. We can
(partially) represent the content of ‘I’ in this centered
world thus:

Obama’s use of ‘I’ in his inaugural address:



w1w_1
w2w_2
w3w_3 

⟨w1,BO,t0⟩\langle w_1, \BO, t_0\rangle
BO
BO
BO 



This simple one-dimensional matrix reflects the fact that, when used
in this context, ‘I’ refers rigidly to Obama at every
possible circumstance of evaluation—even at the counterfactual
worlds w2w_2 and w3w_3, in which
John McCain or Hillary Rodham Clinton won the 2008 presidential
election. The context-dependence of the expression ‘I’ is
revealed when we evaluate the use of ‘I’ with respect to
different possible contexts of use. Let’s consider two other contexts:
⟨w2,JM,t0⟩\langle w_2, \JM, t_0\rangle is a
world in which McCain won the election, centered on him at his
inaugural address; and ⟨w3,HRC,t0⟩\langle w_3, \HRC, t_0\rangle is a world in which Clinton won, centered
on her at her inaugural address. We then rely on our implicit
understanding of the semantic rules governing ‘I’ to
generate two more rows for our matrix:

Kaplanian character of ‘I’:



w1w_1
w2w_2
w3w_3 

⟨w1,BO,t0⟩\langle w_1, \BO, t_0\rangle
BO
BO
BO 

⟨w2,JM,t0⟩\langle w_2, \JM, t_0\rangle
JM
JM
JM 

⟨w3,HRC,t0⟩\langle w_3, \HRC, t_0\rangle
HRC
HRC
HRC 



What the matrix reveals is that the expression ‘I’ rigidly
designates different individuals, depending on the context in which it
is used. Thus the 2D matrix provides a graphic illustration of how
content of the expression ‘I’ varies, depending on the
context in which it is used.

Such 2D matrices can be used to represent the differences between the
semantic rules governing indexicals, definite descriptions, and names.
For instance, the definite description ‘the inaugural speaker in
2009’ will generate the following Kaplanian matrix:

Kaplanian character of ‘the inaugural speaker in 2009’:



w1w_1
w2w_2
w3w_3 

⟨w1,BO,t0⟩\langle w_1, \BO, t_0\rangle
BO
JM
HRC 

⟨w2,JM,t0⟩\langle w_2, \JM, t_0\rangle
BO
JM
HRC 

⟨w3,HRC,t0⟩\langle w_3, \HRC, t_0\rangle
BO
JM
HRC 



Unlike the matrix for ‘I’, the horizontal rows of this 2D
matrix are all exactly the same. This reflects the fact that the
expression ‘the inaugural speaker in 2009’ is not
context-sensitive: it always represents the very same property
irrespective of the context in which it is used—namely, the
property of being the person who delivers the inaugural US
presidential address in 2009. This property is exemplified by
different individuals at different possible worlds: the person who is
the inaugural speaker at w1w_1 is Obama, at
w2w_2 it’s McCain, and at w3w_3 it’s
Clinton. In general, the sequence arrayed along the rows of this
matrix reflects the variety of different individuals who could
instantiate the property represented by ‘the inaugural
speaker’ in different circumstances. Of course, no finite matrix
can fully capture the range of variation, but it can give a useful
partial representation of the property in question.

The matrix for a proper name like ‘Barack Obama’ reveals
another very different pattern:

Kaplanian character of ‘Barack Obama’:



w1w_1
w2w_2
w3w_3 

⟨w1,BO,t0⟩\langle w_1, \BO, t_0\rangle
BO
BO
BO 

⟨w2,JM,t0⟩\langle w_2, \JM, t_0\rangle
BO
BO
BO 

⟨w3,HRC,t0⟩\langle w_3, \HRC, t_0\rangle
BO
BO
BO 



According to Kaplan, proper names are context-invariant: they always
have the very same content irrespective of the context in which they
are used. Proper names are also rigid designators: they pick out a
single individual at every possible world. The upshot is that the 2D
matrix for a proper name will be completely uniform: the very same
individual appears in every cell of the matrix. This reflects the idea
that the semantic function of a name in a public language is simply to
pick out a particular individual, not to convey any information about
how to identify the individual in question. [Some proponents of
generalized 2D semantics reject this account of the conventional
meaning of proper names. See §2.2 below.]
1.3 The logic of indexicals and diagonal intensions

Kaplan’s semantic rules for indexicals guarantee that certain
sentences will be true whenever they are uttered, and certain
inferences will be truth preserving. This account paves the way for a
formal logic of indexicals (Kaplan 1989). In this system, logical
validity is defined in terms of different possible contexts of use: a
sentence is valid iff it is true in every possible context of use; and
an inference is valid iff the truth of the premises ensures the truth
of the conclusion in every possible context of use.

In this formal system, sentences can be logically valid, even if they
express contingent propositions. For instance, the semantic rules
governing indexicals ensures that the sentence ‘I am here’
will be true whenever uttered: ‘I’ always picks out the
agent who is making the utterance and ‘here’ always picks
out the place where the agent is making the utterance. So no matter
how we vary the circumstances in which the utterance takes place, an
utterance of ‘I am here’ is always guaranteed to be true.
The sentence will express different contents depending on who is using
it, but normally the sentence will express a contingent proposition.
(I could easily not have been here right now, but at the beach
instead.)

To get a clearer understanding of how this works, we can construct a
partial 2D matrix for the sentence using our previous example. Let’s
assume Obama would attend the inaugural address of McCain but not of
Clinton, McCain would avoid the inauguration of anyone who defeated
him, and Clinton would attend Obama’s inauguration but not McCain’s.
This yields the following 2D matrix:

Kaplanian character of ‘I am here’



w1w_1
w2w_2
w3w_3 

⟨w1,BO,t0⟩\langle w_1, \BO, t_0\rangle
T
T
F 

⟨w2,JM,t0⟩\langle w_2, \JM, t_0\rangle
F
T
F 

⟨w3,HRC,t0⟩\langle w_3, \HRC, t_0\rangle
T
F
T 



The content of Obama’s utterance of ‘I am here’ in the
context ⟨w1,BO,t0⟩\langle w_1, \BO, t_0\rangle
is the proposition that Obama is in Washington DC on January
20th 2009. Since this claim is true at worlds
w1w_1 and w2w_2, the top row of the
matrix assigns T for those worlds, but it assigns F for
w3w_3 in which Obama is on childcare duty in Chicago
during Clinton’s inauguration. The content of McCain’s utterance in
the second context is that McCain is in DC at that time, so the
intension assigns T to the world of that context,
w2w_2, and F to the worlds where he is in Arizona on
inauguration day. And the content of Clinton’s utterance is that
she is in DC, so the world of that context w3w_3 is
assigned T, while the other worlds get divergent truth-values
depending on her location in those worlds. Thus the differences in the
horizontal rows of the 2D matrix reflect the different propositions
expressed by the sentence in these three contexts. The fact that the
horizontal rows of this matrix contain both ‘T’s and
‘F’s reflects the fact that the intensions expressed in
the relevant contexts are metaphysically contingent: e.g., it’s
neither necessarily true nor necessarily false that McCain is located
in DC on inauguration day.

The 2D matrix also graphically represents the fact that the sentence
is guaranteed to be true whenever uttered. For every possible context
⟨w,a,t⟩\langle w, a, t\rangle, the semantic rules for
indexicals guarantee that ‘I am here’ will be assigned T
at the world of that context ww. Thus the diagonal of the
matrix running from the top left corner to the bottom right contains
all ‘T’s. With a nod to Stalnaker (1978), we can call this the
diagonal intension associated with the sentence. In Kaplan’s
semantic framework, a necessary diagonal intension indicates that a
sentence is logically valid and analytic: it’s
guaranteed by semantic rules to be true in every possible context in
which it is uttered, even though it may express distinct propositions
in different
 contexts.[5]
2. Modal Operators

At around the same time that Kaplan began developing his account of
indexicals, logicians working on tense and modal logic had begun using
2D semantic frameworks to explain the behavior of sentential operators
like ‘now’ and ‘actually’ (Åqvist 1973;
Kamp 1971; Segerberg 1973; Vlach 1973). Unlike Kaplan, these logicians
were not primarily concerned with the semantic rules governing natural
languages. In particular, modal logicians were not focused on how the
context in which an expression is used can affect its reference.
Rather, they were interested in developing formal systems for
representing valid inferences about time and possibility. It turns out
that tense and modal logic are formally very similar and that both
require double-indexing for expressive adequacy. Thus, to fully
capture reasoning about what’s necessary and possible, we need to move
from standard possible worlds semantics to a 2D semantic
framework.
2.1 ‘Actually’ and ‘Necessarily’

The need for a 2D modal framework is not obvious at first glance.
After all, we can state semantic rules for the basic modal operators
like ‘it’s necessarily the case that’ or ‘it’s
possibly the case that’ by simply quantifying over possible
worlds: a sentence is necessary iff it’s true in all possible worlds,
and a sentence is possible iff it’s true in some possible world. But
this (one-dimensional) framework cannot capture what is expressed by
operators like ‘it’s actually the case that’. To
understand how this operator works and to map out the valid inferences
it licenses, we need a double-indexing framework in which possible
worlds play two distinct roles (Crossley and Humberstone 1977; Hazen
1976, 1978).

To see why this is so, consider the following sentence:

(1)
It is possible for everything that is actually red to be shiny.


Standard possible worlds semantics lacks the expressive power to
capture what is said by this sentence. The claim is not that there is
a possible world such that all the things that are red in that world
are also shiny in that world (they’re supposed to be red in the
actual world, not the counterfactual one). Nor is the claim
that for each object that is red, there is a possible world in which
it is shiny (the objects are all supposed to be shiny
together within a single possible world). So here is a
relation among objects in possible worlds that cannot be expressed in
standard possible world semantics. To capture the relation, we need to
introduce an extra element into the formal framework: we simply
designate one world within the model to play the role of the actual
world. We can then introduce a sentential operator ‘A\mathcal{A}’
(read as
‘Actually’), which requires us to evaluate any claim
within its scope at the designated world, even when the operator
is embedded within the scope of other modal operators. Using this
enriched possible worlds framework, we can represent the
truth-conditions of our sample sentence in a straightforward way:

(1′)(1')

⬦∀x(ARed(x)→Shiny(x))\Diamond \forall x(\mathcal{A}\Red(x) \rightarrow \Shiny(x))



This sentence is true just in case there is some possible world,
ww, in which everything that is red in the designated world,
w@w_@, is shiny in ww.

One awkward consequence of this 2D semantic account of
‘Actually’ is the way this operator interacts with the
standard modal operator ‘Necessarily’. Intuitively, what
the actual world is like seems logically and metaphysically
contingent. But according to the proposed semantics for
‘Actually’, any true sentence SS will yield a
necessary truth when embedded within the scope of
the operator ‘A\mathcal{A}’. For
instance, consider the following sentence:

(2)
Obama actually won the 2008 election.


If Obama won in the designated world of our model, then it’s true at
every possible world in that model that Obama won at its designated
world. So on the proposed 2D semantics, the sentence is
necessarily true. (When we embed (2) within the necessity
operator ‘◻\Box’ we get a truth; and any claim of the
form AS→◻AS\mathcal{A}S \rightarrow \Box \mathcal{A}S
will be logically valid.) But
intuitively it’s a contingent matter how the 2008 elections
turned out: surely the fact that Obama actually won does not show that
he was destined by logical necessity to actually win!

To mitigate this counterintuitive consequence, Crossley and
Humberstone introduce a new logical operator, ‘Fixedly’
(‘F\mathcal{F}’) in such a way
that the complex operator ‘Fixedly Actually’ (‘FA\mathcal{F}\mathcal{A}’),
captures the sense of
necessity we have in mind when we deny that (2) is necessary. A
sentence is fixedly actually true just in case it is true no
matter which world is designated as
 actual.[6]

Once again, 2D matrices can be used to graphically depict how the
semantic theory works. Let’s take our universe of possible worlds to
contain just three worlds: w1w_1 is a world where
Obama won, w2w_2 a world where McCain won, and
w3w_3 a world where Clinton won. To explain the
‘Fixedly Actually’ operator, we need to consider possible
worlds playing two different roles: the standard role as a
circumstance of evaluation and the special role of being designated as
the actual world. To construct a 2D matrix, we array possible worlds
playing the standard role along the horizontal axis, and along the
vertical axis we array the same worlds playing the role of being
designated as actual. Each horizontal row of this matrix represents a
different model with a particular world designated as
 actual.[7]
 On this account, the truth of a sentence embedded within the
‘Actually’ operator depends entirely on what’s true in the
world designated as actual in a given model. So we can fill in the 2D
matrix as follows:

C&H matrix for ‘Obama actually won.’



w1w_1
w2w_2
w3w_3 

w1w_1 as actual
T
T
T 

w2w_2 as actual
F
F
F 

w3w_3 as actual
F
F
F 



In any world in a model, ‘Actually SS’ is always
evaluated by looking at the designated world of that model. So such
sentences are either necessarily true (True at every world in the
model) or necessarily false (False at every world in the model). This
is the sense of necessity that corresponds to the standard modal
operator ‘◻\Box’. On this understanding of necessity,
the target sentence is necessarily true (since w1w_1
represents the actual actual world). But intuitively there is
a sense in which the sentence seems contingent, since a different
world could have been actual: if w2w_2 or
w3w_3 had been actual, the sentence ‘Obama
actually won’ would have been false. This fact is reflected in
the 2D matrix by the diagonal intension, where the sentence comes out
true with respect to ⟨w1,w1⟩\langle w_1,
w_1\rangle, but false with respect to
⟨w2,w2⟩\langle w_2, w_2\rangle and
⟨w3,w3⟩\langle w_3, w_3\rangle. The
‘Fixedly Actually’ operator is sensitive to the necessity
or contingency of the diagonal intension. The sense in which the
target sentence (2) is not necessary is that it’s not fixedly actually
true.
2.2 Philosophical applications of modal logic

A highly influential paper by Martin Davies and Lloyd Humberstone
(1980) brought the formal tools developed in 2D modal logic to bear on
philosophical puzzles about modality. Following Gareth Evans (1979),
Davies and Humberstone suggest that there are two notions of
metaphysical necessity involved in ordinary modal thinking: deep and
superficial necessity. They argue that the two logical operators,
‘FA\mathcal{F}\mathcal{A}’
and ‘◻\Box’
respectively, provide a clear formal elucidation of these two
notions.

These two notions of necessity, they argue, help explain some of Saul
Kripke’s (1980) puzzling examples in which necessity and apriority
come apart. Using 2D modal logic, it’s easy to construct necessary
aposteriori truths. The semantic rules governing the modal operator
‘A\mathcal{A}’ guarantee that
every claim of the form AS\mathcal{A}S will
be either necessarily true or necessarily false in the sense of
‘◻\Box’. But when the embedded sentence SS is an
ordinary empirical truth like ‘Obama won’, AS\mathcal{A}S
will be knowable only aposteriori:
so AS\mathcal{A}S will be a necessary
aposteriori truth. The ‘Actually’ operator can also be
used to construct contingent apriori truths. Any claim of the form
(AS→S)(\mathcal{A}S \rightarrow S) is
guaranteed by the semantic rules governing ‘Actually’ to
be true at the designated world no matter which world is designated as
actual (i.e., it’s fixedly actually true). But when SS is an
ordinary empirical truth, the complex claim is not necessary in the
sense of ‘◻\Box’: there will be some worlds in the model
where SS is false while AS\mathcal{A}S
is true. In such cases, the
complex sentence will be a contingent apriori truth.

Davies and Humberstone also suggest that the 2D modal operator
‘Actually’ might help analyze certain referring
expressions in natural language. In particular, they focus on Evans’
(1982) notion of a ‘descriptive name’ (a name whose
reference is fixed by a description) and on natural kind terms.
Suppose the following definitions capture the semantic rules governing
the relevant expressions in natural language:

Julius =df=_{df} the actual inventor of the zip.
Water =df=_{df} the actual chemical kind to which that liquid
belongs which falls from clouds, flows in rivers, is drinkable,
colorless, odorless, etc.


If such analyses are correct, then the semantics for
‘actually’ will allow us to explain why ‘Julius
invented the zip’ is contingent and apriori and ‘water =
H2O’ is necessary
 aposteriori.[8]
 [See the entries on
 names
 and
 descriptions.
 For a survey of other philosophical applications of the 2D framework
in modal logic see (Humberstone 2004).] 

Davies and Humberstone themselves express reservations about the
adequacy of analyses using ‘actually’ for natural language
expressions, particularly in the case of proper names (1980,
17–21). As a consequence, they did not take 2D modal logic to
provide a complete response to Kripke’s puzzles about necessary
aposteriori and contingent apriori truths. However, the use of the 2D
framework to explain these puzzles was subsequently taken up and
refined by proponents of generalized 2D semantics. 

Recently, Brian Rabern has argued that the semantic considerations
that support double-indexing for modal operators also support the need
for multiple modal operators (Rabern 2012b). If this is right, then
the role of multiple-indexing in compositional semantics should be
sharply distinguished from dual roles for possible worlds that Kaplan
highlights: 

Theorists tend to focus on the case of double indexing. And this lines
up well with the Kaplanian distinction between content generating
versus content evaluating parameters (Kaplan 1989). But the
motivations for this Kaplanian distinction are really quite different
from the motivations for double indexing from compositional semantics.
And once we take the latter motivations to their logical consequence
we are left with a system of infinite indexing, which doesn’t
cohere nicely with Kaplan’s two-level picture. There is a
fundamental tension in our default conception of semantic theory.
(Rabern 2012b, 120)


Rabern’s suggestion is that the notion of semantic value needed
for compositional semantics should be distinguished from the notion of
assertoric content of utterances (or of thoughts). For similar views,
see (Ninan 2010; Yalcin 2015). This sharp distinction between formal
semantics and intensional content would undercut some of the
motivation for treating the generalized two-dimensional semantic
program advocated by theorists like David Chalmers and Frank Jackson
as contributing to a compositional semantic theory. 
3. Generalized 2D Semantics
3.1 Vindicating the traditional approach to meaning

In the previous sections, we considered applications of the 2D
framework that seek to explain the meaning of specific types of
expression: indexicals and modal operators. In contrast, proponents of
generalized 2D semantics believe that the 2D framework can be used to
explain an important aspect of the meaning of all
expressions. In particular, generalized 2D semantics is meant to
vindicate the traditional idea that we have apriori access to our own
meanings through armchair reflection.

According to the philosophical tradition, to know the meaning of a
subsentential expression like ‘bachelor’ is to implicitly
grasp a criterion that determines exactly which individuals count as
bachelors in any possible situation. (Accounts of meaning broadly
along these lines were advanced by Plato, Descartes, Locke, Hume,
Frege, Russell, Carnap, and many others.) On the traditional account,
speakers’ implicit grasp of a criterion plays two key theoretical
roles:

Semantic competence: Two speakers (or one speaker on two
occasions) share the same meaning just in case they associate the very
same criterion with their expressions.
Reference determination: The criterion a speaker currently
associates with an expression determines which things fall into its
extension in every possible situation.


The first claim requires that speakers who share the same meaning must
share a criterion for identifying the reference; while the second
requires that this criterion be veridical. If this traditional account
of meaning is correct, then one can make one’s own meanings explicit
by engaging in apriori conceptual analysis. Such conceptual
analysis allows you to determine what exactly it takes to count as a
bachelor in any possible world; and it allows you to specify what
exactly someone must be prepared to accept in order to genuinely agree
or disagree about bachelors.

Generalized two-dimensional semantics is a strategy for defending a
variant of this traditional view of meaning against a series of highly
influential objections. In the 1970s and 80s, semantic externalists
used a variety of persuasive examples to argue that the traditional
account of meaning yields an unrealistic picture of (i) semantic
competence, (ii) reference determination, and (iii) epistemic access
to modal facts. Proper names and natural kind terms seem especially
problematic for the traditional
 account.[9]
 By commonsense standards, you don’t need to know a specific rule for
identifying Gödel in any possible world in order to count as
competent with the name ‘Gödel’; and no such
knowledge seems required for your use of the name to pick out the
relevant man in every possible world (Donnellan 1970; Kripke
 1980).[10]
 Similarly, you don’t need to know precisely what it takes for
something to count as water in any possible world to be competent with
the word ‘water’ or for your word to pick out the chemical
substance H2O in every possible world (Kripke 1980; Putnam
1970, 1972). Indeed, making room for the possibility of ignorance and
error about reference-conditions seems crucial to explaining empirical
inquiry into the nature of familiar things, and to vindicating the
commonsense realist idea that we can refer to things whose nature we
don’t fully understand (Burge 1979, 1986; Putnam 1972, 1973). If these
critics are right, then the traditional account of meaning is
untenable. Implicit knowledge of reference-conditions is not
required either for linguistic competence or for determinate
reference. And apriori conceptual analysis cannot be trusted to reveal
what’s genuinely possible—at best, it reveals one’s current
fallible assumptions about the topic in question. [See the entry on
 externalism about mental content.]

Proponents of generalized 2D semantics believe this pessimistic
conclusion is unwarranted. What critics’ examples really show, they
argue, is that the traditional view of meaning should be refined, not
junked. Moreover, the 2D semantics developed for indexicals and modal
operators suggests a promising strategy for accommodating putative
externalist counterexamples within a broadly traditional account of
meaning. In the case of indexicals and rigidified definite
descriptions, competent speakers grasp a reference-fixing
criterion without grasping the modal profile of the
object, kind, or property picked out by the expression. For instance,
you can know that ‘I’ always refers to the speaker
whenever it is uttered without knowing the nature of the person who is
actually picked (e.g., what it takes to be Barack Obama in any
possible world). Perhaps our understanding of names and natural kind
terms is structured in a similar way: competent speakers always have
apriori access to the reference-fixing criterion currently associated
with their use of the name ‘Barack Obama’, but they have
only aposteriori access to the associated modal profile. If this
suggestion is on the right track, then a generalized 2D semantic
framework could be used to clarify the nature of this semantic
understanding. Moreover we may be able to explain certain epistemic
operators, like ‘it is conceptually possible that’ or
‘it is apriori that’, as operating on such 2D semantic
values.

The basic philosophical idea behind generalized 2D
semantics—that subjects have apriori access to reference-fixing
criteria for their words but not to the modal profile of the subject
matter picked out—has been suggested by a number of theorists.
David Lewis, in particular, was a powerful champion of the idea that
we can give apriori definitions for terms whose precise reference we
do not understand. Lewis articulated the ‘analytic
functionalist’ approach to specifying the meaning of mental
predicates and of theoretical terms in science (1966; 1970; 1972;
1979; 1980; 1994); and he was also an early advocate of a generalized
2D approach to semantics (1981; 1994). Other influential proponents of
the idea that we can have implicit knowledge of reference-fixing
criteria without knowing the modal profile of the reference include
Michael Dummett (1973; 1981), Gareth Evans (1982), and John Searle
(1983). Early proponents of an explicitly two-dimensional semantics
for names and natural kind terms include Harry Deutsch, Ulrike
Haas-Spohn, and Kai-Yee Wong (Deutsch 1990, 1993; Haas-Spohn 1995;
Wong 1996). However, it is two later theorists—Frank Jackson
(1994; 1998a; 1998b; 2004) and David Chalmers (1996; 2002b; 2002c;
2004; 2006a)—who have most systematically developed and defended
generalized 2D semantics as a way of reconciling the lessons of
semantic externalism with the traditional apriori approach to meaning
and modality.

It’s worth noting that generalized 2D semantics has been
motivated primarily by epistemic, metasemantic, and metaphysical
concerns, rather than by issues in compositional semantics. In
particular, generalized 2D semantics seeks to vindicate the
traditional idea that we can know the truth conditions of our own
sentences via armchair reasoning about hypothetical cases. The
approach promises to explain why certain necessary truths can only be
known aposteriori by appealing to the structure of our implicit
semantic understanding. Proponents of generalized 2D semantics make
claims about how the two types of intension may interact with modal
and epistemic operators. However, working out the details of the
compositional semantics has been a relatively recent concern of
proponents of generalized 2D semantics (e.g. Chalmers 2011a, c;
Chalmers and Rabern 2014; Johannesson and Packalén 2016; Kipper
forthcoming). 

The 2D semantic frameworks proposed by Jackson and Chalmers are very
similar in their broad aims and formal structure, and commentators
often treat the two versions as interchangeable. However, the two
frameworks are developed in the service of two quite different
philosophical projects, emphasizing different aspects of the
traditional approach to meaning. Jackson takes up the traditional
empiricist project of explaining empirical facts about language use
and communication, while Chalmers pursues a broadly rationalist
project of explaining key structural interconnections between meaning,
apriority, and possibility. This difference in explanatory aims leads
to different interpretations of the 2D framework.
4. The Empiricist Project
4.1 Linguistic understanding and coordination

An empiricist account of meaning is essentially a high-level causal
explanation of uncontroversial facts about language use. In
particular, the empiricist seeks to characterize the psychological
states that guide individuals’ application of an expression to
particular cases, and to explain how linguistic coordination within a
linguistic community is achieved.

Clearly individual speakers must have some implicit assumptions about
the reference of a word that guide their verdicts about whether it
applies to particular cases (Jackson 1998a, 29–42). When someone
asks you whether a particular Gettier case counts as knowledge, for
instance, you do not simply answer at random: your answer is guided by
your prior understanding of the term ‘knowledge’, and your
answer is only justified insofar as it makes sense of that prior
understanding. An empiricist seeks to explain these facts by positing
a stable internal psychological state—something like an
internal reference-fixing template—that guides your
verdicts no matter what the actual world turns out to be like.

It’s equally clear that members of the same linguistic community
generally manage to use words to reliably coordinate their beliefs and
actions (Jackson 1998b, 2004). When I ask you to pass the salt, you
know roughly which white granular substance I’m asking for—you
know, for instance, that it would be inappropriate to pass the sugar
bowl or the pepper grinder. This sort of everyday coordination
requires speakers to have similar dispositions to classify things as
falling into the extension of words, and it requires that these
similarities in classificatory dispositions be mutually obvious to all
concerned: for it to make sense for me to say ‘please pass the
salt’ in order to get salt, it must be common knowledge between
us that we’re inclined to classify roughly the same things as
‘salt’. An empiricist explains this common knowledge by
positing implicit conventions that require everyone to
associate the very same reference-fixing template with a given word
(Jackson 1998b; Lewis 1969).

An empiricist use of the 2D framework is intended to show that this
core explanatory project is not undermined by the intuitions about
names and natural kind terms highlighted by semantic externalists
(Jackson 1998a; 1998b). According to the empiricist picture of
meaning, implicit linguistic conventions ensure that speakers within a
linguistic community associate roughly the same reference-fixing
criteria with particular words. Empiricist proponents of 2D semantics
hold that the 2D framework can help elucidate the content of the
shared reference-fixing criteria for names and natural kind
 terms.[11]
4.2 The role of the 2D framework

Externalists argue that ordinary speakers are often ignorant or
mistaken about the precise nature (modal profile) of the objects,
kinds or properties their words pick out. But linguistic conventions
don’t always fix the reference by specifying the nature of the
reference. Indexicals are a clear case in point: you can understand my
use of the term ‘here’ in an email, without realizing that
it refers to Melbourne in all possible worlds. This ignorance is
possible because the semantic rule for ‘here’ fixes the
reference via a contingent property of the place picked out (i.e., a
given utterance happened to occur there). Perhaps the conventions
governing names and natural kind terms are structured in a similar
way, specifying the reference via its contingent properties. For
instance, we might have an implicit semantic rule requiring us to take
‘water’ to pick out whatever chemical kind
actually explains a certain suite of superficial observable
properties: e.g., being a clear, potable, odorless liquid that fills
lakes and streams around here (Jackson 1998a, 1998b). On this
analysis, ‘water’ just is an implicitly indexical
expression, picking out different chemical kinds depending on which
world constitutes the actual context of use. If this rule is what one
must accept to count as competent with the meaning of the expression
type ‘water’, then it is no surprise that competent
speakers often fail to realize that water = H2O: for they
may not know that H2O is what actually fulfills the
reference-fixing role in question. Externalist examples of ignorance
and error, therefore, do not directly threaten the empiricist account
of meaning.

Of course, it is an empirical question whether names and natural kind
terms are in fact governed by indirect reference-fixing rules of this
sort. But according to the 2D empiricist, you can test whether your
implicit understanding of ‘water’ is structured in the
relevant way by considering possible situations in two different
roles: as your actual environment or as a mere
counterfactual circumstance of evaluation (Jackson 1998a, ch. 2).
Consider two different possible worlds based on Putnam’s Twin Earth
thought experiment (Putnam 1972). In the first world, Earth, the clear
potable stuff that fills lakes and streams and is habitually called
‘water’ by English speakers is H2O. The second
world, Twin Earth, is exactly the same except that the stuff that has
these properties is the complex chemical kind, XYZ. If your
commonsense understanding of ‘water’ is governed by the
proposed reference-fixing convention, it would lead you to identify
different chemical substances as water depending on what your actual
environment is like: if your actual environment is like Earth, then
water is HO; but if your actual environment is like Twin
earth, then water is XYZ. If you assume that water is
actually H2O, however, you will judge that water
is essentially H2O in all counterfactual
circumstances. And if you assume water is actually XYZ, then
you’ll judge water is essentially XYZ.

This pattern of dispositions to apply the term ‘water’ can
be depicted on a 2D matrix as follows:

Empiricist 2D matrix for ‘water’:



Earth
Twin Earth 

⟨\langleEarth, a,t⟩a, t\rangle
H2O
H2O 

⟨\langleTwin Earth, a,t⟩a, t\rangle
XYZ
XYZ 



Along the vertical axis are ranged centered possible worlds (a
possible world, with a designated agent aa and time tt
within that world) representing different ways your actual environment
could be like; and the same worlds are ranged along the horizontal
axis representing different counterfactual circumstances of
evaluation. This matrix reflects your commonsense dispositions to
apply the term ‘water’ to different chemical kinds on the
basis of whether it actually plays certain superficial roles described
in other commonsense terms (‘clear’,
‘potable’, ‘liquid’,
 etc).[12]

Semantic externalists take these sorts of judgments about Twin Earth
to militate against a traditional account of meaning—for they
suggest that your understanding does not fully determine the nature of
the reference. But according to 2D empiricists like Jackson, the only
conclusion that is warranted is that the meaning of your term is more
complex than the tradition suggests: your verdicts about possible
worlds considered as actual reflect your naïve
reference-fixing criterion, and your verdicts about possible
worlds considered as counterfactual reflect the theoretical
criterion you would accept after you learned all the relevant
empirical facts about your actual environment. These two types of
criterion can be modeled in possible world semantics as intensions: an
A-intension (for ‘Actual’) is a function from worlds
considered as actual to extensions, while a C-intension (for
‘Counterfactual’) is a function from worlds considered as
counterfactual to extensions (Jackson 1998a, ch.2). The diagonal of
our matrix corresponds to the A-intension you associate with
‘water’; and the first horizontal row corresponds to the
C-intension of your term ‘water’ (assuming that
⟨\langleEarth, a,t⟩a, t\rangle represents your real-world
environment).

While semantic externalists acknowledge only the C-intension as
modeling an expression’s semantic content, 2D empiricists will insist
that both A- and C-intensions reflect important aspects of a competent
English speaker’s understanding of a word like ‘water’. In
particular, they take A-intensions to reflect what is understood and
communicated by minimally competent English speakers and what guides
their everyday classifications. The suggestion, then, is that
A-intensions capture the shared, conventionally entrenched
understanding of reference-fixing conditions posited by the empiricist
approach to meaning.

By itself, this 2D framework offers no guarantee that the hypothetical
judgments recorded by an A-intension are produced by a stable
reference-fixing criterion. Nor does it guarantee that the very same
A-intension will be generated for all competent speakers in your
linguistic community. However, according to the 2D empiricist, we have
solid empirical reasons to think these conditions are satisfied in the
case of names and natural kind terms. First, the widespread acceptance
of the externalist thought experiments demonstrates that we do in fact
share similar reference-fixing criteria for terms like
‘water’ and ‘Gödel’ (Jackson 1998a,
38–39). Second, the empiricist model of meaning provides the
best psychological explanation of how such linguistic coordination is
achieved (Jackson
 1998b).[13]
4.3 Apriori conceptual analysis

In addition to clarifying the structure of our semantic understanding,
the 2D framework can help justify specific conceptual analyses. The
criteria that implicitly guide our everyday use of a term are often
embodied in recognitional or inferential dispositions rather than in
consciously accessible rules. Indeed, Jackson likens grasp of
reference-fixing criteria for particular expressions to our ability to
recognize the grammaticality of sentences in one’s own language
(2000). Just as linguists can construct a grammar for your language on
the basis of your judgments about the acceptability of particular
sentences, you can construct an analysis of the meaning you associate
with an expression on the basis of your application of a term to
hypothetical cases. The correct analysis must capture the full range
of your confident judgments involving the target expression, while
abstracting away from performance errors and other interfering factors
(Jackson 1998a, 31–37).

This psychological model helps explain how you can come to know the
correct analysis of your term ‘water’ by noting which
properties you treat as “obvious and central” when filling
in a 2D matrix like the one above (Jackson 1998a, 31). The 2D
framework is particularly helpful for analyzing the meaning of proper
names or natural kind terms, because it prompts you to consider
possible cases in two different ways;–as actual or as
counterfactual. Your verdicts about whether the stuff on Twin Earth
counts as water, for instance, depends on whether you think of Twin
Earth as a hypothesis about your actual environment or as a purely
counterfactual possibility. When the A- and C-intensions for your term
diverge as they do in the case of ‘water’, 2D empiricists
suggest that the correct analysis will take the form of rigidified
definite descriptions using the indexical term ‘actual’:
water =df=_{df} the actual stuff that has such-and-such
superficial properties. Moreover, careful attention to your reactions
to the hypothetical scenarios will allow you to make explicit which
superficial properties implicitly guide your application of the term.
For instance, you may discover that your implicit criterion for
applying ‘water’ is that water =df=_{df} the actual
chemical kind in your environment that is a clear, potable, odorless
liquid that falls as rain and fills lakes and streams. Alternatively,
your use of the term ‘water’ may be guided by the types of
causal relations invoked in causal theories of reference: water
=df=_{df} the actual natural kind that has been the dominant
cause of your community’s past use of the term ‘water’.
Indeed, Jackson suggests that standard causal theories of reference
are based on this method of conceptual analysis (1998a, 37–41).
[See the entry on
 causal theories of mental content.]

The conceptual analyses produced by this method count as apriori,
according to the 2D empiricist, because you can know them to be
correct “independently of knowing what the actual world is
like” (Jackson 1998a, 51). The evidence that supports such
analyses consists in purely hypothetical judgments: judgments about
how to classify cases on the supposition that your
environment is like XX, or like YY. Since such
hypothetical judgments don’t require you to determine what your
real environment is like, your justification for accepting an
analysis is not based on empirical knowledge. And to change your
judgment about a purely hypothetical case would be to change the
meaning of your term (Jackson 1998a, 44–46).
4.4 The role of conceptual analysis in metaphysics

According to empiricist 2D semantics, the truth of any metaphysical
reduction depends on the reference-fixing conditions conventionally
associated with the terms involved—and these reference-fixing
conditions are always knowable apriori. So apriori conceptual analysis
plays a crucial role in vindicating metaphysical reductions (Jackson
1994; 1998a).

Metaphysical reductions provide a constitutive account of some target
domain (e.g., beliefs, free will, water, moral rightness) in terms of
more basic features of the world (e.g., the properties postulated by
an idealized physics, ideas in the mind of God, the mosaic of sense
data). A physicalist about mental states, for instance, is committed
to there being specific facts about the microphysical structure of the
world that suffice for the existence of beliefs, desires and sensory
experiences. The physicalist is thus committed to metaphysically
necessary “entailments” connecting claims about the two
domains: it’s metaphysically necessary that if such-and-such physical
facts obtain, then such-and-such mental facts obtain. This
metaphysical entailment relation can arguably be cashed out in terms
of global supervenience (Jackson 1998a, 6–14). [See the entry on
 supervenience.]

On the empiricist view of meaning, the relevance of conceptual
analysis to metaphysics is then straightforward: conceptual analysis
establishes that a putative reduction respects the original meaning of
the target expression (Jackson 1998a, 28). Obviously, the physicalist
won’t succeed in accounting for free will if she identifies free will
with having a temperature of 37.4º Celsius. Such a
“reduction” would simply change the subject under
discussion. A successful reduction must be answerable to our original
shared understanding of the target expression—and elucidating
this original understanding just is what conceptual analysis does. So
if conceptual analyses are knowable apriori, it follows that
metaphysical reductions must always be backed by apriori entailments
between the base-level claim (such as a physical description of the
world) and the target claim (such as the claim that humans have free
will).

Conceptual analysis plays a modest role on the empiricist account.
Apriori conceptual analysis merely tells you about the relations among
your ideas; it cannot tell you whether there are any objects,
kinds, or properties that satisfy your current reference-fixing
assumptions (Jackson 1998a, 42–4). Moreover, the meaning you currently
associate with a term may be pragmatically deficient: e.g., it may not
be determinate enough to settle certain hard cases or it may not allow
you to draw useful distinctions in your actual environment. In such
cases, you would have good pragmatic reasons to change the meaning of
your term (Jackson 1998a, 44–6, 53–4). What the empiricist
denies is that changing your current criteria for applying a term can
ever get you closer to the truth about what you meant all along.
4.5 Objections to the empiricist project

Criticisms of the empiricist use of 2D semantics to explain linguistic
coordination can be divided into two broad categories: (i) criticisms
that target the account of linguistic conventions, and (ii) criticisms
that target the account of individuals’ linguistic understanding.

The empiricist account of linguistic conventions has elicited the most
criticism. On this account, A-intensions capture the content of tacit
linguistic conventions of the sort outlined by Lewis (1969). If this
is right, then the reference-fixing conditions for words like
‘knowledge’, ‘water’, or ‘Barack
Obama’ must meet two strong empirical constraints:

All (or almost all) speakers in a community must associate the
very same reference-fixing condition with the term.
This convergence must be mutually obvious to all (or almost all)
speakers.


Both assumptions have been challenged. On the first point: Most
philosophers acknowledge that competent English speakers can have
entirely different criteria for identifying the reference of a proper
name like ‘Barack Obama’ and many acknowledge significant
variability in competent speakers’ initial understanding of natural
kind terms like ‘water’: we don’t need to share precisely
the same “folk theory” of Obama or of water in order to be
linguistically competent with those terms (e.g., Burge 1979; Kripke
1980; Quine 1951a). To back up this intuitive point, experimental
philosophers have marshaled survey data to argue that English speakers
from different ethnic or socio-economic backgrounds classify
hypothetical cases, such as Gettier cases or Twin Earth cases,
differently (Machery et al. 2004; Nichols et al. 2004; Stich and
Weinberg 2001; Weinberg et al. 2001). In response to such worries,
Jackson acknowledges that different speakers’ criteria for applying a
term may not be perfectly matched, but he argues that there must be
significant overall similarity in reference-fixing criteria for
everyday practical coordination. Empiricist 2D semantics is meant to
explain this imperfect similarity (1998b, 214–5). See also Lewis
(1997), who posits higher-order similarities among speakers’
reference-fixing commitments. On the second point: Critics (Kroon
2004a; Schroeter 2003) challenge 2D empiricist’s assumption of common
knowledge of reference-fixing conditions, arguing that speakers are
not in a position to know the range of variation and similarity in
speakers’ understanding of a term within their linguistic community.
If this is right, then tacit linguistic conventions cannot get off the
ground: if speakers don’t know what the standard linguistic practices
are, they cannot be expected to conform to those standards. In
response, an empiricist may claim that communal standards will
inevitably involve some indeterminacy.

Criticizing the details of this 2D account of linguistic conventions
won’t carry much weight if the only way to explain the phenomena is to
posit some similarity (however partial or indeterminate) among
speakers’ reference-fixing criteria. Several critics, however, argue
that the best explanation of how speakers manage to knowingly
coordinate on the same reference does not require individual speakers
to share similar criteria for applying the term. Instead, the best
explanation is that speakers are causally and historically embedded
within the same community and they are generally disposed to hold
their own use of a term accountable to that of the community as a
whole.

There is, of course, a distinction between understanding a word and
not understanding it. One can lack understanding of a word through
lack of causal interaction with the social practice of using that
word, or through interaction too superficial to permit sufficiently
fluent engagement in the practice. But sufficiently fluent engagement
in the practice can take many forms, which have no single core of
agreement. (Williamson 2007, 126)


On this account, knowing co-reference does not require speakers to
share any particular substantive criterion for identifying the
reference. What explains interpersonal coordination is speakers’
mutual commitment to a communal referential practice, not some
independently specifiable similarity in their associated criteria. See
(Kroon 2004b; Schroeter and Bigelow 2009; Schroeter and Schroeter
2009) for similar responses to Jackson, and (Burge 1979; 1989) for an
influential defense of a social model of competence.

The second distinctive aspect of the empiricist account of meaning is
the idea that individual speakers have implicit knowledge of
reference-fixing conditions. This model of linguistic understanding
can be challenged in two different ways. First, there is the
psychological claim that competent speakers have something like an
internal reference-fixing template—a stable set of criteria for
identifying the reference that guides the application of the term both
in everyday use and in hypothetical reasoning. Some critics argue that
individuals’ judgments about cases are more plausibly explained
without positing any such stable template (Schroeter 2006; Schroeter
and Bigelow 2009). Second, there is the semantic claim that a
speaker’s everyday criteria determine the real reference of her words.
The semantic claim is challenged by theorists working in a broadly
Quinean tradition. Such critics argue that the reference of someone’s
word is determined not by the speaker’s settled dispositions
to apply a word to cases, but by how these criteria should be refined
in light of empirical facts about the speaker’s environment so as to
meet broader theoretical and practical interests associated with the
speaker’s use of the word (Block and Stalnaker 1999; Schroeter 2003;
Williamson 2007; Yablo 2000a, 2000b). While 2D empiricists can
acknowledge that refinements of the subject’s current conception are
important, they will insist that refinements that depart from
naïve understanding (such as a compatibilist conception of free
will) constitute a change of meaning. The 2D empiricist thus advocates
the sort of position articulated by Carnap (1950), while critics
champion views closer to those of Quine (1951a, 1951b) or Putnam
(1974).
5. The Rationalist Project
5.1 Connecting meaning, apriority, and possibility

For an empiricist, an expression’s meaning reflects the causal
mechanisms guiding everyday classification and communication. For a
rationalist, in contrast, an expression’s meaning reflects what is
apriori accessible to the speaker on the basis of ideal reflection.
The empiricist is primarily concerned with causal explanation, while
the rationalist is primarily concerned with idealized apriori
rationality. This difference in emphasis on the part of the
rationalist can have significant ramifications for a generalized 2D
semantics.

David Chalmers has developed a detailed and influential rationalist
interpretation of the 2D framework. This semantic project is situated
within a broadly rationalist tradition that posits a “golden
triangle” of necessary constitutive relations between meaning,
apriority, and possibility (2004; 2006a).

Following Frege (1892), the 2D rationalist is interested in capturing
a notion of meaning that is finer-grained than reference. Frege
pointed out that sentences containing co-referential expressions like
‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ can differ in
cognitive significance: someone who is competent with these
two names may not realize they are co-referential and may therefore
use them differently in making and justifying claims. Frege took
sameness of cognitive significance to be the mark of sameness of
meaning. According to a 2D rationalist, sameness of cognitive
significance can in most cases be elucidated in terms of apriori
equivalence: two expressions are associated with the same meaning
iff one can know that they pick out the very same things on the basis
of apriori reflection alone (Chalmers
 2002b).[14]
 This constitutive link between meaning and apriority constitutes the
first side of the “golden triangle”.

The second side of the “golden triangle” connects meaning
with possibility. Following Carnap (1947), the 2D rationalist suggests
that we can use possible worlds semantics to individuate particular
meanings in terms of their representational properties. In standard
possible world semantics, the meaning of ‘doctor’ is
identified with an intension that maps possible worlds to
extensions. An expression’s intension reflects the modal profile of
the object, kind, or property picked out. Identifying meanings with
intensions therefore establishes an important constitutive connection
between meanings and modal claims. If ‘doctor’ and
‘physician’ are associated with the same meaning, then
it’s true in all possible worlds that all doctors are
physicians and all physicians are doctors. And conversely if two
expressions are co-extensive in all possible worlds, then
they have the same meaning.

The third side of the “golden triangle” connects
possibility with apriority. Following Kant (1787), a rationalist about
modality holds that what is necessary is always knowable apriori and
what is knowable apriori is always necessary. Thus ideal apriori
reflection can be trusted to reveal the space of possibility.

This “golden triangle” of constitutive relations generates
a distinctive rationalist account of meaning. To be competent with an
expression’s meaning is to be in an internal cognitive state that puts
one in a position to identify its extension in any possible world on
the basis of apriori reflection alone. Apriori reflection will also
suffice to determine whether two expressions are associated with the
same or different meanings. This rationalist approach to meaning
contrasts with the empiricist one: whereas the empiricist uses
causally efficacious cognitive mechanisms to isolate the
reference-fixing criteria currently associated with an expression, the
rationalist uses the subject’s ideally rational judgments to
isolate the complex cognitive states that would ground those
reflective judgments. As a consequence, the aspect of understanding
that corresponds to a rationalist meaning may turn out to be more
heterogeneous and less stable than the shared, causally efficacious
‘templates’ postulated by the empiricist. The
“golden triangle” also involves a distinctive rationalist
account of modal epistemology, according to which ideal apriori
conceivability is a fail-safe guide to metaphysical possibility. This
modal rationalism affords a simple and attractive account of our
access to modal facts (Chalmers 1996, 136–8; 1999, 488–91;
 2002a).[15]


This simple rationalist picture of meaning and modality, however, was
undermined by externalist thought experiments. Kripke’s (1980)
observation that certain necessary truths, like ‘Hesperus =
Phosphorus’, are only knowable aposteriori threatens both the
idea that linguistic competence affords apriori access to the truth-
and applicability-conditions of one’s words and the idea that
necessary truths are always apriori knowable. The guiding idea behind
2D rationalism is that a rationalist can accommodate Kripke’s examples
by moving to a 2D semantic framework. In particular, the 2D framework
can be used to isolate an aspect of meaning that satisfies the
“golden triangle” of constitutive relations among meaning,
apriority and modality.

Roughly, the idea is that ‘Hesperus = Phosphorus’ is
aposteriori because we associate distinct reference-fixing criteria
with the two names: e.g., being the brightest star visible in the
evening and the brightest star visible the morning. According to the
2D rationalist, these reference-fixing criteria are (i) an aspect of
meaning, (ii) which can be known apriori via conceptual analysis, and
(iii) which suffices to fix the applicability conditions for every
possible world considered as one’s actual environment. If the 2D
framework can be used to isolate such an aspect of meaning for all
expressions, we will have vindicated the rationalist’s “golden
triangle” connecting meaning, apriority and possibility.

Vindicating this “golden triangle” constitutes a primary
theoretical constraint for a rationalist interpretation of 2D
semantics. A 2D semantics that meets this constraint would play a
wide-ranging role in philosophy. It would account for core semantic
roles associated with the Fregean notion of sense (Chalmers 2002b) and
the traditional notion of a proposition (Chalmers 2011a). In addition,
rationalist 2D semantics promises to define a versatile notion of
narrow thought content suited to playing key explanatory and
evaluative roles in commonsense psychology (Chalmers 2002c).
Furthermore, the rationalist approach to meaning and modality
underwrites a distinctive form of apriori reasoning about the nature
of the actual world:

There is a long tradition in philosophy of using apriori methods to
draw conclusions about what is possible and what is necessary, and
often in turn to draw conclusions about matters of substantive
metaphysics. Arguments like this typically have three steps: first an
epistemic claim (about what can be known or conceived), from there to
a modal claim (about what is possible or necessary), and from there to
a metaphysical claim (about the nature of things in the world).
(Chalmers 2002a, 145)


Chalmers has developed a highly influential anti-physicalist argument
along these lines, which relies on a rationalist 2D semantic framework
to establish that facts about phenomenal consciousness cannot be
reduced to physical or functional facts about the brain (1996; 2009).
[See the supplementary document:
 The 2D Argument Against Materialism.]
5.2 The epistemic interpretation of the 2D framework

Any interpretation of the 2D framework must answer the following two
questions:

What is the nature of the worlds to be considered as actual?
What is the principle for determining an expression’s extension
relative to worlds considered as actual?


But the rationalist project imposes specific constraints on how these
questions are answered. To vindicate the “golden
triangle”, the rationalist must identify a way of mapping an
individual speaker’s understanding of particular expressions onto
possible worlds that affords apriori access to the entire space of
possibility. This is not a trivial requirement: standard ways of
interpreting the 2D framework cannot vindicate the rationalist
project. However Chalmers has developed a distinctive
“epistemic” interpretation of the 2D framework that he
believes can establish the relevant constitutive links between
meaning, apriority and possibility (2004, 2006a).

A rationalist 2D semantics must vindicate the following principle:

Core Thesis: For any sentence S,SS, S is apriori iff
SS has a necessary 1-intension. (Chalmers 2004, 165)


A sentence’s 1-intension is an intension that corresponds to the
diagonal of a 2D matrix. So the Core Thesis affirms that a token
sentence is apriori (for a subject at a particular time) just in case
there is no possible way the world might be that, if it actually
obtained, would make SS false. In effect, the Core Thesis sums
up the “golden triangle” of constitutive connections the
rationalist hopes to establish between meaning, apriority, and
possibility: (i) it postulates a possible way the world could be for
every apriori coherent hypothesis, and vice versa; and (ii) this tight
connection between apriority and possibility is reflected in an aspect
of linguistic meaning, the
 1-intension.[16]


The major obstacle to vindicating the Core Thesis for standard
interpretations of the 2D framework is the assignment
principle—the way 2D theories assign extensions relative to
“worlds considered as actual”. A natural way of
understanding the injunction to consider a possible world as actual is
to simply imagine a possible world, locate oneself in it, and then
rely on ordinary interpretive methods to decide what exactly a person
in those empirical circumstances is referring to when using a given
expression. Chalmers calls this strategy for assigning 1-intensions to
expressions a “contextualist” interpretation of the 2D
framework. What’s distinctive of a contextualist approach is (i) that
a token of the target expression must be located within the world
considered as actual, and (ii) that the expression is assigned an
extension on the basis of how it’s used in that world. On this
approach, a 1-intension will be undefined for possible worlds
that do not contain a token of the target expression: no extension can
be assigned for such worlds, not even an empty extension.

This contextualist approach to assigning 1-intensions is incompatible
with the Core Thesis (Chalmers 2004, 167­–176). Consider
sentences like ‘Language exists’ or ‘A sentient
being exists’: intuitively the meaning of these sentences will
guarantee that they are true in every possible context in which they
are used. So on the contextualist approach, these sentences should be
assigned necessary 1-intensions, mapping every possible context of use
to the truth-value True. But contrary to the Core Thesis, these
sentences are not apriori truths knowable independently of
any empirical evidence. After all, there’s no contradiction in the
very idea of a world without language or thought, and we can imagine
perfectly well what such a world would be like. It’s just that our
everyday experience allows us to immediately rule out the possibility
that our actual environment is like that. The problem is that although
it’s both apriori coherent and metaphysically possible for there to be
worlds with no language or thought, contextualist 1-intensions are
undefined for those possible worlds. So a necessary contextual
1-intension does not track apriority or metaphysical necessity.
Contextualist 1-intensions, therefore, cannot satisfy the
rationalist’s Core
 Thesis.[17]


This difficulty can be avoided, Chalmers argues, if we rely on a
notion of epistemic possibility—what seems
possible after ideal rational reflection—to interpret the 2D
framework. More specifically, he focuses on the notion of apriori
coherence: claims that could be true for all one can tell on the basis
of idealized apriori
 reasoning.[18]
 This notion of apriori coherence is used to answer the two
interpretive questions highlighted above: (i) apriori coherence is
used to characterize the possibilities relative to which 1-intensions
are defined, and (2) apriori coherence is invoked to assign
1-intensions to a speaker’s expressions.

First consider the possibilities that define 1-intensions. On the
epistemic interpretation, the possibilities are not metaphysically
possible contexts of use, but epistemically possible
“scenarios”: maximally specific hypotheses about what
one’s actual environment might be like that cannot be ruled out
through apriori reasoning alone. Scenarios provide a complete
characterization of the entire history of a universe, down to the last
microphysical detail. They also provide perspectival
information—a notional “center”—that indicates
the location from which the hypothetical universe is to be considered.
The crucial point is that scenarios are defined by their epistemic
role: they represent ways we can conceive of the actual world, within
which we can try to identify familiar objects, kinds or
 properties.[19]


The second distinctive element of the epistemic interpretation of 2D
semantics is the procedure for assigning 1-intensions to a speaker’s
expressions. On the epistemic approach, 1-intensions reflect relations
of apriori coherence between descriptions of possible scenarios and
ordinary language sentences:

The epistemic 1-intension for a sentence SS is True at a
scenario WW iff (W(W & not−S)-S) is apriori
incoherent. (Chalmers 2004, 180–4)


This principle for assigning 1-intensions relies on the speaker’s
ordinary ability to engage in object-level reasoning about
combinations of hypotheses: given the assumption that the scenario
description WW is true, you’re asked to decide whether
SS must be true as well. If it’s incoherent to accept
(W(W & not−S)-S), your epistemic intension for
SS maps WW to True, otherwise WW is mapped to
False. This epistemic assignment principle contrasts sharply with the
contextualist principle. The contextualist approach requires us to
engage in explicit meta-linguistic reasoning to interpret the
expression ‘SS’ as it’s used within the
possible world WW. On the epistemic approach, in contrast, an
extension is assigned to ‘SS’ on the basis of the
subject’s own object-level reasoning using the expressions
‘WW’ and ‘SS’.

Unlike the contextualist approach, therefore, the epistemic assignment
principle does not explicitly require that a scenario contain a token
of the relevant expression type in order to assign an extension
relative to that scenario. As a consequence, sentences like
‘Language exists’ seem to pose no special problem for
satisfying the Core Thesis. The sentence ‘Language exists’
will have a contingent epistemic 1-intension, because there are
possible scenarios that are apriori consistent with both the truth and
falsity of that sentence. For instance, consider a scenario in which
the only object is a giant lump of salt. To test whether your sentence
‘Language exists’ is true at this scenario considered as
actual, you ask whether there is any incoherence in combining the
claim ‘The only object that exists is a lump of salt’ with
the claim ‘It’s not the case that language exists’.
Intuitively, this combination is coherent: there is no language in the
salt world. So the epistemic 1-intension for your sentence
‘Language exists’ yields the value False for that
scenario. Since there are other scenarios relative to which the
sentence ‘Language exists’ will have the value True, your
sentence will have a contingent epistemic 1-intension. This contingent
epistemic intension for your sentence ‘Language exists’
reflects the fact that it’s not apriori true that language exists. So
it seems the epistemic assignment principle will allow apriority and
necessity of the 1-intension to go hand in hand, as required by the
Core Thesis.
5.3 Defining the E2D Framework

There is further work to do in spelling out Chalmers’ E2D
framework in such a way as to vindicate his rationalist project. One
way to think about the rationalist project is as a combination of the
following theses:

Semantic foundationalism holds that there is a canonical level of
description that affords transparent epistemic access to an objective
space of apriori possibilities – i.e. ways the world might be
for all that can be known independently of all experience. 
Meaning rationalism holds that implicit conceptual competence puts
one in a position to conclusively know the applicability conditions of
one’s words relative to every such scenario considered as
actual.
Modal rationalism holds that the space of apriori epistemic
possibility is a failsafe guide to the space of metaphysical
possibility: there are no modal illusions when scenarios or worlds are
described in canonical terms 


Together, 1 and 2 constitute a sort of semantic reductionism: the
meaning of any ordinary language expression is reduced to the meanings
of the base vocabulary via the epistemic exercise of considering
scenarios as actual and worlds as counterfactual. And 3 ensures that
this epistemic exercise is an accurate guide to metaphysical
possibility. Chalmers’ Core Thesis is meant to capture this
tight relationship between grasp of meaning, apriori reflection, and
metaphysical possibility. 

However, simply rejecting C2D in favor of E2D does not yet provide any
positive account of what it is to entertain an epistemic scenario W,
and how we should update our beliefs in the light of the supposition
that W is actual. Without these details, it’s impossible to
determine whether the Core Thesis is true. Perhaps it’s
impossible to consider a scenario as actual without presupposing
one’s own existence, or perhaps our best epistemic methods for
updating our beliefs presupposes the existence of those very beliefs;
or perhaps there is no way of thinking about the world that
doesn’t rely on some further empirical assumptions about the
world. 

Chalmers has entered into these interpretive questions in considerable
detail over many publications. The starting point for his approach is
outlined in (Chalmers and Jackson 2001), where he suggests that
scenarios can be understood as PQTI sentences: where P states
microphysical truths, Q states phenomenal truths, T is a
‘that’s all’ clause indicating that P and Q provide
a complete description of a possible universe, and I indicates the
subject’s notional location within that universe. P and Q employ
a canonical vocabulary that fully specifies the essential nature of
the fundamental properties upon which all other properties in a
possible world supervene. Thus, PQTI sentences provide an
epistemically transparent access to the space of epistemic and
metaphysical possibility (simply removing the self-locating
information from a PQTI sentence yields a complete description of a
corresponding possible world, PQT). The 1-intensions of one’s
ordinary language expressions are then determined by the individual
subject’s ideally reflective dispositions to judge sentences
true, assuming the truth of different PQTI-sentences. And 2-intensions
are fixed by one’s reasoning about PQT sentences considered as
counterfactual (given assumptions about PQTI). (Chalmers 2006, 2011b)
further articulates how the space of epistemic possibility can be
understood, how scenarios are related to possible worlds, and how 1-
and 2-intensions are assigned to token representations. 

Most recently, in Constructing the World (2012), Chalmers has focused
squarely on the epistemic ‘scrutability’ relation that
connects our understanding of ordinary language expressions to
base-level descriptions of scenarios.

Apriori Scrutability: There is a compact class of basic truths D such
that for any truth S, one can conclusively know ‘D ⊃\supset
S’ apriori.


Chalmers still takes PQTI sentences to be a promising candidate for
specifying a scrutability base D, but he is open to the possibility
that the descriptive vocabulary in PQTI may need to be supplemented in
order to capture some truths, such as truths about causal relations or
quiddities. But while he can afford to be flexible about the exact
nature of the scrutability base, Chalmers’ rationalist program
depends on vindicating Apriori Scrutability for any sentence that is
evaluable as possibly true or false (169–71). A good deal thus hangs
on whether he is right that ideal epistemic procedures allow for
apriori justification, given an exhaustive base-level description of a
scenario. Chalmers offers two complementary arguments to support the
plausibility of this view in (2012, ch. 4.). 

It’s worth noting that there are other ways of interpreting an
E2D framework defined on epistemic and metaphysical possibilities,
which do not support Chalmers’ rationalist program. Wolfgang
Spohn, for instance, suggests that the epistemically possible
scenarios should be understood along the lines of concrete universes,
whereas counterfactual metaphysical possibilities should be understood
as ‘totalities’ constructed from the best descriptions of
a concrete environment (Spohn 2016). Spohn suggests that this
interpretation of the 2D framework does a better job in capturing the
ways in which our ways of categorizing our actual physical environment
is partly pragmatic and not fully determined by its physical
structure, and while also vindicating metaphysical essentialism for
counterfactual possibilities. The result is a pragmatist approach to
E2D that is ill suited to Chalmers’ rationalist project. 
5.4 Semantic pluralism

Epistemic 2D semantics differs in important respects from other
theoretical accounts of meaning. Semantic theories normally describe
general semantic rules governing expression types, whereas
epistemic 2D semantics is based on a single individual’s current
understanding of a token expression. Kaplan and Jackson, for
instance, use the 2D framework to characterize the implicit
conventions governing syntactically individuated expressions like
‘I’ or ‘water’ in our linguistic community. In
contrast, the rationalist uses the 2D framework to characterize your
potentially idiosyncratic understanding of a particular use of an
expression on a given occasion—e.g., the way you understood Al
Gore’s fifth use of ‘water’ during a speech on climate
change. On the epistemic approach, moreover, 2D semantic values depend
on the upshot of ideal rational reflection about apriori coherence
relations. Just what is involved in ideal rational reflection is an
open question. But it’s plausible that it may depend on substantive
constructive theorizing about the empirical scenario in question and
on various non-obvious and idiosyncratic aspects of the subject’s
initial cognitive state. In that case, identifying the precise
epistemic 1-intension associated with your understanding of
‘water’ will be a highly non-trivial matter, and it may be
far from obvious when your understanding of the term shifts so that
two tokens no longer share the same epistemic 1-intension. This is
why, in contrast with 2D empiricists like Jackson, a rationalist like
Chalmers denies that epistemic 1-intensions reflect the subject’s
“implicit knowledge” of a reference-fixing criterion
(e.g., Chalmers 2002a, 185; 2006b, §5).

Of course, it’s possible that some epistemic intensions will reflect
stable reference-fixing rules that are entrenched by implicit
linguistic conventions. But it’s also possible that some epistemic
intensions will reflect highly abstract, heterogeneous, unstable, and
idiosyncratic aspects of a speaker’s understanding at a given time. As
a consequence, epistemic intensions are not guaranteed to line up with
conventional linguistic meanings (Chalmers 2002b). Given this
divergence from standard semantic theories, one may wonder whether
epistemic intensions deserve to be considered a kind of
meaning.

However, according to the 2D rationalist, epistemic intensions play
the core semantic roles associated with Fregean senses (Chalmers
2002b). Like Fregean senses, epistemic 1-intensions lend themselves to
a compositional semantic theory: the epistemic intension of a sentence
is determined by the epistemic intensions of the component
expressions. Moreover, epistemic 1-intensions, like Fregean senses,
reflect the speaker’s own rational perspective on what her words
represent. Two token names ‘AA’ and
‘BB’ have the same Fregean senses iff the identity
‘A = B’ would strike the speaker as trivially
true. Similarly, a subject associates two token expressions with
the same epistemic intension iff they are apriori
 equivalent.[20]
 Finally, epistemic intensions may play a role similar to that of
Fregean senses in the semantics of attitude reports (Chalmers 2011a).
Overall, then, epistemic intensions seem to provide an attractive
theoretical refinement of the Fregean notion of sense.

In addition, epistemic intensions arguably carve out a well-defined
notion of narrow content suited to playing key roles in commonsense
psychology (Chalmers 2002c). Epistemic intensions reflect rational
relations among a person’s thoughts that are discernible independently
of any empirical inquiry. As a consequence, epistemic intensions
identify representational states that are relevant to assessing a
person’s rationality and to explaining rational thought processes.

It’s important to note that epistemic 1-intensions are intended to
explain only one aspect of meaning. The 2D semantic framework
also posits 2-intensions (“counterfactual” or
“subjunctive” intensions), which reflect the modal profile
of the object, kind or property picked out by an expression. All 2D
theorists agree that 2-intensions play an important role in explaining
the semantics of modal sentences. Moreover, the two aspects of meaning
captured by the epistemic 2D framework are not intended to provide an
exhaustive characterization of all semantically relevant
phenomena:

Two-dimensionalism is naturally combined with a semantic
pluralism, according to which expressions and utterances can be
associated with many different semantic (or quasi-semantic) values, by
many different semantic (or quasi-semantic) relations. On this view
there should be no question about whether the primary intension or the
secondary intension is the content of an utterance. Both can
be systematically associated with utterances, and both can play some
of the roles that we want contents to play. Furthermore, there will
certainly be explanatory roles that neither of them play, so
two-dimensionalism should not be seen as offering an exhaustive
account of the content of an utterance. Rather it is characterizing
some aspects of utterance content, aspects that can play a useful role
in the epistemic and modal domains. (Chalmers 2006a, §3.5)

5.5 Objections to the rationalist project

Two distinctive aspects of the rationalist project are (a) its
commitment to the modal rationalist thesis that we have apriori access
to the space of metaphysical possibility and (b) its commitment to an
apriori aspect of meaning that can be captured with the 2D modal
framework. Both aspects of the rationalist project have been
challenged by critics.
a. Modal rationalism

According to the modal rationalist, if a hypothesis cannot be ruled
out by idealized apriori reflection then it’s metaphysically possible
for it to be true. So the space of apriori coherent scenarios is a
failsafe guide to the space of metaphysical possibility. This thesis
is crucial if one hopes to draw metaphysical conclusions on the basis
of apriori conceptual analysis (e.g., the 2D argument against
materialism). Critics have challenged the extensional adequacy of
modal rationalism on the basis of putative counterexamples. The thesis
is also open to more general theoretical challenges.

Certain examples suggest that a hypothesis can be apriori coherent
even though it’s metaphysically impossible for it to be true.
Sometimes a claim and its negation both seem apriori coherent. For
instance, it seems apriori coherent that there could be a necessarily
existing god and that there could be no such god—but obviously
it’s impossible for both of these claims to be true. This suggests
that apriori coherence is a fallible guide to genuine possibility
(Yablo 1999, 2000b). Other examples of this sort include unprovable
mathematical necessities and metaphysically necessary laws of nature.
Chalmers (1999, 2002a) argues that all such alleged counterexamples
fail: either they are not apriori coherent (e.g. necessarily existing
beings) or they are not necessary (e.g., necessary laws of nature). A
different type of counterexample turns on concepts whose applicability
is determined by a subject’s ostensive or recognitional capacities
in the actual world (Hill and McLaughlin 1999; Loar 1999;
Perry 2001; Yablo 2002). For instance, we may recognize ovals by the
way they would visually strike us. Since the applicability of such
concepts depends on the actual exercise of these
psychological capacities (whose nature we don’t fully understand),
it’s impossible to know apriori whether a certain equation in analytic
geometry captures the shape of ovals. To know this, one must
actually see the shapes generated by the equation
(Yablo 2002, §13–19; 2006). In response, (Chalmers 2002a,
§12) argues that the alleged counterexamples can be accommodated
within his 2D framework.

A third type of alleged counterexample hinges on objects, kinds or
properties whose intrinsic character is not exhaustively knowable
(Schroeter 2004). For instance, it might be impossible to fully
understand the intrinsic character of quarks and gluons—we can
only know them by their causal effects at the macro-level. It seems
apriori coherent that there could be such unknowable properties. But
then according to modal rationalism itself, there must be distinct
metaphysical possible worlds that cannot be distinguished through
apriori reflection: e.g., two possible worlds in which different
intrinsic properties play the gluon role. So apriori coherence would
fail to provide an accurate guide to the space of metaphysical
possibility. In response, (Chalmers 2002a, §10–11; 2006a,
§5) argues that (i) unknowable essences are controversial and may
be incoherent, (ii) the 2D framework can still capture what is
possible for all we can know, and (iii) there will still be
at least one metaphysical possibility for every apriori
coherent scenario, so apriori coherence is still a failsafe guide to
metaphysical possibility.

Finally, the underlying rationalist claim that objective metaphysical
possibility is constitutively bound up with ideal rationality is
controversial. Modal conventionalists seek to explain the access to
modal facts by denying their objective status: facts about what’s
possible are mere projections of our implicit semantic rules or
psychological dispositions (e.g., Kant 1787; Carnap 1950; Sidelle
1989). Modal empiricists, in contrast, insist on the
judgment-independent nature of metaphysical facts and deny that we
have apriori access to them: our access to the nature of empirical
objects, kinds, and properties is always based on and corrigible by
experience (e.g., Putnam 1975; Stalnaker 2003; Williamson 2007; Yablo
2000). In contrast, the modal rationalist seeks to vindicate the
objectivity of modal facts by appealing to idealized apriori reasoning
(Descartes 1641; Chalmers 2002a). [See the entry on
 the epistemology of modality.]
b. The Core Thesis

Even if one rejects modal rationalism, the semantic rationalist
insists that epistemic 2D semantics may capture an important aspect of
meaning that connects meaning, apriority, and the space of
epistemic possibility. A crucial criterion of adequacy for
this project is to provide a way of interpreting the 2D framework that
satisfies the rationalist’s Core Thesis:

Core Thesis: For any S,SS, S is apriori iff its
epistemic intension is necessary.


Some critics have sought to show that epistemic 2D semantics cannot
satisfy this constraint. The problem is that epistemic intensions are
assigned on the basis of the speaker’s commonsense standards for
evaluating the apriori coherence of combining the target sentence with
a description of a scenario. But commonsense standards may presuppose
that the speaker, her words or her thoughts exist within the
hypothetical scenario. If so, the epistemic approach will run into
similar problems to those that plagued the contextualist approach: the
necessity of the epistemic intension will not line up with genuine
epistemic or metaphysical
 necessity.[21]

According to Yablo (2002: §1–10), commonsense evaluations
of the kind of conditionals Chalmers uses to assign epistemic
intensions are sensitive to information about how words are used
within a hypothetical scenario. By commonsense standards,
Yablo contends, the following type of conditional is apriori true:

If my word ‘wing’ actually means tail and horses
have tails, then horses have wings.


If epistemic intensions are assigned on the basis of these sorts of
judgments about conditionals, then every sentence will have a
contingent epistemic intension: even mathematical necessities like
‘22=42^2 = 4’ will yield the value False for
scenarios in which your sentence ‘22=42^2 = 4’ means
tomatoes are numbers. Epistemic 2D semantics would therefore
violate the Core Thesis. According to Chalmers, this problematic
result can be avoided if the assignment principle is formulated more
carefully. The antecedent of Yablo’s conditional is making a claim
about how the quoted word (‘wing’) is used at the center
of a scenario. But there is no apriori reason to suppose that anything
at all follows about the physiology of horses from such a linguistic
fact. The key difference between Yablo’s understanding of the
conditional and Chalmers’ is that Yablo assumes that you’ll treat the
word quoted in the antecedent as identical in content to the
homophonic word used in the consequent. Chalmers denies this
assumption and so allows for necessary epistemic intensions (2002a,
169–71).

Schroeter (2005) presses a similar objection. To assign epistemic
intensions to expressions, we must evaluate conditionals like
‘if the actual world is like Twin Earth, then water =
XYZ’. Schroeter argues that commonsense epistemic norms
presuppose that the token of ‘water’ being used
in the consequent must itself exist within the scenario considered as
actual in the antecedent. Consider a scenario in which there is both
H2O and XYZ in your vicinity: it may be that you’ve only
been using the term ‘water’ to interact with one of these
substances. By commonsense standards, which stuff counts as water will
depend crucially on which stuff is causally hooked up in the right way
with the very token of ‘water’ whose applicability you’re
trying to adjudicate: without such a causal hook-up, no verdict is
justifiable. If this is right, epistemic intensions will be
undefined for scenarios in which the target expression does
not exist. And then the same type of counterexamples to the Core
Thesis that undermine the contextualist approach will also apply to
the epistemic approach: aposteriori sentences about the existence of
language or thought will have necessary epistemic intensions. Speaks
(2010) builds on this line of thought. He argues that it’s not just
commonsense epistemic norms that generate the problem: any
interpretive norms consistent with Chalmers’ restrictions on the
canonical specification of scenarios will generate necessary epistemic
intensions for sentences that are not plausibly apriori. In
particular, certain complex disjunctions involving the existence of
individuals, their properties and their relations to oneself will have
necessary epistemic intensions. For a continuation of this debate, see
(Elliott, McQueen, and Weber 2013; Schroeter 2013; Speaks 2014;
Stillman 2015).

Finally, Derek Ball (2014) articulates a social challenge to necessary
1-intensions based on Tyler Burge’s anti-individualism.
According to Ball, our willingness to revise virtually any belief in
the light of others’ testimony undercuts the claim that any
thoughts have necessary 1-intensions. As a consequence, he argues, E2D
cannot explain Fregean cognitive significance or the rationalist
connection between conceivability and possibility.
6. Objections to Generalized 2D semantics

Although empiricists and rationalists invoke the 2D framework for
different explanatory purposes, they agree on three important theses.
They defend apriori conceptual analysis, and take it to play an
important role in metaphysics. They hold that the 2D framework
captures a kind of meaning: a genuinely semantic aspect of linguistic
understanding, rather than a merely contingent pattern of beliefs. And
they use the 2D framework to represent a broadly internalist approach
to reference determination. These positions are distinctive of the
generalized 2D semantics and all three are controversial.

A common complaint about generalized 2D semantics is that there are no
plausible extant analyses of names or natural kind terms, and the 2D
framework provides no assurances that an analysis will be forthcoming
(e.g., Block and Stalnaker 1999; Byrne and Pryor 2006; Soames 2005).
Chalmers, for instance, characterizes the 1-intension of
‘water’ as follows:

As a rough approximation we might say that the primary intension picks
out the dominant clear, drinkable liquid in the oceans and lakes; or
more briefly, that it picks out the watery stuff in a world.
(Chalmers 1996, 57)


This informal definition is obviously sketchy and incomplete. Critics
contend that any attempt to provide a more precise definition will be
subject to counterexamples: we can imagine empirical situations where
the definition would fail to give the intuitively correct verdict
about the extension. Insofar as this claim is based exclusively on
induction from past failures, however, it is unconvincing. Generalized
2D semantics is not committed to any particular analysis, and the
correct 2D analysis may be quite complex. Indeed, the 2D framework
allows for “analyses” in the form of 1-intensions that
cannot be finitely specified in any natural language. So 2D theorists
can simply accept the intuitions that critics cite against particular
analyses: in their view such intuitions help to elucidate the correct
2D analysis of a term. To establish that no such 2D analysis is
possible, therefore, one must appeal to broader theoretical
considerations. Critics have targeted each of the three key
theoretical commitments of generalized 2D semantics. More recently,
some critics have raised worries about whether the 2D semantic
framework is well-defined.
6.1 Apriority

Proponents of generalized 2D semantics hold that verdicts about
hypothetical cases that ground the assignment of 1-intensions capture
a priori conceptual truths: propositions that can be conclusively
justified without relying on any information about one’s
real-world environment. Chalmers and Jackson (2001) argue that we can
have conclusive apriori knowledge of “application
conditionals” like ‘if the actual world is like Twin
Earth, then water = XYZ’. They argue that any empirical
information relevant to justifying a verdict about the conditional is
packed into the specification of the antecedent. So information about
your real-world environment plays no essential role in justifying
verdicts about the conditional: it is either redundant or irrelevant.
However, facts about one’s real environment may play a purely
causal role in shaping your current understanding of ‘water’.
Moreover, any changes in your understanding of ‘water’ that would
suffice to justify different verdicts about the application
conditionals, they contend, would eo ipso change the meaning of your
word ‘water’ – such changes would therefore be irrelevant to
justifying verdicts about what water is (given your current meaning).


The apriori status of application conditionals can be challenged in
many different ways. One type of challenge targets the prior
understanding that justifies verdicts about application conditionals.
Verdicts about which items count as water in a scenario considered as
actual will be justified on the basis of a complex pattern of initial
assumptions about water–one’s implicit “folk
theory” of water. Critics argue that each element of this folk
theory was originally based on empirical experience and is corrigible
in the light of further experience. Therefore, the verdicts based on
one’s folk theory should also count as aposteriori, not apriori
(e.g. Putnam 1970; Block and Stalnaker 1999; Laurence and Margolis
2003; Nimtz 2004; Byrne and Pryor 2006). A related criticism is that
generalized 2D semantics makes implausible assumptions about
what’s required for possessing the same concept or meaning
(Schroeter 2006; Diaz-Leon 2011). If the patterns of understanding
that ground verdicts about application conditionals are not required
for sameness of concept, then successful empirical inquiry can justify
changes in one’s ideal verdicts about application conditionals
without changing the meaning of one’s terms. So these
conditionals cannot be conclusively known apriori. See (Pickel 2016)
for a formal model of how such changes might be rationally justified.
.

A second type of challenge to the apriority of application
conditionals focuses on the process of reflection on hypothetical
scenarios. These critics argue that purely hypothetical reasoning
about a scenario may not reliably reflect the verdicts one would
endorse if one were actually confronted with the relevant scenario.
For instance, (Williamson 2006, 2007) and (Jenkins 2008, 2012) contend
that the intellectual skills involved in coming to judgments about
hypothetical cases will justify verdicts only if those skills have
been honed through empirical feedback. So reasoning about application
conditionals depends for its justification on experience of
one’s real-world environment, even if it is not based on any
empirical premises. (Rupert 2016) takes this line of thought further,
arguing that the intellectual skills relevant to determining the
application of scientific concepts are typically acquired through
embodied training – and such skills cannot be replicated via
reasoning about descriptions of hypothetical scenarios. In a slightly
different vein, (Dowell 2008) argues that actually believing an
empirical claim S may ground different verdicts than merely supposing
S. In particular, when a hypothetical scenario conflicts with your
core empirical beliefs, your armchair reasoning may fail to track the
reasoning you would endorse if you actually found yourself forced to
accept that scenario as actual. The crucial question for generalized
2D semantics is whether such mismatches between hypothetical reasoning
and real-life reasoning can be explained as failures of ideal
rationality or conceptual change. If so, a two-dimensionalist can
insist that application conditionals are apriori accessible in
principle, even if our actual armchair judgments will inevitably fall
short due to psychological limitations (Braddon-Mitchell 2015;
Chalmers 2012: 181–84).

A third type of challenge targets a specific class of concepts,
demonstrative or recognitional concepts. Critics argue that the
applicability conditions for these concepts depend essentially on
actually having certain experiences: e.g. having the experience of
seeing that color, or seeing that canary, or seeing a shape that’s
similar to an egg (Loar 1990, 1999; Perry 2001; Pryor 2006; Valaris
2009; Yablo 2002, 2006, (Williamson 2012)). Apriori reflection on a
possible scenario cannot elicit the relevant experiences, nor can it
establish that you would have the relevant experiences if actually
confronted with the scenario in question. So these critics conclude
that apriori reflection alone cannot justify verdicts about the
applicability of this type of concept. In response, proponents of
generalized 2D semantics will seek to show either (i) that the
relevant experiences can be included in specifications of scenarios
considered as actual or (ii) that the 2D framework can be used to
capture the way the reference of such concepts is fixed (Chalmers
2002a). More recently, Chalmers argues that recognitional capacities
for non-basic concepts are never essential to one’s ability to
apply the concept: in principle you can always justify verdicts about
a scenario without relying on a basic recognitional capacity (2012:
139–148).

A final type of objection seeks to show that generalized 2D semantics
over-generates apriori truths. For instance, (Speaks 2010, 2014)
argues that generalized 2D semantics is committed to the apriority of
contingent facts about the existence of individuals – a result
that conflicts with commonsense intuitions about what’s knowable
apriori. See (Elliott, McQueen, and Weber 2013) for a defense of the
apriority of such claims. And (Williamson 2006, 2007) argues that
there are no conclusively justifiable conceptual truths, even in the
case of conventional kinds like ‘vixen’ or logical
vocabulary like ‘all’. See (Boghossian 2011) for a reply.


Chalmers’ Constructing the World (2012) provides a systematic
defense of the apriority of application conditionals, and responds in
detail to many individual critics. The book’s central claim is
that there is some compact base-level vocabulary, such that
application conditionals formulated using that base vocabulary are
conclusively knowable on the basis of apriori reflection and
conceptual competence alone. Chalmers articulates the underlying
epistemic relation, ‘apriori scrutability’, that defines
epistemic 1-intensions, and explores different potential base
vocabularies. Chalmers seeks to show that the apriori scrutability of
all truths is an intuitively plausible generalization of a
thinker’s ability to justify verdicts on the basis of empirical
information about her environment. And he provides two arguments, (i)
from the suspension of belief and (ii) from Bayesian principles to
support the apriority of application conditionals (2012, ch 4). For
recent discussion of Chalmers’ arguments along with
Chalmers’ replies, see (Neta 2014; Schroeter 2014; Stanley 2014;
Chalmers 2014; Soames 2014; Turner 2014; Wilson 2014; Chalmers 2014;
Tiehen 2014; Pickel 2016). 
6.2 Semantic status

The semantic status of 1-intensions has also been challenged in
different ways, reflecting different assumptions about what is crucial
to meaning.

Some critics argue that the semantic values generated by generalized
2D semantics are too unstable to provide plausible conditions for
competence with a meaning or a concept. In particular, the
1-intensions assigned to names and natural kind terms will be too
sensitive to idiosyncrasies in a subject’s current understanding to be
stable through reasonable changes in belief or shareable by different
members of a linguistic community (e.g., Block and Stalnaker 1999;
Kroon 2004a; Schroeter 2003; Soames 2005; Stalnaker 2004; Yablo
2000b). Whether this is a telling objection depends on larger issues
about the explanatory role of meanings—in particular, to what
extent meanings must be stable through disagreement and theory change.
The 2D account can vindicate some stability, but it will not be able
to vindicate all commonsense epistemic intuitions about sameness of
meaning. See Chalmers (2012: ch. 5, and 9th excursus) for a recent
reply to worries about stability of meaning.

A different objection argues that 1-intensions misrepresent the
intuitive subject matter of language and thought. According to this
objection, generalized 2D semantics has the implausible consequence
that one cannot speak or think directly about individuals:
the real subject matter of our ‘Obama’ talk is not the man
himself, but whoever happens to satisfy a particular reference-fixing
criterion. Similarly, the real subject matter of our
‘water’ talk is not H2O, but whatever fulfills
our commonsense reference-fixing role. Critics argue that this
misrepresents our ability to think directly about individuals and
natural kinds (Byrne 2001; Perry 2001, ch. 8; Soames 2005, ch. 10;
2006a; Stalnaker 2004). Proponents of generalized 2D semantics argue
that the second aspect of meaning, the 2-intension, fully explains
such intuitions about the intuitive subject matter of names and
natural kind terms.

Finally, critics have argued that generalized 2D semantics faces
difficulties in providing a compositional semantic theory. Diego
Marconi (2005) argues that generalized 2D semantics faces difficulties
integrating the two distinct aspects of meaning into a unified
semantic theory. In particular, he argues that the role of two
distinct intensions in compositional semantics gives rise to something
like a semantic ambiguity, which generates problems for the
interpretation of subjunctive conditionals. See (Bealer 2002) for
another ambiguity interpretation of 2D semantics. In a similar spirit,
Scott Soames (2005) objects that 2D semantics cannot explain Kripke’s
examples of necessary aposteriori truths, since there is no single
proposition (understood as a set of possible worlds) that is both
necessary and contingent. Soames (2005, ch. 10) goes on to argue that
generalized 2D semantics cannot provide a plausible compositional
semantics for the sentences involving both epistemic and metaphysical
operators: e.g. he argues that 2D semantics generates incorrect
interpretations when modal operators, indexicals, or de re
propositions are embedded within attitude reports. And Graeme Forbes
(2011) raises a group of puzzle cases for 2D semantics involving the
interaction of factive operators like ‘someone establishes
that’, with epistemic and metaphysical operators like
‘it’s apriori that’ and ‘it’s necessary
that’. Forbes sees this as a challenge to any two-factor theory
of meaning. And Wlodek Rabinowicz (2010) suggests that a
one-dimensional semantic framework with a more sophisticated
interpretation function is better suited to handling the distinction
between ‘it’s apriori that’ and ‘it’s
analytic that’ than a two-dimensional framework like that of
Chalmers and Jackson.

In response, proponents of generalized 2D semantics have sought to
clarify their own core commitments at the level of compositional
semantics. (Chalmers 2006b) strongly denies that he is committed to
ambiguity, since the two elements of meaning are necessarily
correlated. (Chalmers 2011) argues that worries about embedding within
attitude reports can be handled by an explicitly two-dimensional
account of propositions and a better analysis of the semantics for
attitude reports (together with appropriate pragmatics). And in
response to Forbes’ puzzles, (Chalmers and Rabern 2014) argue
that the source of the tension is not the 2D semantic machinery, but
rather commonsense commitments about apriority, necessity and
contingent apriori truths. So any semantic theory will face similar
difficulties in reconciling these commitments. They go on to
articulate two possible responses on behalf of two-dimensionalism. See
(Fritz 2013; Johannesson and Packalén 2016; Kipper forthcoming)
for alternative semantic accounts of the puzzle cases that are
compatible with generalized 2D semantics. 
6.3 Defining 1-intensions 

A different type of worry focuses on whether the epistemic factors
cited by generalized 2D semantics can generate determinate
1-intensions in the first place. As we saw, 1-intensions are intended
to capture an individual’s implicit epistemic commitments about
the application-conditions of her words. Some critics, however, raise
worries about whether 1-intensions are well-defined. Chalmers and
Jackson (2001) assign semantic values relative to a base-level
description of a scenario — something like a PQTI-sentence
stating basic microphysical, phenomenal, and self-locating
information, together with a ‘that’s all’
completeness claim. Ordinary conceptual competence is then supposed to
put one in a position to conclusively justify any conditional truth of
the form (PQTI ⊃\supset S). According to generalized 2D semantics, this
epistemic procedure generates a determinate 1-intension for any
meaningful sentence S. Although Generalized 2D can allow that some
sentences may have indeterminate truth-values relative to some
scenarios, too much indeterminacy will undermine the viability of the
approach. A number of critics argue that 1-intensions are not
well-defined for many, perhaps most sentences. 

Justin Tiehen has raised an important difficulty for defining an
adequate ‘That’s all’ clause, T, in a PQTI-sentence
(Tiehen 2014). Without this sort of completeness clause, it will be
impossible to come to any justified verdict about the truth of
ordinary sentences. For instance, consider the sentence ‘There
is no ectoplasm’ relative to a purely physical Earthlike
scenario E. A PQI-sentence that exhaustively describes E’s
microphysical, phenomenal and self-locating features, will not allow
one to rationally determine whether E contains further non-physical
ectoplasm over and above the physical features explicitly mentioned in
PQI. In order to conclude that ‘There is no ectoplasm’ is
true in E you need to know that PQI is a complete base-level
description of that scenario. The question, then, is how to analyze
‘That’s all’. Chalmers’ solution to this
problem is to appeal to a distinction between positive and negative
truths: intuitively ‘There is no ectoplasm’ is a negative
truth, whereas ‘Ectoplasm exists’ a positive one. Chalmers
suggests that T should be understood as a claim about all positive
truths:

(T) All positive truths are apriori entailed by PQI truths. (2012:
111).


Tiehen argues, however, that the distinction between positive and
negative truths cannot cleanly drawn in the way Chalmers hopes, so
most ordinary truths will end up as partly negative. The upshot is
that even a parade case like ‘water = H2O’ will not be
apriori entailed by PQI truths. If Tiehen is right that no better
formulation of T is available, then the 2D framework cannot be used to
define 1-intensions for most ordinary language sentences. 

Another worry focuses on the descriptive vocabulary in PQTI-sentences.
If the description of a scenario is to ground determinate verdicts
about 1- and 2-intensions, the predicates that attribute base-level
microphysical and phenomenal properties should afford transparent
access to the instantiation conditions of those properties. But many
externalist critics will be skeptical about the possibility of such
ideal descriptive language (e.g. Stalnaker 2008, Schroeter 2004).

Setting aside worries about the PQTI-descriptions, a different line of
objection questions whether your current epistemic commitments
generate determinate extensions for possible scenarios considered as
actual. Many externalist critics of Chalmers’ rationalist Core
Thesis can be interpreted as challenging the assumption that an
individual’s conceptual competence grounds determinate
1-intensions (e.g., Yablo 2002, 2006; Schroeter 2006, 2013; Ball 2014;
Pickel 2016). The worry would be that conceptual competence and ideal
epistemic norms don’t suffice to generate determinate verdicts
for application conditionals of the form (PQTI ⊃\supset S): in many cases
at least, ideal verdicts about application conditionals will depend
essentially on empirical presuppositions about the real world and
one’s own representational states. If these critics are right,
1-intensions are not suited to capturing individuals’ epistemic
commitments about the truth-conditions of sentences (and the thoughts
they express). On this approach, competence with the same word meaning
or concept will depend in part on facts outside the epistemic purview
of the individual subject. 
6.4 Internalism

Proponents of generalized 2D semantics aim to vindicate an internalist
approach to assigning semantic content to an individual’s expressions.
Both the empiricist and the rationalist versions of generalized 2D
semantics assign 1-intensions to words in such a way as to reflect
individual speakers’ current rational dispositions: 1-intensions are
therefore fully determined by the speaker’s current internal states.
In contrast, semantic externalists hold that the aspects of meaning
that 1-intensions are intended to explain—reference
determination and competence conditions—depend in part on the
subject’s relation to external facts, and so cannot be fully
determined by the subject’s internal states at a given time.

Internalism is a deep methodological point of contention that
separates proponents of generalized 2D semantics from many of their
critics (e.g., Soames 2005; Stalnaker 2004). Internalists take the
notion of meaning to capture an aspect of an individual’s current
state of understanding, while externalists take the notion of meaning
to reflect how an individual is embedded within her social and
physical environment. Adjudicating this disagreement raises difficult
issues about the explanatory role of semantic theories and how that
role is best fulfilled. As we’ve seen, traditional empiricists aim to
explain the causal mechanisms that allow individual speakers to
coordinate their everyday classificatory dispositions, while
rationalists seek to identify the aspect of understanding that grounds
an individual’s ideal apriori judgments about what’s possible. Both of
these projects focus squarely on the individual’s current subjective
perspective, and thus naturally suggest an internalist approach to
intentionality. Proponents of generalized 2D semantics maintain that
the individual’s current state of understanding fully determines the
relevant truth- and applicability-conditions for her words (Chalmers
and Jackson 2001; Gertler 2002; Braddon-Mitchell 2004). In contrast,
semantic externalists tend to emphasize different explanatory
projects: e.g. situating individuals with respect to objective
features of their environment and vindicating the holistic,
falliblist, and open-ended character of empirical inquiry. These
explanatory projects highlight individual’s relation to aspects of her
real-world environment and her fallibility about those relations, and
thus naturally suggest an externalist approach to intentionality. Just
which explanatory projects are most central to intentionality and how
the relevant phenomena are best explained are both hotly contested
issues. [See the entries on
 externalism about mental content
 and
 narrow mental content.]
7. The Metasemantic Interpretation
7.1 Overview: 2D semantics for externalists

Generalized 2D semantics seeks to vindicate a traditional internalist
conception of meaning: it posits an extra aspect of meaning for all
expressions (the intension corresponding to the diagonal of a 2D
matrix) that is fully determined by a subject’s internal states, and
which in turn determines objective truth-conditions for her sentences.
By enriching compositional semantics in this way, generalized 2D
semantics promises a straightforward explanation of a variety of
epistemic properties of sentences: e.g., why a necessary sentence like
‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ is not apriori knowable, what the
subject learns by accepting the sentence, or how the subject uses the
sentence in reasoning.

But using the 2D framework to characterize the subject’s epistemic
perspective is not beholden to this internalist project. Semantic
externalists reject the traditional view that our purely internal
states afford apriori access to reference-fixing conditions for our
words and thoughts. According to externalists, the basic assignments
in a compositional semantics relate the subject’s words and thoughts
to objective features of her environment—objects, kinds and
properties whose nature is captured by standard (1D) possible world
semantics. Even externalists, however, can define 2D matrices that
reflect the subject’s epistemic perspective on the reference of her
words and thoughts. For the externalist, however, these 2D matrices
will not represent meanings—a specific aspect of
understanding that is required for linguistic or conceptual competence
and which figures in a compositional semantic theory that determines
truth-conditions for sentences. On an externalist interpretation, 2D
matrices merely reflect one aspect of a subject’s partial semantic
understanding of what her words and thoughts represent. Because
externalist 2D matrices don’t represent meanings, moreover, the
externalist is free to use the 2D framework strategically to focus on
different aspects of the subject’s understanding for different
explanatory purposes.

Robert Stalnaker has articulated such an externalist interpretation of
the 2D framework in a series of influential papers spanning some
thirty years. He was the first to introduce 2D matrices to specify
what is communicated in situations where conversational partners are
partly ignorant or mistaken about the nature of the objects, kinds or
properties their words pick out (1978), and he later extended his 2D
framework to characterize the content of certain thoughts and attitude
attributions (1981; 1987; 1988). In both cases, the 2D framework is
used to define “diagonal” intensions that reflect the
subject’s partial understanding of which objects, kinds or properties
her words and thoughts represent. These diagonal intensions are not
meanings or semantic values, since they do not figure in a
compositional semantic theory and they do not reflect conditions for
conceptual or linguistic competence. The only meaning of an expression
on this account is its ordinary “horizontal” intension. In
effect, Stalnaker’s 2D matrices represent different meanings that an
expression could have had if it had occurred in different
empirical circumstances. This “metasemantic”
interpretation of the 2D framework contrasts sharply the
“semantic” interpretations favored by theorists like
Jackson and Chalmers (Stalnaker 2001, 2004).

Proponents of generalized 2D semantics were influenced by Stalnaker’s
early papers developing the 2D framework, and their views are often
presented as continuous in motivation and form. But there are
important theoretical consequences that flow from the choice between
2D metasemantics and generalized 2D semantics. Indeed, Stalnaker
himself is a vocal critic of generalized 2D semantics, rejecting its
commitment to the semantic status of 2D matrices, its commitment to
apriori conceptual analysis, and its internalist approach to reference
determination.
7.2 A two-dimensional account of assertoric content

The metasemantic interpretation of the 2D framework was originally
developed as a way of explaining how the propositions conveyed by the
assertion of a sentence can vary depending on the conversational
context (Stalnaker 1978). In this seminal paper, Stalnaker proposes an
attractive theoretical account of the role of assertion in a
conversation, which is then used to explain how the assertoric use of
a necessary sentence like ‘Hesperus = Phosphorus’, can
convey a specific empirical proposition within a given conversation.
In particular, Stalnaker argues that our commitment to construing such
sentences as making felicitous and informative assertions will lead us
to reinterpret their content in ways that can be modeled
using the 2D framework.

The guiding idea is that in making an assertion the speaker is trying
to get the audience to rule out certain possibilities. In asserting
‘It’s cold today‘, for instance, I may be trying to get
you to rule out possibilities in which today’s temperature in
Melbourne is over 10° C. We can model what my assertion conveys,
then, as a function that maps possible worlds in which today’s
temperature is under 10° C to True and all other worlds to False.
However, the precise truth-conditions communicated by an assertoric
use of a sentence depend in part on the conversational context in
which it takes place. Just which temperatures count as cold, for
instance, depends on shared background assumptions in a particular
conversational context: what’s cold in Melbourne is mild in
Manitoba.

A second guiding idea is that the proposition actually conveyed by the
assertion of a particular sentence depends on presuppositions
shared by the participants in the conversation—including
presuppositions about what particular words represent and
presuppositions about actual empirical circumstances. If you’re a
Chinese speaker who doesn’t understand anything at all about what the
term ‘cold’ represents in English, then I cannot use
‘It’s cold today‘ to convey facts about Melbourne’s
weather. And if you’re a Canadian who doesn’t understand anything
about Australian weather conditions, you won’t understand precisely
what I am saying to my fellow Melburnians when I assert that sentence.
Stalnaker calls the set of presuppositions that conversational
partners treat as common knowledge that they can rely on to get their
point across the “context set”—which he models as
the set of possible worlds that satisfy all of these mutual
presuppositions. The context set will encode shared assumptions about
the meaning of words, about general empirical facts, about the what’s
happened so far in the conversation, and so on.

The goal of assertion, Stalnaker suggests, is to shrink the context
set. In making an assertion, the speaker tries to get the audience to
accept a new proposition as one of their shared presuppositions,
thereby shrinking the set of possible worlds that are considered live
options. For instance, in asserting ‘It’ll be very cold
today’ to a group of Melburnians, I exploit background knowledge
of local weather conditions in June to get my audience to accept that
the temperature outside is somewhere between 5–10° C, ruling
out live possibilities that it might be in the 15–20° C
range. If all goes well, further planning will proceed on the basis of
a smaller and more accurate range of possibilities. In contrast, if I
were to assert ‘It’s cold’ to the monolingual Chinese
speaker or to the parochial Canadian, my assertion would be defective,
since my audience wouldn’t be able to figure out which temperatures
are ruled out by my assertion.

Identity claims, however, do not seem to fit this simple model of
assertion. As Kripke (1980) argued, identities are either necessarily
true or necessarily false. So accepting an identity will either leave
the context set unchanged or it will eliminate it altogether. Either
way, asserting an identity would be pointless. But clearly it is not.
Asserting an identity such as ‘Lloyd is I.L. Humberstone’
can be genuinely informative, ruling out empirical possibilities
previously taken to be live options. According to the metasemantic
account, (i) the goal of assertion can explain why the assertion of a
necessary sentence will lead to a reinterpretation of the content of
the asserted sentence, and (ii) the 2D framework helps to specify just
which proposition will be conveyed by the sentence within a given
conversation.

In general, an identity claim is appropriate when one of the parties
to a conversation is (partially) ignorant about which object is picked
out by a name like ‘Lloyd’. For an externalist like
Stalnaker, this is a case of semantic ignorance. If O’Leary
doesn’t know that ‘Lloyd’ is co-referential with
‘I.L. Humberstone’, then he does not fully understand the
semantic rules governing these names: i.e., that both names are
associated with a constant function from any possible world to a
specific individual. But O’Leary isn’t utterly incompetent with the
meaning of these terms: he implicitly understands both names as rigid
designators, and he has some substantive understanding of the object
each name picks out. For instance, he may understand that
‘Lloyd’ refers to the person to whom he’s just been
introduced and that ‘I.L. Humberstone’ refers to the
author of ‘Direction of Fit’. O’Leary’s semantic
deficiency—his failure to fully understand the meaning of these
names in a contextually appropriate way—is grounded in his
ignorance of the ordinary empirical fact that the man to whom he has
been introduced is the author of ‘Direction of Fit’.

2D matrices can be used to represent this sort of partial semantic
understanding. O’Leary knows that ifif the man in front of him
is the author of the famous article, then ‘Lloyd = I.L.
Humberstone’ expresses a necessary truth; and he knows that
ifif the man in front of him isn’t the author, the sentence
expresses a necessary falsehood. What O’Leary doesn’t know is which of
these two possibilities corresponds to his actual situation. Call the
first possibility ii and the second jj. O’Leary’s
epistemic situation can then be summed up in a 2D matrix:

O’Leary: ‘Lloyd = I.L. Humberstone’



ii
jj 

ii
T
T 

jj
F
F 



The matrix is defined only with respect to a specific set of relevant
alternative possibilities, ii and jj, chosen in such a way
as to reflect the subjects’ semantic understanding and our own
explanatory interests. The vertical axis represents these possible
worlds in their role as contexts of use, which determine the
literal semantic content of the expressions used in them. The
horizontal axis represents those same possible worlds as
circumstances of evaluation, relative to which we evaluate
the truth or falsity of the proposition expressed. Each row of the
matrix thus represents a different proposition that might be literally
expressed by the sentence. Stalnaker calls such matrices
propositional concepts, since they reflect the subject’s
current imperfect conception of the meaning of the
 sentence.[22]
 This particular matrix reflects the fact that O’Leary’s current
epistemic state is compatible with the identity sentence expressing
either a necessary truth or a necessary falsehood, depending on
empirical facts about the actual context of use.

What does O’Leary learn when he comes to accept Daniels’ assertion of
‘Lloyd is I.L. Humberstone’? Since the actual world is
like ii, the literal semantic content of the asserted sentence
is a necessary truth. But necessary truths rule out no empirical
possibilities whatsoever, so this cannot be the informative
proposition that is conveyed by Daniels’ assertion. Moreover, O’Leary
is not in a position to recognize that this is the literal semantic
content of the sentence, since he doesn’t know whether the actual
world is like ii or jj. The natural suggestion is that the
information conveyed by Daniels’ assertion is that the real world is
like ii and not jj. When O’Leary accepts ‘Lloyd is
I.L. Humberstone’, he will no longer treat the possibility that
the man in front of him is not the author of the famous
article as a live option: this empirical possibility will be
eliminated from his context set. Thus, the proposition that seems to
be conveyed by Daniels’ assertion corresponds to the diagonal
intension determined by our 2D matrix for that assertion. Moreover,
this observation generalizes: when subjects are partially ignorant of
the semantic values of their words, the diagonal proposition
determined by the propositional concept can capture the empirical
information conveyed by the assertion.

But why is this so? To explain why assertions sometimes express the
diagonal proposition, the metasemantic account appeals to rational
maxims governing conversational cooperation. The following maxim seems
to govern the practice of assertion:

The very same proposition should be expressed relative to every
possible world in the context set. (Stalnaker 1978, 88)


Speakers should conform to this maxim, because assertion involves an
intention to get one’s audience to eliminate worlds from the context
set in accordance with the proposition expressed—and in order
for this intention to succeed the audience must be in a position to
figure out just which worlds they are being asked to eliminate. When
this sort of rational maxim governing the communication of information
is flouted, the audience will look for a non-standard interpretation
of the utterance that would bring it back into conformity with the
maxims (Grice 1989). [See the entries on
 pragmatics
 and on
 implicature.]

According to Stalnaker, this is precisely what is going on in the case
of identity claims like the one we have been considering. Daniels’
assertion of ‘Lloyd is I.L. Humberstone’ clearly flouts
the proposed maxim. We can assume that Daniels is aware that O’Leary
doesn’t know whether he is in a world like ii, where the man to
whom he’s been introduced is the famous author, or a world like j
where they are distinct. Yet Daniels utters a sentence that expresses
a different proposition depending on whether the actual world is like
ii or like jj. In such circumstances, the audience should
look for an alternative interpretation of the assertion. Daniels’
assertion can be brought back into conformity with the maxim by
re-interpreting it as conveying the proposition expressed by the
diagonal of the matrix. At a rough intuitive level, we can say that
Daniels is trying to get O’Leary to accept that the sentence
‘Lloyd is I.L. Humberstone’ expresses a truth. But the 2D
framework also allows us to specify more precisely just what empirical
information is conveyed within a given conversational context. Given
O’Leary’s and Daniels’ common presuppositions about what the two names
represent, Daniels’ assertion also expresses the proposition that
the man to whom O’Leary has just been introduced is the author of
‘Direction of Fit’.

It’s worth emphasizing, however, that the very same sentence asserted
in a different conversational context could express an entirely
different empirical proposition: just which proposition is expressed,
on this metasemantic account, depends on what the individual parties
to the conversation are currently presupposing about the meanings of
the expressions used.

In recent work, Stalanaker has enriched his notion of a context. In
addition to a sets of possible worlds, he introduces (i) multiple
centers within those worlds representing the participants in a
conversation, and (ii) accessibility relations among the centers
representing interlocutors’ ways of identifying each other
(Stalnaker 2008, 2014). This added structure is intended to capture
self-locating presuppositions that can help explain what’s
communicated by indexical expressions like ‘I’,
‘you’ and ‘now’. For a helpful overview of the
motivation for such an approach, see (Ninan 2010a) and for further
development of multi-centered accounts of propositional content see
(Torre 2010, Ninan 2013). 
7.3 Propositional attitudes

The metasemantic 2D framework was originally developed to explain
communication, but the framework can also be used to specify the
content of certain beliefs and the content of assertions that
attribute beliefs.

Stalnaker (1984) defends a coarse-grained account of belief contents,
which individuates particular belief states in terms of a set of
possible worlds that would make them true. If this project is to
succeed, it must be possible to fully specify beliefs without invoking
anything like Fregean senses or conceptual structure. But there is an
important class of beliefs that seem to pose insuperable problems for
a simple possible worlds account of their content: beliefs in
necessary truths. The problem for a standard possible worlds analysis
is that all necessary truths have precisely the same content (the
function mapping every world to True). So on a simple possible worlds
account, the belief that Hesperus = Phosphorus will have
exactly the same content as a belief that Hesperus = Hesperus
& Fermat’s last theorem is true. But these are clearly
distinct belief states. Beliefs in identities have been particularly
important in motivating theories of finer-grained thought
contents.

But fine-grained Fregean senses or conceptual structures are not
strictly required to distinguish beliefs in identities. Stalnaker
(1981; 1987) argues that the metasemantic 2D framework he developed to
explain what is communicated by an assertion of an identity
sentence can also explain the content of the belief states
attributed using an identity sentence to specify its content. If
O’Leary were to notice the pole star and think to himself that’s
Mars, for instance, the truth-conditions of his thought can be
captured by a judiciously defined diagonal proposition (Stalnaker
1987, 125). In this case, the worlds we include in the context set may
involve facts about which object is the target of O’Leary’s visual
attention and facts about salient empirical properties he associates
with the name ‘Mars’. On the metasemantic approach, then,
the proposition we attribute in saying O’Leary believes that that
is Mars is the proposition that the visually salient object is
the object that has those Martian properties.

A further complication arises in specifying the content of attitude
attributions. On the metasemantic account of assertion, the content
conveyed by a sentence depends on the shared presuppositions of the
speaker and audience. But sometimes the parties to a discussion are
better informed than the person they are describing. In philosophical
discussions, for instance, it is standardly presupposed that
‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ are
co-referential. So the diagonal intension associated with sentence
‘Hesperus ≠\ne Phosphorus’ will be necessarily
false when it’s asserted in philosophical contexts (i.e., it will
be false when uttered in any situation compatible with what is being
presupposed in the philosophical conversation). And yet when a
philosopher says that O’Leary doesn’t know that Hesperus is
Phosphorus, she still manages to communicate that O’Leary fails to
grasp some contingent empirical proposition. On the face of it, the
metasemantic account of assertion cannot explain how this is possible,
since every cell of the metasemantic matrix for the sentence in this
philosophical conversation will be assigned the value True.

Stalnaker’s response to this problem is to suggest that the context
set for a belief report must be expanded so as to include worlds that
correspond to the way that the believer himself (i.e. O’Leary) takes
things to be. The diagonal proposition of the philosopher’s sentence
is thus determined by considering what she would be saying if her
sentence were asserted in contexts compatible with O’Leary’s beliefs
(1987; 1988). However, there is no general rule for choosing which
worlds are the relevant ones:

The procedure I am proposing for extending propositional concepts so
that the diagonalization strategy can be applied to problematic belief
attributions takes examples case by case. It is not, as yet, very
satisfactory if we are looking for a systematic way to explain why the
complements of belief attributions denote the propositions that they
seem to denote. But if, using this procedure, we can find a possible
worlds proposition that is a plausible candidate to be the object of
belief being attributed in the various problematic examples, then
[…] it will not be completely mysterious how these propositions
can be expressed by the sentences that seem to express them.
(Stalnaker 1987, 129)


Thus, the metasemantic 2D framework provides adequate descriptive
resources for characterizing mental states and our discourse about
them, without invoking fine-grained Fregean senses, concepts, or
syntactic structures. However, the metasemantic theory used to
construct the relevant 2D matrices relies on unsystematic norms of
charitable interpretation to identify the precise contents of
particular attitudes and attitude reports (Stalnaker 1999b,
 18–19).[23]
7.4 Metasemantic vs. semantic

The semantic vs. metasemantic distinction was first drawn by Kaplan
(1989b, 573–6). A semantic theory for a language assigns semantic
values (meanings) to particular expressions in the language. In
contrast, a metasemantic theory explains why expressions have
those semantic values: i.e., what facts about an expression make it
the case that it has a certain meaning. A semantic theory, for
instance, might tell us that the semantic value for ‘Barack
Obama’ is a 1D intension that maps any possible world to a
specific individual, while the semantic value for ‘I’ is a
2D intension that maps contexts of utterance to a constant function
from any possible world to the individual who is the speaker in the
context. A metasemantic theory will tell us what makes it the case
that these are the correct interpretations of their meaning: e.g., the
metasemantic theory might appeal to the speaker’s dispositions and
history, how she is causally connected to her social or physical
context, the linguistic conventions of the local linguistic community,
details about the conversational context, and so on.

A semantic interpretation of the 2D framework takes the 2D
framework to specify a semantic value of an expression. Kaplan’s
theory of indexicals is a semantic interpretation of the framework, as
are Jackson’s and Chalmers’ generalized 2D semantics. Stalnaker calls
his own interpretation of the 2D framework a metasemantic one
because his 2D matrices reflect general principles for assigning
semantic values (horizontal intensions) to expressions on the basis of
empirical facts about their use. Stalnaker’s 2D matrices thus reflect
metasemantic facts about interpretation, not semantic facts about the
meanings of specific expressions.

The metasemantic interpretation of the 2D framework is structurally
different from semantic interpretations like Jackson’s and Chalmers’
in a number of important respects. First, on the metasemantic
approach, 2D matrices are defined in terms of a restricted set of
possible worlds. Metasemantic 2D matrices are defined only with
respect to those worlds that are consistent with some relevant set of
the subject’s background assumptions. On a semantic interpretation, in
contrast, 2D matrices are defined on the set of all centered
possible worlds.

Second, just which set of possible worlds is used to construct a
metasemantic 2D matrix depends in part on the theorist’s
contingent explanatory interests. For instance, Daniels’ current
internal state of understanding the expression ‘Mars’ may
be associated with different 2D matrices, depending on whether we are
interested in characterizing his conversation with O’Leary or in
characterizing his thought identifying a speck visible in the night
sky as Mars. In many contexts, moreover, we can characterize the
content associated with Daniels’ internal state without resorting to
the 2D apparatus at all: e.g., when Daniels asserts ‘Mars is a
planet’ we can usually model what he says and thinks in terms of
a simple horizontal intension. Semantic interpretations of the 2D
framework treat the intension corresponding to the diagonal of a 2D
matrix as fully determined by the subject’s internal states, whereas
on a metasemantic approach which diagonal intension is
assigned—or whether a diagonal intension is invoked at
all—depends on the explanatory interests of an
 interpreter.[24]

Third, the assignment principle used to fill in a metasemantic 2D
matrix for a subject’s words is not beholden to an internalist account
of reference-fixing. On a semantic interpretation, 2D matrices are
filled in on the basis of the subject’s idealized judgments about
hypothetical scenarios. But the metasemantic approach is not committed
to relying on the subject’s epistemic judgments to fill in 2D
matrices: it’s the theorist who must be able to assign
horizontal intensions to the subject’s words and thoughts on the basis
of the totality of empirical facts about her. Nor should we think of
reference-fixing as somehow determined by the internal states of the
theorist, since even theorists are prone to mistakes on externalist
accounts of reference-fixing.

Fourth, on the metasemantic approach, the basic semantic assignments
are always horizontal intensions, which reflect the nature of the
objects, kinds and properties the subject is thinking and talking
about. On a metasemantic account, diagonal intensions represent ad
hoc reinterpretations that we resort to when the normal
horizontal intension for a subject’s sentences or thoughts is
necessarily true or necessarily false, and hence makes no substantive
claim about the empirical world. Such diagonal intensions, moreover,
are theoretical abstractions derived from a set of horizontal
intensions that are compatible with the subject’s partial ignorance
about nature of the objects, kinds, and properties she is representing
(i.e., her partial ignorance of the horizontal intensions for her
words and thoughts). Semantic interpretations of the 2D framework, in
contrast, treat the intensions picked out by the diagonal of a 2D
matrix as basic semantic values in their own right.

As a consequence of these structural features of the metasemantic
interpretation, metasemantic diagonal intensions play none of the
basic explanatory roles attributed to 1-intensions by proponents of
generalized 2D semantics. In particular, (i) diagonal intensions do
not figure in a compositional semantic theory, (ii) they do not
reflect stable aspects of linguistic or conceptual competence, and
(iii) they do not represent apriori accessible reference-fixing
conditions for the subject’s words or thoughts (Stalnaker 1999b, 2004
, 2007).
7.5 Objections to the metasemantic interpretation

The metasemantic interpretation uses the 2D possible worlds framework
in an ad hoc, context-sensitive way to isolate certain aspects
of a subject’s understanding that are not captured by standard
possible worlds semantics. This metasemantic project can be challenged
on a number of different fronts.

First, one might object to the account of how metasemantic diagonal
propositions are generated for particular assertions. The account
developed in ‘Assertion’ relies on Gricean norms for
felicitous communication to identify an empirical proposition
expressed by a necessary sentence. However, Gricean mechanisms may not
determine the intuitively correct semantic assignments (e.g., Brehany
2006). Indeed, some critics argue the diagonalization strategy may
fail to determine any semantic assignment at all, because of its
commitment to transparent mutual knowledge of the context (Hawthorne
and Madigor 2009; see (Stalnaker 2009) for a reply). More generally,
Stalnaker emphasizes that his primary commitment is not to specific
Gricean mechanisms for assigning diagonal intensions to assertions,
but rather to the idea that possible worlds semantics can fully
capture the content of thought and talk and how it evolves through
conversation and inquiry (Stalnaker 2014).

Second, one might challenge the background assumption that
one-dimensional possible world semantics, with its coarse-grained
representation of truth-conditions as functions mapping possible
worlds to truth-values, is the best way to characterize the content of
language and thought. Stalnaker introduces the 2D framework in order
to address cases that are problematic for standard possible world
semantics: the assertion of necessary truths and certain types of
attitude reports. But many theorists contend that functions from
worlds to truth-values cannot fully capture the content of thought and
talk. For instance, we may need to invoke finer-grained syntactic or
conceptual structures (i) to explain what is said when we report the
content of a person’s words or thoughts (e.g., Crimmins 1992; Richard
1990), (ii) to capture apparent differences in content between
logically equivalent claims (“the problem of logical
omniscience”), (iii) to account for our ability to think de
re thoughts about particular objects (Soames 2005, ch. 5; 2006a;
2006b), (iv) to capture the subject’s understanding of her own
location within the world (“the problem of the essential
indexical”) (Perry 1979, 2006), or (v) to capture the subject’s
perspective on sameness of subject matter (Perry, 1980; Kaplan 1990;
Fine 2007). Even if the metasemantic approach has the resources to
describe these phenomena, critics may question whether it provides the
best, most perspicuous explanation of mental and linguistic
 content.[25]
 [See the entries on
 structured propositions,
 situation semantics, and
 propositional attitude reports.]
 The addition of multi-centered possible worlds for keeping track of
conversational dynamics and thought content may help address some of
these worries (Stalnaker 2008, 2014; Torre 2010; Ninan 2013). 

Third, proponents of generalized 2D semantics challenge the idea that
there is a principled distinction between semantic theories and
metasemantic theories. Perhaps the distinction is merely a verbal
dispute over whether the 2D matrices assigned to a person’s words and
thoughts deserve the name ‘semantic’ (Chalmers 1996, ch.2
§4; Jackson 2006; Lewis 1981). Stalnaker himself holds that the
distinction is a theoretically important one that has implications for
compositional semantic theory and apriori knowledge of
truth-conditions. This dispute between 2D metasemantics and
generalized 2D semantics may ultimately turn on whether one accepts an
externalist or an internalist account of metasemantics—i.e.,
whether the subject’s purely internal states fully determine how the
extension of her words and thoughts is fixed. Proponents of
generalized 2D semantics hold that the individual’s own cognitive
dispositions suffice to fix the propositional content of her words and
thoughts. In contrast, Stalnaker holds that the propositional content
of language and thought depends in part on external facts to which
subjects have no privileged apriori access and it varies according to
contingent explanatory interests.

In his recent book, Context (2014), Stalnaker focuses on the
nature of common ground, context, the dynamics of conversation –
issues that are central to his metasemantic interpretation of the
two-dimensional framework. For a helpful author-meets-critics
discussion of his current views and the prospects for extending them,
see (Camp forthcoming, Greene forthcoming, Szabó forthcoming,
Stalnaker forthcoming).