The word ‘pluralism’ generally refers to the view that
there are many of the things in question (concepts, scientific world
views, discourses, viewpoints etc.) The issues arising from there
being many differ widely from subject area to subject area. This entry
is concerned with moral pluralism—the view that there are many
different moral values.


Moral value pluralism should be distinguished from political
pluralism. Political pluralism, which, like moral value pluralism, is
often referred to as ‘value pluralism’, is a view
associated with political liberalism. Political pluralism is concerned
with the question of what sort of restrictions governments can put on
people’s freedom to act according to their values. One version
of political pluralism is based on moral value pluralism, claiming
that there are irreducibly plural moral values and that this justifies
a liberal political system. (See Isaiah Berlin, 1969; George Crowder,
2002; William Galston, 2002, and for a more detailed discussion of
this see the entry on
 Isaiah Berlin).  Political Liberalism need
not be based on value pluralism: a defence of toleration of different
value systems need not rely on the claim that there are plural moral
values. We shall leave political pluralism aside for the purposes of
this entry, and concentrate on moral value pluralism.
 It is also worth emphasising that moral value pluralism does not
entail relativism. The idea is not that all values or value systems
are equally true. Value pluralism is independent of any particular
meta-ethical view. It is a claim about the normative domain: about
what value looks like. 

Commonsensically we talk about lots of
different values—happiness, liberty, friendship, and so
on. The question about pluralism in moral theory is whether these
apparently different values are all reducible to one supervalue, or
whether we should think that there really are several distinct
values.

There are different ways that value might be conceived, but
the debate about pluralism should be able to cut across different
sorts of moral theory. Traditionally, moral philosophers recognize
three different ways of thinking about morality: the deontological
way, the consequentialist way, and the virtue ethics way, although there
is debate about the cogency of these
 distinctions.[1]
The term ‘value’ as it appears in ‘value
pluralism’ is neutral between these three
theories. Deontologists think of morality as being fundamentally about
moral principles. Thus the question of whether a deontological theory
is pluralist is a question about how many fundamental principles there
are. The consequentialist, by contrast, tends to see value as being
realized by goods in the world, such as friendship, knowledge, beauty
and so on, and the question of pluralism is thus a question about how
many fundamental goods there are. Virtue ethicists focus on how agents
should be, so are interested both in principles of action (or
motivation) and the pursuit of goods, such as friendship.



Deontologists can clearly be monists or pluralists. Kant can be
understood as a monist—arguing that there is one overarching
principle, and that all other principles are derived from it. Ross, by
contrast, is a  pluralist, because he thinks that
there is a plurality of prima facie duties. (See Kant (1948), Ross
(1930).)[2]

 

Many utilitarians are monists, arguing that there is only one
fundamental value and that is well-being or pleasure or happiness, or
something of that sort. In other words, some utilitarians are
committed to hedonism.  Monist utilitarians must claim that all other
putative values, such as friendship, knowledge and so on, are only
instrumental values, which are valuable in so far as they contribute
to the foundational value. But utilitarians need not be
monists. Amartya Sen, for example, argues that utilitarians can take a
‘vector view of utility’, according to which there are
differences in the qualities as well of the quantites of utility in
goods in the world. According to Sen, we should interpet Mill as a
pluralist in this way. (I return to Mill below: it is not entirely
clear how we should understand his view). Sen points out that desire
satisfaction theorists can be pluralists too. Just as different sorts
of pleasure might have different sorts of value, so different desires
might have different sorts of value. (Sen, 1981). Even utilitarians
who claim that the value to be maximized is well-being can be
pluralist: a prominent view of well-being is that well-being itself is
plural, an objective list of things that are fundamentally
plural. (See Finnis 1980; Griffin 1986; for recent defences see
Fletcher, 2013, Lin, 2014). Another reason to think that hedonistic
utilitarians should be pluralists is that it seems essential to say
something about the disvalue of pain. As Shelly Kagan points out
(2014), we need an account of ill-being in addition to an account of
well-being. 

In what follows I will be as neutral as possible between different
theoretical approaches to morality, and will focus on the debate
between monists and pluralists. Monists claim that there is only one
ultimate value.  Pluralists argue that there really are several
different values, and that these values are not reducible to each
other or to a supervalue. Monism has the advantage of relative
simplicity: once it has been determined what the supervalue is
(whether we think of the super value in terms of the goods approach or
any other approach) much of the hard work has been done. On the other
hand, monism may be too simple: it may not capture the real texture of
our ethical lives. However, pluralism faces the difficulty of
explaining how different fundamental values relate to each other, and
how they can be compared.

 
1. Some Preliminary Clarifications
1.1 Foundational and Non-foundational Pluralism


It is important to clarify the levels at which a moral theory might be
pluralistic. Let us distinguish between two levels of pluralism:
foundational and non-foundational. Foundational pluralism is the view
that there are plural moral values at the most basic level—that
is to say, there is no one value that subsumes all other values, no
one property of goodness, and no overarching principle of
action. Non-foundational pluralism is the view that there are plural
values at the level of choice, but these apparently plural values can
be understood in terms of their contribution to one more fundamental
value.[3]

Judith Jarvis Thomson, a foundational pluralist, argues that when we
say that something is good we are never ascribing a property of
goodness, rather we are always saying that the thing in question is
good in some way. If we say that a fountain pen is good we mean
something different from when we say that a logic book is good, or a
film is good. As Thomson puts it, all goodness is a goodness in a
way. Thomson focusses her argument on Moore, who argues that when we
say ‘x is good’ we do not mean ‘x
is conducive to pleasure’, or ‘x is in accordance
with a given set of rules’ and nor do we mean anything else that
is purely descriptive. As Moore points out, we can always query
whether any purely descriptive property really is good—so he
concludes that goodness is simple and
unanalyzable.[4]
Moore is thus a foundational monist, he thinks that there is one
non-natural property of goodness, and that all good things are good in
virtue of having this property. Thomson finds this preposterous.  In
Thomson’s own words:



Moore says that the question he will be addressing himself to in what
follows is the question ‘What is good?’, and he rightly
thinks that we are going to need a bit of help in seeing exactly what
question he is expressing in those words. He proposes to help us by
drawing attention to a possible answer to the question he is
expressing—that is, to something that would be an answer to it,
whether or not it is the correct answer to it. Here is what he offers
us: “Books are good.”  Books are good? What would you mean if you said
‘Books are good’?  Moore, however, goes placidly on:
“though [that would be] an answer obviously false; for some books are
very bad indeed”. Well some books are bad to read or to look at, some
are bad for use in teaching philosophy, some are bad for
children. What sense could be made of a person who said, “No. no. I
meant that some books are just plain bad things”? (Thomson 1997,
pp. 275-276)  


According to Thomson there is a fundamental plurality of ways of being
good. We cannot reduce them to something they all have in common, or
sensibly claim that there is a disjunctive property of goodness (such
that goodness is ‘goodness in one of the various ways’. Thomson
argues that that could not be an interesting property as each disjunct
is truly different from every other disjunct. Thomson (1997), p. 277).
Thomson is thus a foundational pluralist—she does not think
that there is any one property of value at the most basic
level. 


W.D. Ross is a foundational pluralist in a rather complex way. Most
straightforwardly, Ross thinks that there are several prima facie
duties, and there is nothing that they all have in common: they are
irreducibly plural. This is the aspect of Ross’s view that is referred
to with the phrase, ‘Ross-style pluralism’. However, Ross also thinks
that there are goods in the world (justice and pleasure, for example),
and that these are good because of some property they share. Goodness
and rightness are not reducible to one another, so Ross is a pluralist
about types of value as well as about principles.


Writers do not always make the distinction between foundational
and other forms of pluralism, but as well as Thomson and Ross, at least Bernard
Williams (1981), Charles Taylor (1982), Charles Larmore (1987), John
Kekes (1993), Michael Stocker (1990 and 1997), David Wiggins (1997)
and Christine Swanton (2001) are all committed to foundational
pluralism.


Non-foundational pluralism is less radical—it posits a plurality
of bearers of value. In fact, almost everyone accepts that there are
plural bearers of value. This is compatible with thinking that there
is only one ultimate value. G.E.  Moore (1903), Thomson’s
target, is a foundational monist, but he accepts that there are
non-foundational plural values. Moore thinks that there are many
different bearers of value, but he thinks that there is one property
of goodness, and that it is a simple non-natural property that bearers
of value possess in varying degrees. Moore is clear that comparison
between plural goods proceeds in terms of the amount of goodness they
have. 


This is not to say that the amount of goodness is always a matter of
simple addition. Moore thinks that there can be organic unities, where
the amount of goodness contributed by a certain value will vary
according to the combination of values such as love and
friendship. Thus Moore’s view is pluralist at the level of
ordinary choices, and that is not without interesting consequences. (I
shall return to the issue of how a foundational monist like Moore can
account for organic unities in section 2.1.) 


Mill, a classic utilitarian, could be and often has
been interpreted as thinking that there are irreducibly different
sorts of pleasure. Mill argues that there are higher and lower
pleasures, and that the higher pleasures (pleasures of the intellect
as opposed to the body) are superior, in that higher pleasures can
outweigh lower pleasures regardless of the quantity of the latter. As
Mill puts it: “It is quite compatible with the principle of utility to
recognize the fact, that some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and
more valuable than others.” (2002, p. 241). On the foundational
pluralist interpretation of Mill, there is not one ultimate good, but
two (at least): higher and lower pleasures. Mill goes on to give an
account of what he means:


If I am asked, what I mean by difference in quality in pleasures, or
what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a
pleasure, except its being greater in amount, there is but one
possible answer. Of two pleasures, if there be one to which all or
almost all who have experience of both give a decided preference,
irrespective of any feeling of moral obligation to prefer it, that is
the more desirable pleasure. (2002, p. 241).  



The passage is ambiguous, it is not clear what role the expert
judges play in the theory. On the pluralist interpretation of this
passage we must take Mill as intending the role of the expert judges
as a purely heuristic device: thinking about what such people
would prefer is a way of discovering which pleasures are higher and
which are lower, but the respective values of the pleasure is
independent of the judges’ judgment. On a monist interpretation we
must understand Mill as a preference utilitarian: the
preferences of the judges determine value.  On this interpretation
there is one property of value (being preferred by expert judges) and
many bearers of value (whatever the
 judges
 prefer).[5]



Before moving on, it is worth noting that a theory might be
foundationally monist in its account of what values there are, but not
recommend that people attempt to think or make decisions on the basis
of the supervalue. A distinction between decision procedures and
criteria of right has become commonplace in moral philosophy. For
example, a certain form of consequentialism has as its criterion of
right action: act so as to maximize good consequences. This might
invite the complaint that an agent who is constantly trying to
maximize good consequences will often, in virtue of that fact, fail to
do so.  Sometimes concentrating too hard on the goal will make it less
likely that the goal is achieved. A distinction between decision
procedure and right action can provide a response—the
consequentialist can say that the criterion of right action, (act so
as to maximize good consequences) is not intended as a decision
procedure—the agent should use whichever decision procedure is
most likely to result in success. If, then, there is some attraction
or instrumental advantage from the point of view of a particular
theory to thinking in pluralist terms, then it is open to that theory
to have a decision procedure that deals with apparently plural values,
even if the theory is monist in every other way.
 [6]

1.2 A Purely Verbal Dispute?


One final clarification about different understandings of pluralism
ought to be made. There is an ambiguity between the name for a group
of values and the name for one unitary value. There are really two
problems here: distinguishing between the terms that refer to groups
and the terms that refer to individuals (a merely linguistic problem)
and defending the view that there really is  a candidate for a
unitary value (a metaphysical problem). The linguistic problem comes
about because in natural language we may use a singular term as
‘shorthand’: conceptual analysis may reveal that surface
grammar does not reflect the real nature of the concept. For example,
we use the term ‘well-being’ as if it refers to one single
thing, but it is not hard to see that it may 
not. ‘Well-being’ may be a term that we use to refer to
a group of things such as pleasure, health, a sense of achievement and
so on. A theory that tells us that well-being is the only value may only
be nominally monist. The metaphysical question is more
difficult, and concerns whether there are any genuinely unitary values
at all.


The metaphysical question is rather different for naturalist and
non-naturalist accounts of value. On Moore’s non-naturalist account,
goodness is a unitary property but it is not a natural 
property: it is not empirically available to us, but is known by a
special faculty of intuition. It is very clear that Moore thinks that
goodness is a genuinely unitary property:


‘Good’, then, if we mean by it that quality which we assert to belong
to a thing, when we say that the thing is good, is incapable of any
definition, in the most important sense of that word. The most
important sense of ‘definition’ is that in which a definition states
what are the parts which invariably compose a certain whole; and in
this sense ‘good’ has no definition because it is simple and has no
parts. (Moore, 1903, p. 9)

 The question of whether there could be such a thing is no more
easy or difficult than any question about the existence of non-natural
entities. The issue of whether the entity is genuinely unitary
is not an especially difficult part of that issue.


By contrast, naturalist views do face a particular difficulty in
giving an account of a value that is genuinely unitary.  On the goods
approach, for example, the claim must be that there is one good that
is genuinely singular, not a composite of other goods. So for example,
a monist hedonist must claim that pleasure really is just one
thing. Pleasure is a concept we use to refer to something we take to
be in the natural world, and conceptual analysis may or may not
confirm that pleasure really is one thing. Perhaps, for example, 
we refer both to intellectual and sensual experiences as
pleasure. Or, take another good often suggested by proponents of the
goods approach to value, friendship. It seems highly unlikely that
there is one thing that we call friendship, even if there are good
reasons to use one umbrella concept to refer to all those different
things. Many of the plausible candidates for the good seem plausible
precisely because they are very broad terms. If a theory is to be
properly monist then, it must have an account of the good that is
satisfactorily unitary.


The problem applies to the deontological approach to value too. It is
often relatively easy to determine whether a principle is really two
or more principles in disguise—the presence of a conjunction
or a disjunction, for example, is a clear giveaway.  However,
principles can contain terms that are unclear. Take for example
a deontological theory that tells us to respect friendship. As mentioned previously,
it is not clear whether there is one thing that is friendship or more
than one, so it is not clear whether this is one principle about one
thing, or one principle about several things, or whether it is really
more than one principle.


Questions about what makes individuals individuals and what the
relationship is between parts and wholes have been discussed in the
context of metaphysics but these issues have not been much discussed in the
literature on pluralism and monism in moral philosophy. However, these issues are
implicit in discussions of the well-being, nature of friendship and pleasure, and
in the literature on Kant’s categorical imperative, or on Aristotelian
accounts of eudaimonea. Part of an investigation into the nature of
these things is an investigation into whether there really is one
thing or not. [7]



The upshot of this brief discussion is that monists must be able to
defend their claim that the value they cite is genuinely one
value. There may be fewer monist theories than it first
appears. Further, the monist must accept the implications of a
genuinely monist view. As Ruth Chang points out, (2015, p. 24) the
simpler the monist’s account of the good is, the less likely it
is that the monist will be able to give a good account of the various
complexities in choice that seem an inevitable part of our experience
of value. But on the other hand, if the monist starts to admit that
the good is complex, the view gets closer and closer to being a
pluralist view.


However, the dispute between monists and pluralists is not merely
verbal: there is no prima facie reason to think that there are no
genuinely unitary properties, goods or principles.  
2. The Attraction of Pluralism


If values are plural, then choices between them will be complex.
Pluralists have pressed the point that choices are complex, and so we
should not shy away from the hypothesis that values are plural. In
brief, the attraction of pluralism is that it seems to allow for the
complexity and conflict that is part of our moral experience. We do
not experience our moral choices as simple additive
puzzles. Pluralists have argued that there are incommensurabilities
and discontinuities in value comparisons, value remainders (or
residues) when choices are made, and complexities in appropriate
responses to value. Recent empirical work confirms
that our ethical experience is of apparently irreducible plural
values. (See Gill and Nichols, 2008.) 
2.1 Discontinuities


John Stuart Mill suggested that there are higher and lower pleasures
(Mill, 2002, p. 241), the idea being that the value of higher and lower
pleasures is measured on different scales. In other words, there are
discontinuities in the measurement of value. As mentioned previously, it is unclear
whether we should interpret Mill as a foundational pluralist, but the
notion of higher and lower pleasures is a very useful one to
illustrate the attraction of thinking that there are discontinuities
in value. The distinction between higher and lower pleasures allows us
to say that no amount of lower pleasures can outweigh some amount of
higher pleasures.  As Mill puts it, it is better to be an unhappy
human being than a happy pig. In other words, the distinction allows
us to say that there are discontinuities in value addition. As James
Griffin (1986, p. 87) puts it: “We do seem, when informed, to rank a
certain amount of life at a very high level above any amount of life
at a very low level.”  Griffin’s point is that there are
discontinuities in the way we rank values, and this suggests that
there are different
 values.[8]
 The phenomenon of
discontinuities in our value rankings seems to support pluralism: if
higher pleasures are not outweighed by lower pleasures, that suggests
that they are not the same sort of thing. For if they were just the
same sort of thing, there seems to be no reason why lower pleasures
will not eventually outweigh higher pleasures.



The most extreme form of discontinuity is incommensurability or
incomparability, when two values cannot be ranked at
all. Pluralists differ on whether pluralism entails
incommensurabilities, and on what incommensurability entails for the
possibility of choice. Griffin denies that pluralism entails
incommensurability (Griffin uses the term incomparability) whereas
other pluralists embrace incommensurability, but deny that it entails
that rational choice is impossible. Some pluralists accept that there
are sometimes cases where incommensurability precludes rational
choice.  We shall return to these issues in Section 4.
2.2 Value Conflicts and Rational Regret


Michael Stocker (1990) and Bernard Williams (1973 and 1981) and others
have argued that it can be rational to regret the outcome of a correct
moral choice. That is,  even when the right choice has been made,
the rejected option can reasonably be regretted, and so the choice
involves a genuine value conflict. This seems strange if the options
are being compared in terms of a supervalue. How can we regret having
chosen more rather than less of the same thing? Yet the phenomenon
seems undeniable, and pluralism can explain it. If there are plural
values, then one can rationally regret not having chosen something which
though less good, was different.


It is worth noting that the pluralist argument is not that all cases
of value conflict point to pluralism. There may be conflicts because
of ignorance, for example, or because of irrationality, and these do
not require positing plural values. Stocker argues that there are (at
least) two sorts of value conflict that require plural values. The
first is conflict that involves choices between doing things at
different times. Stocker argues that goods become different values in
different temporal situations, and the monist cannot accommodate this
thought. The other sort of case (which Williams also points to) is
when there is a conflict between things that have different advantages
and disadvantages. The better option may be better, but it does not
‘make up for’ the lesser option, because it isn’t the same
sort of thing. Thus there is a remainder—a moral value that is
lost in the choice, and that it is rational to regret.  


Both Martha Nussbaum (1986) and David Wiggins (1980) have argued for
pluralism on the grounds that only pluralism can explain akrasia, or
weakness of will. An agent is said to suffer from weakness of will
when she knowingly chooses a less good option over a better one. On
the face of it, this is a puzzling thing to do—why would
someone knowingly do what they know to be worse? A pluralist has a
plausible answer—when the choice is between two different
sorts of value, the agent is preferring A to B, rather than preferring
less of A to more of A. Wiggins explains the akratic choice by
suggesting that the agent is ‘charmed’ by some aspect of
the choice, and is swayed by that to choose what she knows to be worse
overall (Wiggins 1980, p. 257). However, even Michael Stocker, the arch
pluralist, does not accept that this argument works. As Stocker points
out, Wiggins is using a distinction between a cognitive and an
affective element to the choice, and this distinction can explain
akrasia on a monist account of value too. Imagine that a monist
hedonist agent is faced with a choice between something that will give
her more pleasure and something that will give her less pleasure. The
cognitive aspect to the choice is clear—the agent knows that
one option is more pleasurable than the other, and hence on her theory
better. However, to say that the agent believes that more pleasure is
better is not to say that she will always be attracted to the option
that is most pleasurable. She may, on occasion, be attracted to the
option that is more unusual or interesting. Hence she may act
akratically because she was charmed by some aspect of the less good
choice—and as Stocker says, there is no need to posit plural
values to make sense of this—being charmed is not the same as
valuing. (Stocker 1990, p.219).
2.3 Appropriate Responses to Value


Another argument for pluralism starts from the observation that there
are many and diverse appropriate responses to value. Christine Swanton
(2003, ch. 2) and Elizabeth Anderson (1993) both take this line. As
Swanton puts it:


According to value centered monism, the rightness of moral
responsiveness is determined entirely by degree or strength of
value…I shall argue, on the contrary, that just how things are
to be pursued, nurtured, respected, loved, preserved, protected, and so
forth may often depend on further general features of those things, and
their relations to other things, particularly the moral agent. (Swanton
2003, p. 41).



The crucial thought is that there are various bases of moral
responsiveness, and these bases are irreducibly plural. A monist could
argue that there are different appropriate responses to value, but the
monist would have to explain why there are different appropriate
responses to the same value. Swanton’s point is that the only
explanation the monist has is that different degrees of value merit
different responses. According to Swanton, this does not capture what
is really going on when we appropriately honor or respect a value
rather than promoting it. Anderson and Swanton both argue that the
complexity of our responses to value can only be explained by a
pluralistic theory.


Elizabeth Anderson argues that it is a mistake to understand moral
goods on the maximising model. She uses the example of parental love
(Anderson 1997, p. 98). Parents should not see their love for their
children as being directed towards an “aggregate child
collective”. Such a view would entail that trade offs were
possible, that one child could be sacrificed for another. On
Anderson’s view we can make rational choices between conflicting
values without ranking values: “…choices concerning those
goods or their continued existence do not generally require that we
rank their values on a common scale and choose the more valuable good;
they require that we give each good its due” (Anderson 1997,
p. 104).


3. Monist Solutions


I began the last section by saying that if foundational values are
plural, then choices between them will be complex. It is clear that
our choices are complex. However, it would be invalid to conclude from
that that values are plural—the challenge for monists is to
explain how they too can make sense of the complexity of our value
choices.  
3.1 Different Bearers of Value


One way for monists to make sense of complexity in value choice is to
point out that there are different bearers of value, and this makes a
big difference to the experience of choice. (See Hurka, 1996; Schaber,
1999; Klocksiem 2011). Here is the challenge to monism in Michael
Stocker’s words (Stocker, 1990, p. 272): “[if monism is
true] there is no ground for rational conflict because the better
option lacks nothing that would be made good by the lesser.” In
other words, there are no relevant differences between the better and
worse options except that the better option is better. Thomas Hurka
objects that there can be such differences. For example, in a choice
between giving five units of pleasure to A and ten units
to B, the best option (more pleasure for B) involves
giving no pleasure at all to A. So there is something to
rationally regret, namely, that A had no pleasure. The
argument can be expanded to deal with all sorts of choice situation:
in each situation,  a monist can say something sensible about an
unavoidable loss, a loss that really is a loss. If, of two options one
will contribute more basic value, the monist must obviously choose
that one. But the lesser of the options may contribute value via
pleasure, while the superior option contributes value via knowledge,
and so there is a loss in choosing the option with the greater value
contribution—a loss in pleasure— and it is rational for us
to regret this.


There is one difficulty with this answer. The loss described by Hurka
is not a moral loss, and so the regret is not moral regret. In Hurka’s
example, the relevant loss is that A does not get any
pleasure. The agent doing the choosing may be rational to regret this
if she cares about A, or even if she just feels sorry for
A, but there has been no moral loss, as ‘pleasure for
A’ as opposed to pleasure itself is not a moral
value. According to the view under consideration, pleasure itself is
what matters morally, and so although A’s pleasure matters
qua pleasure, the moral point of view takes B’s pleasure into
account in just the same way, and there is nothing to regret, as there
is more pleasure than there would otherwise have been.  Stocker and
Williams would surely insist that the point of their argument was not
just that there is a loss, but that there is a moral loss. The monist
cannot accommodate that point, as the monist can only consider the
quantity of the value, not its distribution, and so we are at an
impasse.


However, the initial question was whether the monist has succeeded in
explaining the phenomenon of ‘moral regret’, and perhaps
Hurka has done that by positing a conflation of moral and non-moral
regret in our experience. From our point of view, there is regret, and
the monist can explain why that is without appealing to
irrationality. On the other hand the monist cannot appeal to anything
other than quantity of value in appraising the morality of the
situation. So although Hurka is clearly right in so far as he is
saying that a correct moral choice can be regretted for non-moral
reasons, he can go no further than that.
3.2 Diminishing Marginal Value


Another promising strategy that the monist can use in order to explain
the complexity in our value choices is the appeal to
‘diminishing marginal value’. The value that is added to
the sum by a source of value will tend to diminish after a certain
point—this phenomenon is known as diminishing marginal value
(or, sometimes, diminishing marginal utility). Mill’s higher and lower
pleasures, which seem to be plural values, might be accommodated by
the monist in this way. The monist makes sense of discontinuities in
value by insisting on the distinction between sources of value, which
are often ambiguously referred to as ‘values’, and the super
value. Using a monist utilitarian account of value, we can distinguish
between the non-evaluative description of options, the intermediate
description, and the evaluative description as follows:


Non-evaluativedescription of option
Intermediatedescription of option
Evaluativedescription of option


Painting a picture →
Producing x unitsof beauty →
Producing y unitsof value


Reading a book →
Producing x unitsof knowledge →
Producing y unitsof value




On this account, painting produces beauty, and beauty (which is not a
value but the intermediate source of value) produces value. Similarly,
reading a book produces knowledge, and gaining knowledge produces
value. Now it should be clear how the monist can make sense of
phenomena like higher and lower pleasures. The non-evaluative options
(e.g. eating donuts) have diminishing marginal non-basic value.


On top of that, the intermediate effect, or non-basic value,
(e.g. experiencing pleasure) can have a diminishing contribution to
value. Varying diminishing marginal value in these cases is easily
explained psychologically. It is just the way we are—we get
less and less enjoyment from donuts as we eat more and more (at least
in one sitting). However, we may well get the same amount of enjoyment
from the tenth Johnny Cash song that we did from the first. In order
to deal with the higher and lower pleasures case the monist will have
to argue that pleasures themselves can have diminishing marginal
utility—the monist can argue that gustatory pleasure gets
boring after a while, and hence contributes less and less to the super
value—well being, or whatever it
 is.[9]


This picture brings us back to the distinction between foundational
and non-foundational pluralism. Notice that the monist theories being
imagined here are foundationally monist, because they claim that
there is fundamentally one value, such as pleasure, and they are
pluralist at the level of ordinary choice because they claim that there are intermediate
values, such as knowledge and beauty, which are valuable because of
the amount of pleasure they produce (or realize, or 
contain—the exact relationship will vary from theory to
theory). 
3.3 Theoretical Virtues

The main advantage of pluralism is that it seems true to our
experience of value. We experience values as plural, and pluralism
tells is that values are indeed plural. The monist can respond, as we
have seen, that there are ways to explain the apparent plurality of
values without positing fundamentally plural values. Another,
complementary strategy that the monist can pursue is to argue that
monism has theoretical virtues that pluralism lacks. In general, it
seems that theories should be as simple and coherent as possible, and
that other things being equal, we should prefer a more coherent theory
to a less coherent one. Thus so long as monism can make sense of
enough of our intuitive judgments about the nature of value, then it
is to be preferred to pluralism because it does better on the
theoretical virtue of coherence.


Another way to put this point is in terms of explanation. The monist
can point out that the pluralist picture lacks explanatory depth. It
seems that a list of values needs some further explanation: what makes
these things values? (See Bradley, 2009, p.16). The monist picture is
superior, because the monist can provide an explanation for the value
of the (non-foundational) plurality of values: these things are values
because they contribute to well-being, or pleasure, or whatever the
foundational monist value is. (See also the discussion of this in the
entry on
  value theory).
Patricia Marino argues against this strategy (2016). She argues
that ‘systematicity’ (the idea that it is better to have
fewer principles) is not a good argument in favour of monism. Marino
points out that explanation in terms of fewer fundamental principles
is not necessarily better explanation. If there are plural
values, then the explanation that appeals to plural values is a better
one, in the sense that it is the true one: it doesn’t deny the
plurality of values. (2016, p.124-125). Even if we could give a monist
explanation without having to trade off against our pluralist
intuitions, Marino argues, we have no particular reason to think that
explanations appealing to fewer principles are superior. 
3.4 Preference Satisfaction Views


There is a different account of value that we ought to consider here:
the view that value consists in preference or desire satisfaction. On
this view, knowledge and pleasure and so on are valuable when they are
desired, and if they are not desired anymore they are not valuable
anymore. There is no need to appeal to complicated accounts of
diminishing marginal utility: it is uncontroversial that we sometimes
desire something and sometimes don’t. Thus complexities in choices are
explained by complexities in our desires, and it is uncontroversial
that our desires are complex.


Imagine a one person preference satisfaction account of value that
says simply that what is valuable is what P desires.
Apparently this view is foundationally monist: there is only one thing
that confers value (being desired by P), yet at the
non-foundational level there are many values (whatever P
desires). Let us say that P desires hot baths, donuts and
knowledge. The structure of P’s desires is such that
there is a complicated ranking of these things, which will vary from
circumstance to circumstance. The ranking is not explained by the
value of the objects,rather, her desire explains the ranking and
determines the value of the objects. So it might be that P
sometimes desires a hot bath and a donut equally, and cannot choose
between them; it might be that sometimes she would choose knowledge
over a hot bath and a donut, but sometimes she would choose a hot bath
over knowledge. On James Griffin’s slightly more complex view,
well-being consist in the fulfillment of informed desire, and Griffin
points out that his view can explain discontinuities in value without
having to appeal to diminishing marginal utility:


there may well turn out to be cases in which, when informed, I want,
say, a certain amount of one thing more than any amount of another, and
not because the second thing cloys, and so adding to it merely produces
diminishing marginal values. I may want it even though the second thing
does not, with addition, lose its value; it may be that I think that no
increase in that kind of value, even if constant and positive, can
overtake a certain amount of this kind of value. (1986, p. 76).



This version of foundational monism/normative pluralism escapes some
of the problems that attend the goods approach. First, this view can
account for deep complexities in choice. The plural goods that P is
choosing between do not seem merely instrumental. Donuts are not good
because they contribute to another value, and P does not desire donuts
for any reason other than their donuty nature. On this view, if it is
hard to choose between donuts and hot baths it is because of the
intrinsic nature of the objects. The key here is that value is
conferred by desire, not by contribution to another value. Second,
this view can accommodate incomparabilities: if P desires a hot bath
because of its hot bathy nature, and a donut because of its donuty
nature, she may not be able to choose between them.
 However, it is not entirely clear that a view like Griffin’s is
genuinely monist at the foundational level: the question arises, what
is constraining the desires that qualify as value conferring? If the
answer is ‘nothing’, then the view seems genuinely monist,
but is probably implausible. Unconstrained desire accounts of value
seem implausible because our desires can be for all sorts of 
things—we may desire things that are bad for us, or we may desire
things because of some mistake we have made. If the answer is that
there is something constraining the desires that count as value
conferring, then of course the question is, ‘what?’ Is it
the values of the things desired? A desire satisfaction view that
restricts the qualifying desires must give an account of what
restricts them, and obviously, the account may commit the view to
foundational pluralism.  
 Griffin addresses this question at the very beginning of his book
on well being (Griffin, 1986,
 ch.2).[10]
 As he puts it,


The danger is that desire accounts get plausible only by, in effect,
ceasing to be desire accounts. We had to qualify desire with informed,
and that gave prominence to the features or qualities of the objects of
desire, and not to the mere existence of desire. (1986, p.  26).



Griffin’s account of the relationship between desire and value is
subtle, and (partly because Griffin himself does not distinguish
between foundational and normative pluralism) it is difficult to say
whether his view is foundationally pluralist or not. Griffin argues
that it is a mistake to see desire as a blind motivational 
force—we desire things that we perceive in a favorable light- we
take them to have a desirability feature. When we try to explain what
involved in seeing things in a favorable light, we cannot, according
to Griffin, separate understanding from desire: 


…we cannot, even in the case of a desirability feature such as
accomplishment, separate understanding and desire. Once we see
something as ‘accomplishment’, as ‘giving weight and
substance to our lives’, there is no space left for desire to follow
along in a secondary subordinate position. Desire is not
blind. Understanding is not bloodless. Neither is the slave of the
other. There is no priority. (1986, p. 30)


This suggests that the view is indeed pluralist at the
foundation—values are not defined entirely by desire, but partly
by other features of the situation, and so at the most fundamental
level there is more than one value making feature. Griffin himself
says that “the desire account is compatible with a strong form of
pluralism about values” (p. 31).


I shall not pursue further the question whether or not Griffin is a
foundational pluralist, my aim in this section is to show first, that
monist preference satisfaction accounts of value may have more
compelling ways of explaining complexities in value comparison than
monist goods approaches, but second, to point out that any constrained
desire account may well actually be foundationally pluralist. As soon
as something is introduced to constrain the desires that qualify as
value conferring, it looks as though another value is operating.

4. Pluralism and Rational Choice


The big question facing pluralism is whether rational choices can be
made between irreducibly plural values. Irreducible plurality appears
to imply incommensurability—that is to say, that there is no
common measure which can be used to compare two different values. (See
the entry on
 incommensurable values.)
 Value incommensurability seems worrying: if values are incommensurable, then
either we are forced into an ad hoc ranking, or we cannot rank the
values at all.  Neither of these are very appealing options. 

However, pluralists reject this dilemma. 
Bernard Williams argues that it is a mistake to think that pluralism
implies that comparisons are impossible. He says:


There is one motive for reductivism that does not operate simply on the
ethical, or on the non-ethical, but tends to reduce every consideration
to one basic kind. This rests on an assumption about rationality, to
the effect that two considerations cannot be rationally weighed against
each other unless there is a common consideration in terms of which
they can be compared. This assumption is at once very powerful and
utterly baseless. Quite apart from the ethical, aesthetic
considerations can be weighed against economic ones (for instance)
without being an application of them, and without their both being an
example of a third kind of consideration. (Williams 1985, p. 17)


Making a similar point, Ruth Chang points out that incommensurability
is often conflated with incomparability. She provides clear
definitions of each: incommensurability is the lack of a common unit
of value by which precise comparisons can be made. Two items are
incomparable, if there is no possible relation of comparison, such as
‘better than’, or ‘as good as’ (1997,
Introduction). Chang points out that incommensurability is often
thought to entail incomparability, but it does not. 

Defenders of pluralism have used various strategies to show that it is
possible to make rational choices between plural values. 
4.1 Practical Wisdom


The pluralist’s most common strategy in the face of worries about
choices between incommensurable values is to appeal to practical
wisdom—the faculty described by Aristotle—a faculty of
judgment that the wise and virtuous person has, which enables him to
see the right answer. Practical wisdom is not just a question of being
able to see and collate the facts, it goes beyond that in some
way—the wise person will see things that only a wise person
could see. So plural values can be compared in that a wise person will
‘just see’ that one course of action rather than another
is to be taken. This strategy is used (explicitly or implicitly) by
McDowell (1979), Nagel (1979), Larmore (1987), Skorupski (1996),
Anderson (1993 and 1997) Wiggins (1997 and 1998), Chappell (1998),
Swanton (2003). Here it is in Nagel’s words:
 

Provided one has taken the process of practical justification as far
as it will go in the course of arriving at the conflict, one may be
able to proceed without further justification, but without
irrationality either. What makes this possible is 
judgment—essentially the faculty Aristotle described as
practical wisdom, which reveals itself over time in individual
decisions rather than in the enunciation of general principles. (1979,
p. 135)


The main issue for this solution to the comparison problem is to come
up with an account of what practical wisdom is. It is not easy to
understand what sort of thing the faculty of judgment might be, or how
it might work. Obviously pluralists who appeal to this strategy do not
want to end up saying that the wise judge can see which of the options
has more goodness, as that would constitute collapsing back into
monism. So the pluralist has to maintain that the wise judge makes a
judgment about what the right thing to do is without making any
quantitative judgment. The danger is that the faculty seems entirely
mysterious: it is a kind of magical vision, unrelated to our
natural senses. As a solution to the comparison problem, the appeal to
practical wisdom looks rather like way of shifting the problem to
another level. Thus the appeal to practical wisdom cannot be left at
that. The pluralist owes more explanation of what is involved
in practical wisdom. What follows below are various pluralists’
accounts of how choice between plural values is possible, and whether
such choice is rational.
4.2 Super Scales

One direction that pluralists have taken is to argue that although
values are plural, there is nonetheless an available scale on which to
rank them. This scale is not rationalized by something that the values
have in common (that would be monism), but by something over and above
the values, which is not itself a super value. Williams sometimes
writes as if this is his intention, as do Griffin (1986 and 1997),
Stocker (1990), Chang (1997 and 2004), Taylor (1982 and 1997). James
Griffin (1986) develops this suggestion in his discussion of plural
prudential values. According to Griffin, we do not need to have a
super-value to have super-scale. Griffin says:


…it does not follow from there being no super-value that there
is no super-scale. To think so would be to misunderstand how the notion
of ‘quantity’ of well-being enters. It enters through ranking;
quantitative differences are defined on qualitative ones. The quantity
we are talking about is ‘prudential value’ defined on informed
rankings. All that we need for the all-encompassing-scale is the
possibility of ranking items on the basis of their nature. And we can,
in fact, rank them in that way. We can work out trade-offs between
different dimensions of pleasure or happiness. And when we do, we rank
in a strong sense: not just choose one rather than the other, but
regard it as worth more. That is the ultimate scale here: worth to
one’s life. (Griffin 1986, p. 90)

 
This passage is slightly hard to interpret (for more on why see my
earlier discussion of Griffin in the section on preference
satisfaction accounts). On one interpretation, Griffin is in fact
espousing a sophisticated monism. The basic value is ‘worth to
one’s life’, and though it is important to talk about non-basic
values, such as the different dimensions of pleasure and happiness,
they are ultimately judged in terms of their contribution to the worth
of lives.


The second possible interpretation takes Griffin’s claim that worth to
life is not a supervalue seriously. On this interpretation, it is
hard to see what worth to life is, if not a supervalue. Perhaps it is
only a value that we should resort to when faced with
incomparabilities. However, this interpretation invites the criticism
that Griffin is introducing a non-moral value, perhaps prudential
value, to arbitrate when moral values are incommensurable.  In other
words, we cannot decide between incommensurable values on moral
grounds, so we should decide on prudential grounds. This seems
reasonable when applied to incommensurabilities in aesthetic
values. One might not be able to say whether Guernica is better than
War and Peace, but one might choose to have Guernica displayed on the
wall because it will impress one’s friends, or because it is worth
more money, or even because one just enjoys it more. In the case of
moral choices this is a less convincing strategy: it introduces a
level of frivolity into morality that seems out of place.


Stocker’s main strategy is to argue that values are plural, and
comparisons are made, so it must be possible to make rational
comparisons. He suggests that a “higher level synthesizing category”
can explain how comparisons are made (1990, p. 172). According to
Stocker these comparisons are not quantitative, they are evaluative:



Suppose we are trying to choose between lying on a beach
and discussing philosophy—or more particularly, between the
pleasure of the former and the gain in understanding from the latter.
To compare them we may invoke what might be called a higher-level
synthesizing category. So, we may ask which will conduce to a more
pleasing day, or to a day that is better spent. Once we have fixed upon
the higher synthesizing category, we can often easily ask which option
is better in regard to that category and judge which to choose on the
basis of that. Even if it seems a mystery how we might ‘directly’
compare lying on the beach and discussing philosophy, it is a
commonplace that we do compare them, e.g. in regard to their
contribution to a pleasing day. (Stocker 1990, p. 72)
 Stocker claims that goodness is just the highest level
synthesizing category, and that lower goods are constitutive means to
the good. Ruth Chang’s approach to comparisons of plural values is
very similar (Chang 1997 (introduction) and 2004). Chang claims that
comparisons can only be made in terms of a covering value—a
more comprehensive value that has the plural values as parts.


There is a problem in understanding quite what a ‘synthesizing
category’ or ‘covering value’ is. How does the
covering value determine the relative weightings of the constituent
values? One possibility is that it does it by pure 
stipulation—as a martini just is a certain proportion of gin and
vermouth. However, stipulation does not have the right sort of
explanatory power. On the other hand, if a view is to remain
pluralist, it must avoid conflating the super scale with a super
value. Chang argues that her covering values are sufficiently unitary
to provide a basis for comparison, and yet preserve the separateness
of the other values. Chang’s argument goes as follows: the values at
stake in a situation (for example, prudence and morality) cannot on
their own determine how heavily they weigh in a particular choice
situation—the values weigh differently depending on the
circumstances of the choice. However, the values plus the
circumstances cannot determine relevant weightings 
either—because (I am simplifying here) the internal circumstances of the
choice will affect the weighting of the values differently depending
on the external circumstances. To use Chang’s own example, when the
values at stake are prudence and morality (specifically, the duty to
help an innocent victim), and the circumstances include the fact that
the victim is far away, the effect this circumstance will have on the
weighting of the values depends on external circumstances, which fix
what matters in the choice. So, as Chang puts it, “‘What
matters’ must therefore have content beyond the values and the
circumstances of the choice” (2004, p. 134).


Stocker is aware of the worry that appeal to something in terms of
which comparisons can be made reduces the view to monism: Stocker
insists that the synthesizing category (such as a good life) is not a
unitary value—it is at most ‘nominal monism’ in my
terminology. Stocker argues that it is a philosophical prejudice to
think that rational judgment must be quantitative, and so he claims
that he does not need to give an account of how we form and use the
higher level synthesizing categories.
4.3 Basic Preferences


Another approach to the comparison problem appeals to basic
preferences. Joseph Raz takes the line that we can explain choice
between irreducibly plural goods by talking about basic preferences.
Raz approaches the issue of incommensurability by talking about the
nature of agency and rationality instead of about the nature of value.
He distinguishes between two conceptions of human agency: the
rationalist conception, and the classical conception. The rationalist
conception corresponds to what we have called the stronger use of the
term rational. According to the rationalist conception, reasons
require action. The classical conception, by contrast, “regards
reasons as rendering options eligible” (Raz 1999, p. 47). Raz favors
the classical conception, which regards the will as something separate
from desire: 


The will is the ability to choose and perform intentional actions. We
exercise our will when we endorse the verdict of reason that we must
perform an action, and we do so, whether willingly, reluctantly, or
regretting the need, etc. According to the classical conception,
however, the most typical exercise or manifestation of the will is in
choosing among options that reason merely renders eligible. Commonly
when we so choose, we do what we want, and we choose what we want, from
among the eligible options. Sometimes speaking of wanting one option
(or its consequences) in preference to the other eligible ones is out
of place. When I choose one tin of soup from a row of identical tins in
the shop, it would be wrong and misleading to say that I wanted that
tin rather than, or in preference to, the others. Similarly, when faced
with unpalatable but unavoidable and incommensurate options (as when
financial need forces me to give up one or another of incommensurate
goods), it would be incorrect to say that I want to give up the one I
choose to give up. I do not want to do so. I have to, and I would
equally have regretted the loss of either good. I simply choose to give
up one of them. (Raz, 1999, p. 48)



Raz’s view about the nature of agency is defended in great detail over
the course of many  articles, and all of those arguments cannot
be examined in detail here. What is crucial in the context of this
discussion of pluralism is whether Raz gives us a satisfactory account
of the weaker sense of rational. Raz’s solution to the problem of
incommensurability hangs on the claim that it can be rational (in the
weak sense) to choose A over B  when there are no further reasons
favouring A over B. We shall restrict ourselves to mentioning one
objection to the view in the context of moral choices between plural
goods. Though Raz’s account of choice may seem plausible in cases
where we choose between non-moral values, it seems to do violence to
the concept of morality. Consider one of Raz’s own examples, the
choice between a banana and a pear. It may be that one has to choose
between them, and there is no objective reason to choose one or the
other. In this case, it seems Raz’s account of choice is plausible. If
one feels like eating a banana, then in this case, desire does provide
a reason. As Raz puts it, “A want can never tip the balance of
reasons in and of itself. Rather, our wants become relevant when
reasons have run their course.” In the example where we choose
between a banana and a pear, this sounds fine. However, if we apply it
to a moral choice it seems a lot less plausible. Raz admits that
“If of the options available to agents in typical situations of
choice and decision, several are incommensurate, then reason can
neither determine nor completely explain their choices or
actions” (Raz, 1999, p. 48). Thus many moral choices are not
directed by reason but by a basic preference. It is not fair to call
it a desire, because on Raz’s account we desire things for
reasons—we take the object of our desire to be desirable. On
Raz’s picture then, when reasons have run their course, we are
choosing without reasons. It doesn’t matter hugely whether we call
that ‘rational’ (it is not rational in the strong sense,
but it is in the weak sense). What matters is whether this weak
sense of rational is sufficient to satisfy our concept of moral choice
as being objectively defensible. The problem is that choosing without
reasons look rather like plumping. Plumping may be an intelligible
form of choice, but it is questionable whether it is a satisfactory
account of moral choice.
4.4 Accepting Incomparability


One philosopher who is happy to accept that there may be situations
where we just cannot make reasoned choices between plural values is
Isaiah Berlin, who claimed that goods such as liberty and equality
conflict at the fundamental level. Berlin is primarily concerned with
political pluralism, and with defending political liberalism, but his
views about incomparability have been very influential in
discussions on moral pluralism. Bernard Williams (1981), Charles
Larmore (1987), John Kekes (1993), Michael Stocker (1990 and 1997),
David Wiggins (1997) have all argued that there are at least some
genuinely irresolvable conflicts between values, and that to expect a
rational resolution is a mistake. For Williams this is part of a more
general mistake made by contemporary moral philosophers—he
thinks that philosophy tries to make ethics too easy, too much like
arithmetic. Williams insists throughout his writings that ethics is a
much more complex and multi-faceted beast than its treatment at the
hands of moral philosophers would suggest, and so it is not surprising
to him that there should be situations where values conflict
irresolvably. Stocker (1990) discusses the nature of moral conflict at
great length, and although he thinks that many apparent conflicts can
be dissolved or are not serious, like Williams, he argues that much of
contemporary philosophy’s demand for simplicity is mistaken. Stocker
argues that ethics need not always be action guiding, that value is
much more complex than Kantians and utilitarians would have us think,
and that as the world is complicated we will inevitably face
conflicts.  Several pluralists have argued that accepting the
inevitability of value conflicts does not result in a  breakdown
of moral argument, but rather the reverse. Kekes (1993), for example,
claims that pluralism enables us to see that irresolvable
disagreements are not due to wickedness on the part of our
interlocutor, but may be due to the plural nature of values.
5. Conclusion


The battle lines in the debate between pluralism and monism are not
always clear. In this entry I have outlined some of them, and
discussed some of the main arguments. Pluralists need to be clear
about whether they are foundational or non-foundational pluralists. Monists must defend
their claim that there really is a unitary value. Much of the debate
between pluralists and monists has focussed on the issue of whether
the complexity of moral choice implies that values really are 
plural—a pattern emerges in which the monist claims to be able to
explain the appearance of plurality away, and the pluralist insists
that the appearance reflects a pluralist reality. Finally, pluralists
must explain how comparisons between values are made, or defend the
consequence that incommensurability is widespread.