Wilhelm Dilthey was a German philosopher who lived from
1833–1911. Dilthey is best known for the way he distinguished
between the natural and human sciences. Whereas the main task of the
natural sciences is to arrive at law-based causal explanations, the
core task of the human sciences is the understanding of the
organizational structures of human and historical life. It will be
shown that this distinction is not so sharp as to rule out causal
explanations in human sciences such as psychology and history; it
merely delimits the scope of such explanations. Dilthey’s aim
was to expand Kant’s primarily nature-oriented Critique of
Pure Reason into a Critique of Historical Reason that
can also do justice to the social and cultural dimensions of human
experience. Understanding the meaning of human historical events
requires being able to organize them in their proper contexts and to
articulate the structural uniformities that can be found in this way.
Dilthey’s reflections on the human sciences, historical
contextualization and hermeneutics influenced many subsequent thinkers
such as Husserl, Heidegger, Cassirer, Gadamer and Ricoeur. Recently,
there has been some attention given to the ways in which
Dilthey’s empirical approach to experience influenced Carnap in
his early attempts to overcome metaphysics.
 
1. Dilthey’s Life and Thought
1.1 Brief Overview of Dilthey’s Philosophical Development

Wilhelm Dilthey was born in Biebrich on the Rhine in 1833, two years
after Hegel had died. Dilthey’s ambivalent attitude towards
Hegel can provide some initial clues about his own philosophical
approach. He admired Hegel’s recognition of the historical
dimension of philosophical thought, but rejected the speculative and
metaphysical ways he developed this relation. Like the Neo-Kantians,
Dilthey proposed a return to the more focused viewpoint of Kant, but
not without also taking account of the broader perspective of later
idealists like Hegel.

Dilthey characterized his own expansive view of philosophy as one of
establishing integral relations to all the theoretical disciplines and
historical practices that attempt to make sense of the world. Instead
of demarcating the boundaries that set philosophy apart from other
ways of engaging life, Dilthey conceives its critical task as
articulating the overall structures that define the human spirit in
general. Relatively early in his career, philosophy is defined as
“an experiential science of spiritual phenomena” that
seeks to “cognize the laws governing social, intellectual and
moral phenomena” (1867/GS.V, 27). Philosophy should aim to
preserve the scope that idealists such as Fichte, Schelling and Hegel
once gave it, but it must do so by recapturing the Kantian rigor that
had been lost and by applying it empirically.

These goals, as formulated in the inaugural lecture that Dilthey gave
in 1867 on assuming his first professorship in Basel, were already
prefigured in his early journals. Thus in 1859 Dilthey wrote that a
new Critique of Reason must proceed on the basis of the psychological
laws and impulses from which art, religion and science all derive. All
intellectual systems are mere crystallizations of more generic
schemata rooted in life (JD, 80).

The early Dilthey conceived his goal as a broadening of the critical
project that would ground the human sciences as Kant had grounded the
natural sciences. His hope then was that the human sciences would be
able to arrive at lawful explanations just like the natural sciences.
Up until at least 1887, when he published his Poetics,
Dilthey was confident that inner explanations of human creativity
could be arrived at. He himself formulated three laws of the
imaginative metamorphosis to account for the powerful effect that
poets can have on us.

But through his efforts to work out the psychology that could be
appealed to by such inner explanations, Dilthey came to modify some of
his basic assumptions. He increasingly stresses that our access to the
human world of history is much more direct than our access to nature.
Although Dilthey is still willing to accept that objects of outer
experience are phenomenal, he no longer accepts the Kantian thesis
that the contents of inner experience are phenomenal as well. They are
real and the time that relates us to history is not merely the ideal
form that Kant had exposited.

This second phase of Dilthey’s thought is characterized by a
stress on the reality of lived experience and on the immediate
understanding of human life that this makes possible. It is in the
“Ideas for a Descriptive and Analytic Psychology” of 1894
that Dilthey works out his explanation-understanding
distinction. “We explain through purely intellectual processes,
but we understand through the cooperation of all the powers of the
mind activated by apprehension” (1894/SW.II, 147). The human
sciences will henceforth be conceived as primarily concerned with
understanding the meaning of human action and interaction. Also
central to this second phase of Dilthey’s thought is the essay
“The Origin of Our Belief in the Reality of the External World
and Its Justification” of 1890. Our initial access to the
external world is not inferential, but is felt as resistance to the
will. The world of lived experience is not merely a theoretical
representation, but is directly present to us as embodying values that
are relevant to our purposes. The stress on feeling and immediacy in
this second phase amounts to a rejection of Hegel’s dialectical
approach.

If the first phase was characterized by a search for inner explanation
and the second phase by direct understanding, the third phase can be
characterized by the need for interpretation. This final phase can be
said to span the last decade of Dilthey’s life until his death
in 1911. It begins with the realization in the essay “The Rise
of Hermeneutics” of 1900 that the inner intelligibility of lived
experience does not yet constitute understanding. Self-understanding
can only come from without. The way we express ourselves, whether in
communication or in action, is a crucial intermediary in defining
ourselves. Understanding can only be reliable if it proceeds through
the interpretation of human objectifications. Thus we understand
ourselves not through introspection but through history. It is in this
last phase of his thought that Dilthey, who now occupied the chair
that Hegel had once held in Berlin, revives his predecessor’s
theory of objective spirit as the medium relating us to the past. In
1906 Dilthey published a seminal work on the young Hegel that made use
of recently discovered theological and political fragments. These
unknown early fragments disclosed Hegel’s historical geniality
before it became constrained by the dialectical systematization that
Dilthey had always objected to. Dilthey’s student Herman Nohl
was helpful in deciphering some of these fragments and went on to
publish them. Nohl also edited a volume of Dilthey’s writings on
the history of German Idealism going back to Kant, Beck and Fichte and
leading up to such contemporaries of Hegel as Schelling,
Schleiermacher, Schopenhauer and Fries.
1.2 The Religious Background of Dilthey’s Philosophy

Dilthey followed family tradition by starting his university studies
at Heidelberg in theology. There he was also introduced to the
philosophical systems of the idealists by Kuno Fischer. Because
Fischer was accused of being a pantheist, his right to teach was
withdrawn in 1853. Dilthey then moved to the University of Berlin,
where he came under the influence of two of Schleiermacher’s
students, Friedrich von Trendelenburg and August Boeckh. Increasingly,
Schleiermacher became the focus of Dilthey’s interests. In 1859
he was asked to complete the editing of Schleiermacher’s
letters. That year the Schleiermacher Society also organized an essay
competition. Dilthey’s submission entitled
“Schleiermacher’s Hermeneutical System in Relation to
Earlier Protestant Hermeneutics” (1860, SW.IV, 33–227),
was awarded the first prize and led to a second commission, namely, to
write Schleiermacher’s biography. The first volume of this
biography was published in 1870. It places Schleiermacher not only in
his theological setting but also in the context of the literary and
philosophical movements astir in Berlin from 1796 to 1807. The work
displays Dilthey’s own expanding interests in aesthetical and
philosophical issues. He also wrote his dissertation on
Schleiermacher’s ethics.

As a theology student, Dilthey had begun a study of many early
formulations of the Christian worldview, which though never completed,
continued to influence his subsequent writings. In 1860 Dilthey writes
that 


it is my calling to apprehend the innermost nature of religious life
in history and to bring this to the attention of our times which are
moved exclusively by matters of state and
science. (JD, 140) 


This means looking for religiosity not so much in its institutional
practices and its theological doctrines as in the recesses of human
experience. In a similar vein, he asserts that it is necessary to
recover the “religious-philosophical worldview that is buried
under the ruins of our theology and philosophy” (JD, 140).

Dilthey conceives religious experience as an extension of
Schleiermacher’s feeling of absolute dependence. It is a total
experience that interweaves a feeling of dependence with an awareness
of a higher life independent of nature. Religious life is regarded as
the enduring background of human intellectual development, and that
development can manifest itself in mythical representation, in
theological doctrine, in metaphysical conceptualization as well as in
scientific theory. Dilthey rejected attempts to find the roots of
religion in myth. He saw myth as an attempt to represent and explain
the world in religious terms. Myth is not so much a primitive mode of
religion as it is a primitive mode of scientific theory.

Later as he reflected on the nature of worldviews, Dilthey would
occasionally return to the problem of religion. What distinguishes the
religious worldview from artistic and philosophical worldviews is that
it relates the visible to what is invisible, life to our awareness of
death. In a striking late passage, Dilthey writes that when life is
experienced religiously 


according to its true nature—full of hardships and a singular
blend of suffering and happiness throughout—[it] points to
something strange and unfamiliar, as if it were coming from invisible
sources, something <pressing in> on life from outside, yet
coming from its own depths. (ca. 1910/SW.III, 285)


The same non-transcendent perspective on religion is to be found in
Dilthey’s last essay, written during the final days of his life
in 1911 while he was on vacation in the Dolomites. This essay on
“The Problem of Religion” points to the fact that the
Enlightenment has made it increasingly difficult to acknowledge the
mystical aspects of religious experience. Enlightenment thinkers
regarded mystical experience as irrational. But according to Dilthey,
Schleiermacher was able to avoid this charge of irrationalism by
relating core aspects of religious experience to the insights of
transcendental philosophy.  Instead of interpreting the mystical
feeling of communion as an esoteric union with God, Schleiermacher
explicates it as a general awareness that is attuned to the invisible
coherence of things (1911/GS.VI, 295). He gives a transcendental
reading of what is intuited and felt in the religious mood by
transforming it into a creative principle. Whereas traditionally
mysticism tended to devalue our life in this world,
Schleiermacher’s mysticism is seen as affirming it.
2. Dilthey’s Main Philosophical Works
2.1 The 1880s: Broadening the Critical Framework

Dilthey’s first important theoretical work is the
Introduction to the Human Sciences of 1883. The human
sciences (Geisteswissenschaften) encompass both the
humanities and the social sciences. They range from disciplines like
philology, literary and cultural studies, religion and psychology, to
political science and economics. Dilthey insists that the human
sciences be related not by some logical construct on the order of a
Comte or a Mill, but by means of reflective considerations that take
their historical genesis into account. Dilthey writes that 


the human sciences as they exist and as they are practiced according
to the reason of things that were active in their history …
contain three classes of assertions. (1883/SW.I, 78) 


These are 1) descriptive and historical statements, 2) theoretical
generalizations about partial contents and 3) evaluative judgments and
practical rules. The human sciences are more obviously normative in
nature than the natural sciences for which formal norms related to
objective inquiry suffice. The fact that the human sciences are forced
to confront substantive normative issues puts a limit on the kind of
theoretical regularities that can be established in the human
sciences. Given the core role that human beings play in the
socio-historical world, the understanding of individuality is as
important in the human sciences as are the explanations to be found
through generalizations.

But the human science of psychology that deals with human beings
cannot examine them apart from interactions with society. “Man
as a fact prior to history and society is a fiction” (1883/SW.I,
83). This means that psychology can be a foundational human science
only if it is conceived as being primarily descriptive.  Psychological
explanations may still be possible, but only by starting with a
non-hypothetical base that describes how our experience assimilates
social and cultural features. Many human character traits are not
purely psychological. Thus when we speak of a person as thrifty we are
combining economic and psychological features.

Individual human beings are important for the understanding of
history, but instead of making them the monadic building blocks of
history, they are to be considered as points of intersection. Only a
multidisciplinary approach to human history can do it justice.
Qua conscious living beings, individuals are the carriers of
history, but they are just as much the products of history.
Individuals are not self-sufficient atoms. But neither are they to be
regarded as swallowed up by encompassing communities like nations or
peoples. Concepts that posit the spirit or soul of a people “are
no more usable in history than is the concept of life-force in
physiology” (1883/SW.I, 92). Suspicion of overarching forces
like peoples led Dilthey to distance himself from the nationalism of
his contemporary Heinrich von Treitschke and to ally himself with a
political gradualism reminiscent of Kant and Wilhelm von Humboldt.

Dilthey conceives of most of the human sciences as analyzing human
interactions at a level that can mediate between individual initiative
and communal tradition. These sciences deal with what he calls
“cultural systems” and “external organizations of
society”. Cultural systems are associations that individuals
join voluntarily for certain purposes that they can only achieve
through cooperation. These systems are cultural in the widest possible
sense and include all aspects of our social life. They can be
political, economic, artistic, scientific or religious in nature and
are not bound by local or national interests. External organizations
of society by contrast are those institutional structures like a
family and a state that we already are born into. Here “enduring
causes bind the wills of many into a single whole” (1883/SW.I,
94) within which relations of power, dependence and property can be
established. It is important to cross-reference cultural systems and
institutional organizations. Enlightenment thinkers had focused on
cultural systems and their potential universal scope while overlooking
how they are rooted in real life. Although Dilthey received his
training from members of the Historical School, he recognized that
many of them had been equally one-sided by stressing the distinctive
institutional organizations that separate different peoples while
ignoring the role of generalizations made possible through the
analysis of cultural systems.

Dilthey aims to combine these two approaches to liberalize the
historicist perspective and give it a methodological rigor. To
understand the role of the law in historical life we must consider it
both as a cultural system that frames legal issues in universal terms
and as an external organization of society that examines them in terms
of the positive laws of particular institutions. The Historical School
was wrong to regard individuals as completely subordinate to the bonds
of family and state and to think that the positive laws of
institutions define the full reality of life. The authority of the
state “encompasses only a certain portion … of the
collective power of the populace” and even when state power
exerts a certain preponderance it can do so only “through the
cooperation of psychological impulses” (1883/SW.I, 132).

In the preface to the Introduction to the Human Sciences,
Dilthey refers to his project as a Critique of Historical Reason. We
can now see that this is first of all a critique of the metaphysical
thesis that there can be an overarching “universal explanatory
framework for all historical facts” (1883/SW.I, 141). If
universal explanations are to be possible for history as well as for
nature, then we must recognize that they are only possible for
correlating partial contents of reality. The reason that the natural
sciences have been so successful in discovering causal laws of nature
is that they abstract from the full scope of the external world. 


The conditions sought by the mechanistic explanation
of nature explain only part of the contents of external
reality. This intelligible world of atoms, ether, vibrations, is
only a calculated and highly artificial abstraction from what is given
in experience and lived experience. (1883/SW.I, 203) 


The human sciences cannot similarly construct an abstract phenomenal
world that focuses on physical and chemical processes and appeals to
hypothetical atomic or even subatomic elements. It is incumbent on the
human sciences to deal with the more complex networks of the
historical world and the actual givens of human beings. Explanations
that are adequate for the historical world will require an analysis of
the multiple partial contents that are relevant in a particular
context. According to Dilthey the human sciences must replace the
abstract methodology of the natural sciences with an analytic
counterpart. 


Abstraction is distinguished from analysis in that the former singles
out one fact and disregards the others, whereas the latter
seeks to apprehend the majority of the facts that make up the factors
of a complex whole. (ca. 1880–1893/SW.I, 433) 


The more facts that explanations seek to correlate, the more limited
their scope must be. Thus the laws to be discovered in the human
sciences will apply not to history in general, but to specific
cultural systems or social organizations only. It may be possible to
arrive at causal laws of economic growth, of scientific progress or of
literary development, but not overarching historical laws of human
progress.

So far Dilthey has argued for a relative independence of the human
sciences vis-à-vis the better established natural
sciences. However, from the transcendental perspective that considers
the conditions our consciousness brings to experience, the human
sciences must claim a reflective priority. The realization that the
human sciences not only ascertain what is—as do the natural
sciences—but also make value judgments, establish goals and
prescribe rules, discloses that they are much more directly related to
the full reality of lived experience. The I-think that is the basis of
the conceptual cognition (Erkenntnis) of the natural sciences
is preceded by a direct knowing (Wissen) that is rooted in
the more inclusive thinking-feeling-willing of lived experience (see
1883/SW.I, 228, and ca. 1880–93/SW.I, 263–68). The natural
sciences merely construct a phenomenal or ideal world that abstracts
from the real nexus of lived experience. The world that is formed by
the human sciences is the historical-social reality in which human
beings participate. It is a real world that is directly possessed or
present in what Dilthey calls Innewerden. This term is best
translated as “reflexive awareness” to indicate a
self-givenness. Reflexive awareness is an “original form of
consciousness” (ca. 1880–93/SW.I, 255) that “does not
place a content over against the subject of consciousness (it does not
re-present it)” (ca. 1880–93/SW.I, 253). Reflexive awareness
involves a direct knowing that reality is present-for-me prior to
there being any reflective act-content, subject-object distinctions
that characterize the representational world of conceptual
cognition.

The human sciences must tap the original and direct presence of this
known world even when they attempt to use the intellectual tools of
conceptual cognition in their analysis of partial contents. The way
the historical world is represented and explained must in some way
reflect the way history has been lived and understood. Understanding
(Verstehen) for Dilthey is a process that employs all our
capacities and is to be distinguished from pure intellectual
understanding (Verstand). And if the human sciences are going
to be capable of expanding the scope of our understanding beyond what
is available to each of us in our particular circumstances, it must be
rooted in the original fullness and richness of our lived
experience.

In attempting to convey the genuine richness and depth of lived
experience, the human sciences must also consider the contribution of
the arts. Aesthetics constitutes an important cultural system in that
it can provide a sense of how the arts can contribute to human
understanding in general. Dilthey’s Poetics of 1887
represents an effort to develop certain psychological concepts to
explain the workings of the poetic imagination. Even in ordinary life,
the images we extract from experience are subject to metamorphosis.
With time all our images are transformed, for “the same image
can no more return than the same leaf can grow back on a tree the
following spring” (1887/SW.V, 102). The first law of
metamorphosis involves the exclusion of those constituents of images
that are not valuable to us. Not every apprehended constituent is
worth remembering. According to Dilthey we do not just passively
absorb every impression that comes our way. We filter out what is not
worth perceiving by a process of apperception. This apperception is
guided by what is called an “acquired nexus of psychic
life”. Because this gradually acquired nexus differs for each
subject, the process of exclusion never has the same outcome.

Some of what has not been excluded by the first law of imaginative
metamorphosis can then become the focus of special attention.
According to Dilthey’s second law of imaginative metamorphosis
“Images are transformed when they expand or contract, when the
intensity of the sensations of which they are composed is increased or
decreased” (1887/SW.V, 102). Such a change in intensity can
apply to either the reproductive imagination of ordinary memory or the
productive imagination of the poet. In the former case of memory an
increase of intensity tends to be a function of a present practical
interest. In the latter case of the poetic imagination an increase of
intensity is more likely to be regulated by the acquired psychic
nexus. What distinguishes the imagination of great poets according to
Dilthey is their capacity to ignore the constant distractions and
mundane interests of daily life. Only they can unfold imagery in a way
that reflects their overall values.

The third law of imaginative metamorphosis involves their completion,
by which Dilthey means a process “by which something outer is
enlivened by something inner or something inner is made visible and
intuitable by something outer” (1887/SW.V, 104). In
completion there is an interpenetration between inner feeling and
outer perception so that the very nucleus of an image can symbolize
the overall acquired psychic nexus. Dilthey writes, 


Only when the whole acquired psychic nexus becomes active can
images be transformed on the basis of it: innumerable,
immeasurable, almost imperceptible changes occur in their
nucleus. And in this way, the completion of the particular originates
from the fullness of psychic life. (1887/SW.V, 104)


This last law of imaginative completion applies only to artists and
allows them to articulate the essential meaning of
life-situations—through them we come to understand what is
typical in life. These laws of metamorphosis are conceived as
explanative to the extent that they appeal to an overall acquired
psychic nexus as their context. A generally understood context frames
more specific explanations.

After 1887 Dilthey backs away from pure psychological explanations. In
the essay “Three Epochs of Modern Aesthetics” of 1892 he
redescribes imaginative metamorphosis structurally. A portrait painter
is said to order the structure of what is objectively perceived 


around one especially noticeable point, which I will call the
aesthetic point of impression. Every carefully observed face is
understood on the basis of such a dominant impression …. On the
basis of this impression and repeated memory, indifferent features are
excluded, while telling features are stressed and refractory ones
de-emphasized. The remaining whole is unified ever more decisively.
(1892/SW.V, 217) 


Now exclusion, intensification and unifying completion are understood
as part of a process of articulating the structure of our experience
of the reality.

2.2 The 1890s: Understanding as Structural Articulation

This new, more descriptive structural approach is inaugurated in the
essay “The Origin of Our Belief in the Reality of the External
World and Its Justification” of 1890. Here Dilthey writes that
the structure of all psychic life consists of impressions
“evoking purposive reactions in the system of our drives and the
feelings connected with them” (1890a/SW.II, 14). Rather than
basing our initial sense of an external world on theoretical
inferences from effects to causes, he roots it in a felt resistance to
the will. But resistance must be internalized as a restraint of a
volitional intention for it to signify the existence of something
independent. Thus Dilthey is not merely replacing a representational
phenomenalism with a direct perceptual realism. Each perceptual
process has “an inner side” that involves “an energy
and affective tone deriving from inner strivings that connect it to
our own life” (1890a/SW.II, 14). All aspects of our own life
are brought into play as we respond to the world.

In 1894 Dilthey published his “Ideas for a Descriptive and
Analytic Psychology” and established how it differs from
traditional explanative psychologies. He admits that even a
descriptive psychology will seek to explicate the causal relationships
of life, but that it must differ from explanative psychology by not
trying to “derive a comprehensive and transparent cognition of
psychological phenomena from a limited number of univocally determined
elements” (1894/SW.II, 116). Unlike the associationists, Dilthey
will not posit simple, stable impressions that are then combined into
more complex ideas. They introduce unnecessary hypothetical elements
into the foundation of psychology. 


In psychology it is precisely the connectedness that is originally
and continually given in lived experience: life presents itself
everywhere only as a continuum or nexus. (1894/SW.II, 119-20) 


It is the task of a descriptive and analytic psychology to explicate
how different processes converge in the nexus of consciousness. This
nexus is lived and must be distinguished from the overall acquired
psychic nexus discussed earlier. The lived nexus is available to
reflexive awareness and can be described as itself an ongoing process.
Analysis then shows this process to have a rather uniform
cross-sectional structure. Almost every momentary state of
consciousness can be seen “to simultaneously contain some kind
of representing, feeling, and willing” (1894/SW.II, 173).

If we were merely representational beings, the conditions of psychic
life would be merely causal. But we at the same time estimate the
value of what we represent through feeling. 


Once external conditions evoke a sense of pressure or intensification
in the sphere of feeling, a striving comes about to either maintain or
to modify a given state. (1894/SW.II, 177) 


The interest of feeling that attaches to aspects of what is
experienced allows us to value them as either favorable or unfavorable
to our existence and sets the stage for the will to possibly act on
their basis.


To the extent that the parts [of the experiential nexus] are connected
structurally so as to link the satisfaction of the drives and
happiness and to reject suffering, we call this nexus purposive. It is
solely in psychic structure that the character of purposiveness is
originally given, and when we attribute this to an organism or to the
world, this concept is only transferred from inner lived
experience. Every relation of parts to a whole attains the character
of purposiveness from the value that is realized in it. This value is
experienced only in the life of feelings and drives. (1894/SW.II,
178)


Psychic life is not constructed from discrete elements, but is always
already a continuum that is constantly differentiating itself from
within. By first explicating the structural unity of this nexus we
bring out the breadth of its scope. When we then consider the
development of the nexus we display its temporal length. As purposive,
this development is characterized as teleological, but this does not
entail positing any final telos to which all previous stages
are to be subsumed. The purposiveness of life and its structural
systems is immanent and adaptive rather than external and
predetermined. Each stage of life can be understood as an epoch with
its distinctive value.

Nothing can be more erroneous than viewing maturity as the goal of the
development that constitutes life and thus transforming the early
years into mere means. How could those years serve as means to a goal
which in each case is so uncertain? Instead, it is part of the nature
of life to strive to fill each moment with a richness of value.
(1894/SW.II, 189)


A further task of Dilthey’s descriptive and analytic psychology
is to show how the development of psychological structure produces the
individuation of human life. Individuality is not conceived in terms
of unique qualities that we are endowed with, but as something that
each of us acquires historically. It is embodied in what was referred
to earlier as a subject’s acquired psychic nexus and is only
gradually articulated. Even when people share the same qualities their
relative intensity will differ. Sometimes qualities are present to
such a small extent as to be, in effect, unnoticeable. Prominent
qualities, however, tend to reinforce certain related qualities and
suppress others. Each individual can thus be understood as a
structural configuration of a set of dominant qualities in tension
with some subordinate qualities. This tension may be unresolved for a
long time until finally some articulation or Gestalt is
reached that defines a person’s character. Dilthey gives the
example of strong ambition leading someone to gradually overcome
shyness in public. Once a person recognizes that low self-confidence
when speaking in public stands in the way of an important goal being
fulfilled, that person can begin to cultivate the requisite
qualities.

The initial response to Dilthey’s descriptive psychology was
rather negative. Hermann Ebbinghaus wrote an extended review which
claimed that Dilthey still relies on hypotheses and that the
differences between explanative and descriptive psychologies are
minimal. Dilthey defended his position by showing that he never meant
to banish explanative hypotheses from psychology altogether, merely
from its descriptive foundations. Husserl later expressed his regret
that the Ebbinghaus review deflected him from reading this
“genial” anticipation of phenomenology until much
later.

Another source of criticism came from the Neo-Kantians, most of whom
wanted to divorce philosophy from psychology. In 1894 the Baden School
Neo-Kantian Wilhelm Windelband delivered a lecture in which he claimed
that psychology has no real relevance for the historical sciences and
should be considered a natural science rather than a human science. He
sees psychology as searching for laws just as the natural sciences do
and historical studies as interested in unique patterns. Thus
Windelband proposed that the natural sciences are nomothetic and the
historical or cultural sciences ideographic. Dilthey rejects
Windelband’s distinction by showing that many natural sciences
have ideographic elements and many human sciences such as linguistics
and economics have nomothetic aims. Moreover, Dilthey argues that the
description of singular historical data only becomes meaningful if
understood in the framework of regularities: “What is most
characteristic of the systematic human sciences is the connection
of the general and the individual ” (1895–6/SW.II, 
227). Not only is it the case that universal considerations are as
important as ideographic specificity, but also the understanding of
individuality is not possible without reference to some broader
context.
2.3 1900–1911: Historical Understanding and Hermeneutics
2.3.1 Interpreting from the Outside In

The final phase of Dilthey’s philosophy can be said to begin at
the turn of the twentieth century with his essay “The Rise of
Hermeneutics”. Whereas the early prize-essay on
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics had been more focused on textual
and theological interpretation, the new essay makes hermeneutics a
connecting link between philosophy and history. Dilthey argues that
the study of history can be reliable only if it is possible to raise
the understanding of what is singular to the level of universal
validity. Here he also comes to the realization that 


the inner experience through which I obtain reflexive awareness of my
own condition can never by itself bring me to a consciousness of my
own individuality. I experience the latter only through a comparison
of myself with others. (1900/SW.IV, 236) 


Others cannot be assumed to be mere extensions of myself. They are
accessible to me only from the outside. It is the task of
understanding to confer “an inside” to what is first given
as “a complex of external sensory signs” (1900/SW.IV,
236).

Whereas up to then lived experience had been assumed to provide us an
understanding of ourselves, now Dilthey asserts that we understand
ourselves only by means of our objectifications. The understanding of
self requires me to approach myself as others do, that is, from the
outside to the inside. 


The process of understanding, insofar as it is determined by common
conditions and epistemological means, must everywhere have the same
characteristics. (1900/SW.IV, 237) 


To the extent that rules can guide the understanding of the
objectifications of life it constitutes interpretation. Hermeneutics
is the theory of interpretation that relates to all human
objectifications—that is, not only speech and writing, but also
visual artistic expressions, more casual physical gestures as well as
observable actions or deeds.

This new perspective that approaches the inside from the outside also
alters Dilthey’s conception of psychic structure. In the first
of three “Studies Toward the Foundation of the Human
Sciences” dating from 1904–9, Dilthey considers what
linguistic expressions can teach us about the intentionality of
consciousness. No longer merely explicating the breadth of psychic
life through the interweavings of acts of cognition, feeling and
willing, Dilthey uses an expression such as “I am worried about
something” to disclose the referential structure of a lived
experience. Psychic acts have contents that are related to the objects
of the world by means of what Dilthey calls attitudinal stances. Our
attitudes toward the world are 


indefinite in number. Asking, believing, presuming, claiming, taking
pleasure in, approving, liking and its opposite, wishing, desiring,
and willing are such modifications of the psychic
attitude. (1904–9/SW.III, 43) 


These attitudinal stances are not just cognitive, but predelineate
something more encompassing, which Dilthey calls
“knowledge”. Knowledge (Wissen) adds to the
conceptual cognition (Erkenntnis) of reality, “the
positing of values” and “the determination of purposes and
the establishment of rules” (1904–9/SW.III, 25).

While the kind of epistemology (Erkenntnistheorie)
established by Kant and others suffices for the natural sciences, the
human sciences require a more full-blooded theory of knowledge
(Theorie des Wissens). Knowledge is to be
“distinguished from a mere representation, presumption,
question, or assumption by the fact that a content appears here with a
sense of objective necessity” (1904–9/SW.III,
27–28). This objective necessity is to be located in the
evidentness that accompanies thinking that is properly executed and
reaches its goal whether through the self-given reality of lived
experience or the “givenness that binds us to an outer
perception” (1904–9/SW.III, 28).

For the human sciences, things in the world are not merely cognitively
apprehended as phenomenal objects, but known as real for our
life-concerns (Lebensbezüge). Thinking of the unfinished
manuscripts in his office, Dilthey writes in the Second Study:

I am tired from overworking; having reviewed my files, I worry about
their unfinished contents, whose completion demands incalculably more
work from me. All this “about”, “of”, and
“toward”, all these references of what is remembered to
what is experienced, in short, all these structural inner relations,
must be apprehended by me, since I now want to apprehend the fullness
of the lived experience exhaustively. And precisely in order to
exhaust it, I must regress further in the structural network to the
memories of other lived experiences. (1904–9/SW.III, 50)


Every attempt to characterize a lived experience leads beyond it to
other structurally related experiences that ground it. This involves
not just an observational process of willful attention, but also an
involuntary “being-pulled-along by the state of affairs
itself” (1904–9/SW.III, 51) to other constituent parts of
the nexus of human knowledge.

Some of these refinements incorporated into Dilthey’s
descriptive program were inspired by reading Husserl’s
Logical Investigations (1900–01). Dilthey specifically
follows Husserl in his account of how language contributes to
“significative apprehension” (1904–9/SW.III, 60). In
using words we do not represent them as words but fulfill their
meaning by representing their objects. There is a triadic structural
relation between the intuitive content of a linguistic expression, an
act that gives it meaning and the object that embodies that meaning as
what is expressed. But whereas Husserl’s phenomenology focused
in the conceptual structures of objective apprehension, Dilthey gives
equal attention to the felt structures of what he calls
“objective having” (1904–9/SW.III, 66). In objective
apprehension we progress from attitude to objects, in objective having
we regress from objects to attitude. This regressive turn from the
outside to the inside is brought to bear on how feelings are to be
interpreted. “Whether we feel our own state or some object, it
involves only a state of being as a kind of attitude…. The way this
state of being depends on outer objects or on the state of the subject
is obscured through an inverse attitude that loses itself in the depth
of the subject” (1904–9/SW.III, 69). Instead of regarding
feelings merely as subjective states such as pleasure or displeasure,
they can be interpreted as attitudes that assess what is given in
consciousness as either furthering or diminishing one’s state of
being in the world. Feelings can be added to our earlier list of
attitudes.

Feelings as attitudes allow us to evaluate the world. Our
values express adjudicative attitudes based on feeling. Although the
setting of purposes is grounded in the lived experience of values, the
life of feelings has an immanent teleology that does not require it to
go over into the desire to act. The structural nexus of willing is
thus different from that of feeling. There are many feelings that
evoke further feelings rather than the impulse to do something in
response to them. A feeling of suffering can for instance elicit a
kind of self-pity that spreads the suffering and elicits a
“distinctively mellow” (1904–9/SW.III, 76) mood
that immobilizes.

The final general attitude relevant to the structural nexus of
knowledge is that of willing. In the lived experiences of willing
“we possess a reflexive awareness of an intention to realize a
state of affairs” (1904–9/SW.III, 82). If we call this
state of affairs to be realized a “purpose” then what is
expected from this purpose is a satisfaction of some kind.
2.3.2 Reinterpreting Purposiveness and Distinguishing Elementary Understanding and Higher Understanding.

Dilthey’s most important work is The Formation of the
Historical World in the Human Sciences of 1910. Here Dilthey
applies the same kind of structural analysis that we saw him develop
for lived experience to the understanding of history. The human
sciences give form to the historical world by analyzing the structural
systems in terms of which human beings participate in history. In the
Introduction to the Human Sciences Dilthey had conceived
the psychic nexus, cultural system and the external organization of
society as purposive systems. Now a more neutral covering concept is
used to capture all the ways the forces of life can converge. This is
the concept of the “productive nexus or system”
(Wirkungszusammenhang). The efficacy of life and of the
historical world is to be understood in terms of productivity before
any causal or teleological analysis is applied. The carriers of
history, whether they be individuals, cultures, institutions, or
communities, are productive systems capable of producing value,
meaning, and, in some cases, realizing purposes. Each is to be
considered structurally as centered in itself.

Each individual is a psychic productive system inherently related to
other more inclusive productive systems that are also at work in
history. These larger productive systems come about because of the
need for communication, interaction, and cooperation among
individuals. But they can also take on a life of their own and survive
the individuals that formed them. Dilthey’s category of
Wirkung or productivity is at the root of Gadamer’s
theory of effective history (Wirkungsgeschichte). In the
Introduction to the Human Sciences, Dilthey had been
unwilling to consider these larger groupings as subjects or carriers
of history. In The Formation of the Historical World in the Human
Sciences, he qualifies his opposition to transpersonal subjects
by allowing them to be considered as logical rather than real
subjects. It is possible to regard cooperative productive systems as
logical subjects that transcend individuals without positing them as
superempirical real subjects.

Even when individuals participate in more encompassing cultural
systems and organizations of society, they are never completely
submerged by them. This is because any such productive system only
engages some aspects of an individual. Moreover, the individuals
active in a cultural system often put their stamp on its mode of
productivity so that not just the rationally agreed upon function of
the system is achieved. Summing up these two points, Dilthey discerns
a difficulty in conceptualizing the sciences of these cultural systems
in terms of the idea of purposes alone:

The individuals who cooperate in such a function belong to the
cultural system only through those processes by which they contribute
to the realization of the function. Nevertheless, they participate in
these processes with their whole being, which means that a domain
based purely on the system’s functional purpose can never be
constructed. Rather, other aspects of human nature are also constantly
at work in this domain supplementing the energies devoted to the
system’s functions. (1910/SW.III, 208)


Individuals give only part of themselves to these more inclusive
systems, yet they can express their whole being through this part. No
cultural system will embody merely the purposes it was meant to
fulfill. That is why it is crucial to reconceive purposive systems as
productive systems. A productive nexus or system may be purposive in a
general sense without fulfilling a determinate purpose. It is to be
understood more generally as producing objectifications that express
human values as well as purposes—leaving open the extent to
which specific goals are achieved. The important thing is how human
values and purposes are expressed in productive systems and how their
meaning is to be understood.

As in the essay “The Rise of Hermeneutics”, understanding
is said to involve a process of referring back from outer sensory
phenomena to a reality that is inner. But now in The Formation of
the Historical World in the Human Sciences Dilthey recognizes
that this inner reality need not be psychological in nature. He uses
the example of how the statutes of a state express the common will of
a community. The inner content of the laws on the books is a legal
meaning formation. The expressions we read in law books articulate an
inner relation among legal imperatives. What is expressed in these
laws is not the mental states of individual legislators, but a general
way of regulating human relations. Dilthey makes the same claim for
individual poetic creations. What is expressed in a drama is 


not the inner processes in the poet; it is rather a nexus created in
them but separable from them. The nexus of a drama consists in a
distinctive relation of material, poetic mood, motif, plot, and means
of presentation. (1910/SW.III, 107)


The interpretation of history must deal with all manifestations of
life, not merely expressions that are intended to communicate a state
of mind. In the section entitled “The Understanding of Other
Persons and Their Manifestations of Life”, Dilthey distinguishes
three classes of life-manifestations. The first class consists of
concepts, judgments and larger thought-formations. They are intended
to communicate states of affairs, not states of mind. Thus the
proposition “two plus two equals four” means the same in
all contexts and says nothing about the person uttering it. Actions
form a second class of manifestations of life. Actions as such are not
meant to communicate anything, but they often do reveal something
about the intentions of the actor. Thus if someone picks up a hammer
nearby some nails and wooden boards, it is legitimate to assume that
he or she wants to assemble the boards into some artifact. If this
occurs in a large workshop, it is also plausible to think the person
is a carpenter. This might also tell us something about the
person’s livelihood, but not much more. There is a third class
of life-manifestations that Dilthey calls “expressions of lived
experience” and which disclose more about the individual
uttering them. Expressions of lived experience can range from simple
exclamations and gestures to personal self-descriptions and
reflections to works of art. Often these expressions are more
revealing than was intended:

An expression of lived experience can contain more of the nexus of
psychic life than any introspection can catch sight of. It draws from
depths not illuminated by consciousness. But at the same time, it is
characteristic of an expression of lived experience that its relation
to the spiritual or human content expressed in it can only be made
available to understanding within limits. Such expressions are not to
be judged as true or false but as truthful or untruthful. (ca. 1910/SW.III, 227)


A work of art is often more disclosive of human life in general than
of the specific life of the artist. It may disclose something about
the state of mind or the attitude of the artist, but a work of art
will only be great if its “spiritual content is liberated from
its creator” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 228).

After having analyzed these three kinds of manifestations of life,
which can be called theoretical, practical and disclosive
respectively, Dilthey proceeds to distinguish various modes of
understanding them. Elementary understanding goes back to the
associative relation that normally exists between an expression and
what is expressed in it. It assimilates the meanings that are commonly
attached to expressions in the community that we grow up in. Dilthey
uses Hegel’s concept of “objective spirit” to
account for this commonality of meaning. Objective spirit embodies
“the manifold forms in which a commonality existing among
individuals has objectified itself in the world of the senses”,
allowing the past to become “a continuously enduring present for
us” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 229). Whereas Hegel restricted objective
spirit to the legal, economic and political aspects of historical
life, Dilthey expands the concept to include not only the sciences,
but also the triad of art, religion and philosophy that Hegel had
assigned to absolute spirit. But most of all, objective spirit
embodies the everyday, mundane aspects of life that we grow up
with.

From earliest childhood, the self is nurtured by this world of
objective spirit. It is also the medium in which the understanding of
other persons and their life-manifestations takes place. For
everything in which spirit has objectified itself contains something
that is common to the I and the Thou. Every square planted with trees,
every room in which chairs are arranged, is understandable to us from
childhood because human tendencies to set goals, produce order, and
define values in common have assigned a place to every square and
every object in the room. (ca. 1910/SW.III, 229)


This common background suffices for the elementary understanding of
everyday life. But whenever the common meaning of life-manifestations
is called into question for some reason, higher understanding becomes
necessary. This can occur because of an apparent inconsistency among
judgments or expressions, or because of an ambiguity that attaches to
them or because of a complexity that we have not come upon before.
Higher understanding cannot continue to rely on the common meanings of
an expression that derive from a shared local background between
speaker and listener, writer and reader. Higher understanding must
replace the sphere of commonality, where inference by analogy
suffices, with that of universality, where inductive inference must
take over. Here the human sciences become relevant by offering the
appropriate universal disciplinary contexts that can help to deal with
uncertainties of interpretation. These universal systematic contexts
can be social or political, economic or cultural, secular or
religious. When expressions can be determined to be functioning in a
specific disciplinary context then ambiguities tend to disappear.
Literary scholars may be able to clarify a puzzling poetic passage by
showing it to contain a literary allusion to a classical work with a
foreign vocabulary. Or they can perhaps clarify it by seeing it as a
way of accommodating certain technical demands of the genre as such.
These cases of higher understanding establish a larger context of
reference.

However, higher understanding can also focus on more specific contexts
related to the work or its author. The consideration of such contexts
should come only at the conclusion of the interpretive process and
represents a shift from exploring the relation “of expression to
what is expressed” toward the relation “of what has been
produced to productivity” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 233). Here we move from
meaning relationships to something like a productive relationship to
which knowledge about the authors becomes relevant. But the first
recourse here is to consult more of the products of the author. How
does a sentence fit into a paragraph, a chapter, a whole work, or a
corpus as a whole? Only if these contexts fail to resolve the problem
may we consider psychological claims about the author. The
understanding of the individuality of an author should only bring in
psychological factors as a last resort. Dilthey writes 


we understand individuals by means of their affinities, their
commonalities. This process presupposes the connection between the
universally human and individuation. On the basis of what is
universal, we can see individuation extended to the manifoldness of
human existence. (ca. 1910/SW.III, 233)


However, the highest form of understanding is not the reconstruction
of the individuality of the author. It involves something that has
been confused with reconstruction, but is distinct. What Dilthey
points to is a process of re-creation or re-experiencing, which he
contrasts with understanding as such: 


Understanding as such is an operation running inverse to the course of
production. But a fully sympathetic reliving requires that
understanding go forward with the line of the events themselves.
(ca. 1910/SW.III, 235)


Re-experiencing develops understanding by completing the hermeneutical
circle. If understanding goes “back” to the overall
context, re-experiencing goes “forward” by following out
the parts that give focus to the whole. A re-experiencing is not an
actual re-construction but produces a better understanding that
refines the original. This is made clear by the following example:



A lyrical poem makes possible, through the sequence of its verses, the
re-experiencing of a nexus of lived experience—not the real one
that stimulated the poet, but the one that, on its basis, the poet
places in the mouth of an ideal person. (ca. 1910/SW.III, 235)


Whereas the arts can expand the horizon of our lived experience by
means of the ideal and imaginary means of fiction, history must do so
by a process of structural articulation. The task of the human
sciences is to analyze the productive nexus of history as it exhibits
itself in stable formations or systematic structures. The productive
nexus of history differs from the causal nexus of nature in producing
values and arriving at purposes.

The carriers of this constant creation of values and goods in the
world of human spirit are individuals, communities, and the cultural
systems in which individuals cooperate. This cooperation is determined
by the fact that, in order to realize values, individuals subject
themselves to rules and set themselves purposes. All these modes of
cooperation manifest a life-concern connected to the human essence
that links individuals with each other—a core, as it were, that
cannot be grasped psychologically but is revealed in every such system
of relations among human beings. (1910/SW.III, 175–76)


Each such system can be regarded as being centered within itself on
the basis of some function, whether it be economic, political,
cultural or religious. The structures to be analyzed here provide
various cross-sections of what takes place in history. But there are
also relatively enduring socio-historical contexts that we can
delineate as nation-states and historical periods.

A nation organized as a state can be considered as a composite
structural unity of productive systems. The individual members of a
nation-state exhibit commonalities which produce a solidarity. And
when cultural systems transcending the scope of this nation come into
contact with other local productive systems, they begin to assume
commonalities distinctive of that nation. Finally, integration of
associations comes about through relations of “domination and
obedience, as well as of community, that are combined in the sovereign
will of a state” (1910/SW.III, 196).

Nation-states are spatially defined historical wholes, but we can also
delineate temporal composite wholes such as historical phases. What
characterizes generations, ages and epochs according to Dilthey is
that they are general, “permeating tendencies”
(1910/SW.III, 198). Each epoch defines a life-horizon by which people
orient their life. “Such a horizon places life, life-concerns,
life-experience, and thought-formation in a certain proportion”
(1910/SW.III, 198), which tends to restrain the way individuals can
modify their outlooks. But an epoch is only a dominating tendency that
will encompass opposing tendencies. In fact, a new epoch will come
about when opposing tendencies take advantage of the inevitable
tensions and dissatisfactions produced by any dominant tendency.

The structural analysis of history in terms of cultural systems and
the external organization of society can be guided by the various
human sciences. But a reflective mode of judgment is needed when
historians try to make sense of the more composite structures of
nation-states and epochs. History is both a judgmental art concerned
with meaning and a science concerned with objective truth. Only
historical reflection can create the right balance that will transform
the conceptual cognition of the human sciences into adequate
historical knowledge.
2.3.3 The Categories of Historical Knowledge.

This shift to historical knowledge is the main theme of the notes
(ca. 1910) for a second volume of The Formation of the Historical
World in the Human Sciences (1910) which were published
posthumously in 1927 as Drafts for a Critique of Historical
Reason. Here Dilthey analyzes the categories of life that are
relevant to historical knowledge. He distinguishes between formal and
real categories. Formal categories stem from elementary logical
operations that are at work in all apprehension: they include the
processes of comparing, noting sameness, differentiating and
relating. Although such elementary operations are prediscursive, they
provide the basis for discursive thought. The prediscursive noting of
sameness prepares the way for the unifying concepts of discursive
thought and the process of relating provides the basis for synthetic
procedures. These prediscursive and discursive modes of thought
account for the formal categories of unity, plurality, identity,
difference, degree and relation that are shared by the natural and
human sciences.

But the real categories are not the same in the natural and human
sciences. Whereas time is an ideal abstract form for the natural
sciences, for the human sciences it has an experienced content. It is
experienced as advancing into the future and “always contains
the memory of what has just been present” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 216).
The relation between the past and the present becomes the source for
the category of meaning which is Dilthey’s main historical
category. The present never is in the sense of being
observable, but it can be understood meaningfully to the extent that
the past asserts its presence in it. When the present is
merely lived, “the positive or negative value of the realities
that fill it are experienced through feeling. And when we face the
future, the category of purpose arises through a projective
attitude” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 222). Meaning, value, and purpose are
the three central categories of the human sciences and each relates to
time in its own way. What is valued by feeling focuses on the
momentary present, but for the will everything in the present tends to
be subordinated to some future purpose. Only the category of meaning
can expand the present into a presence that overcomes the mere
juxtaposition or subordination of the various aspects of life to each
other. The understanding of meaning involves the encompassing sense of
knowledge that attempts to relate cognition to evaluation and the
setting of goals.

Dilthey’s distinction between the natural and human sciences is
not a metaphysical distinction. For that reason he does not create a
dualism between nature as the domain of causality and history as the
domain of freedom. There are determining forces at work in history
because it cannot be divorced from natural conditions. But to
understand how individuals participate in history we must replace the
purely external relation of cause and effect with the integral
relation of “agency and suffering, of action and reaction”
(ca. 1910/SW.III, 219).

The doing and undergoing that characterizes human involvement in
history can be brought home most forcefully in autobiography. 


Here a life-course stands as an external phenomenon from which
understanding seeks to discover what produced it within a particular
environment. The person who understands it is the same as the one who
created it. This results in a special intimacy of understanding.
(ca. 1910/SW.III, 221) 


Autobiography begins with what memory has selected as significant
life-moments, which reflection then gives a certain coherence. Thereby
the initial tasks of “explicating a historical nexus are already
half solved by life itself” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 221).

But the fact that history derives a special intimacy through the
capacity for autobiography does not mean that we should be content to
understand history through individuals alone. This also becomes
evident in relation to Dilthey’s own work as a biographer of
Schleiermacher. It became ever more clear to Dilthey that his
biography could not solve its task of understanding the life of
Schleiermacher without considering the intellectual life of Berlin in
which he so actively participated. A biography is likely to bring more
contextual conditions into play than an autobiography, but to
understand how historical personalities are actively engaged in their
context, full comprehension is not needed. Dilthey writes that such an
individual 


does not face a limitless play of forces in the historical world: he
dwells in the sphere of the state, religion, or science—in
brief, in a distinctive life-system or in a constellation of them. The
inner structure of such a constellation draws the individual into it,
shapes him, and determines the direction of his
productivity. (ca. 1910/SW.III, 266–67) 


Yet this very placement allows individuals to in turn exert an
influence on their immediate surroundings.

When turning to the nexus of universal history, we must move beyond
the individual life-courses focused on by autobiography and biography.
Universal-historical understanding cannot ignore the results of
autobiography and biography, but it will focus more on the history of
nations, cultural systems, and the external organizations of society.



Each of these histories has its own center to which the processes are
related and consequently the values, purposes, and significance that
result from this relationship. (ca. 1910/SW.III, 291)


Anthropological reflection expects history to teach what life is and
yet history is dependent on life. There is a hermeneutical circularity
here that could be escaped “if unconditioned norms, purposes, or
values [could] set the standard for contemplating an apprehending
history” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 281). Unlike his Neo-Kantian
contemporaries such as Hermann Cohen and Heinrich Rickert, Dilthey is
not willing to accept unconditional values that transcend life. The
spiritual nexus of history “is that of life itself insofar as
life produces connectedness under the conditions of its natural
environment” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 280). Life is the ultimate context
behind which we cannot go. It is the horizon of productivity which
encompasses the organic and the mental, but cannot be defined by
either. Since “life is intimately related to temporal
fulfillment” (ca. 1910/SW.III, 249), historicity is part of its
essence. Consequently, the objective validity that is to be attached
to any value cannot be separated from our temporal engagement with
life. Values are not simply given or imposed by life, but are produced
as part of the human process of explicating the meaning of history. In
light of Dilthey’s skepticism about transcendent unconditional
values, it may seem surprising that he presented an ethical system
that expects human beings to make unconditional commitments that are
self-binding.
3. Dilthey’s Reflections on Ethics and Worldviews and His Doubts about Metaphysics

In 1890 Dilthey offered a lecture course at the University of Berlin
that was posthumously published with the title System of
Ethics (1890b). Here Dilthey sets himself the task of
developing a “psycho-ethical” approach that is rooted in
“anthropological-historical analysis” (1890b/GS.X, 79).
Whereas traditional psychology has analyzed feelings mainly as
responses to sense impressions that come from without, a
psycho-ethical understanding of the feelings that can motivate us to
act must be rooted in anthropological analysis of our drives,
instincts and desires. Instead of focusing on the intellectual
processes whereby human beings adapt to their surroundings, Dilthey
argues that most of our responses are basically instinctive. The
feelings that measure the effect the world has on us are not just the
subjective aspect of our representations of the world. These feelings
are rooted in certain drives among which the drive for sociability and
a sense of solidarity are central (1890b/GS.X, 101).

This human solidarity involves a sense of movement with
(Mitbewegung) others. All psychological forms of sympathy or
feeling with (Mitgefühl) others, whether it be
compassion (Mitleid) or shared joy (Mitfreude) or
empathy (Mitempfindung) are derivable from this more basic
anthropological Mitbewegung of solidarity (1890b/GS.X,
74–77).

We are naturally moved by and engaged with others around us, but the
strength of this solidarity will vary. The extent to which we are
motivated by a sense of solidarity is a function of the sphere of
commonality of objective spirit that we grow up in. Our
anthropological sense of solidarity and its Mitbewegung
provides a more positive incentive for sociability than Hume’s
sympathy and Schopenhauer’s compassion. But even solidarity is a
mere natural incentive which does not become ethical until it is
transformed into a more active or participatory incentive of
benevolence (1890b/GS.X, 70).

As he develops his anthropologically based approach to ethics, Dilthey
leads up to three main ethical incentives. One of them is the
benevolence (Wohlwollen) that we related to human solidarity.
The other two incentives are to strive for what is right
(Rechtschaffenheit) and to perfect oneself in a socially
legitimate manner (Vollkommenheit). These three ethical
incentives had already been predelineated as moral principles in
Dilthey’s Habilitationsschrift of 1864 entitled
“Versuch einer Analyse des moralischen Bewußtseins”
(see 1864/GS.VI, 26–27). In fact, the concluding section 12 of
the System of Ethics is taken almost exclusively from this
earlier work, where the ethical incentives were formulated as three
moral oughts. This raises the question how it is possible to move from
anthropologically derived ethical incentives that are a
posteriori to ultimately arrive at moral oughts that are a
priori. There is a crucial subsection 9.3 that prepares us for
this transition. It is entitled “The Consciousness of Commitment
(Bindung) in Duty and Right”. Here Dilthey is quite
explicit that the commitment to do what is right demands a
consciousness that cannot be conceived as a mere reflex to external
pressure coming from our sense of solidarity with others. The
commitment to do what is right must come from within on the basis of
respect for others as ends in themselves (1890b/GS.X, 102). The
mere life-value of solidarity is elevated to the spiritual value of
respect for others. Having replaced Humean sympathy with benevolence,
Dilthey now engages Kantian duty as part of his analysis of moral
self-reflection. But instead of appealing to respect for the law to
justify doing what is right, Dilthey derives respect from a commitment
that is based on both a “fidelity to oneself and respect for the
self-worth of other persons” (1890b/GS.X, 102). The sense of
obligation (Verbindlichkeit) that comes with this commitment
(Bindung) involves a recognition of a reciprocal human
connectedness (Verbundensein) (1890b/GS.X, 71, 109) rather
than a one-sided dependence on a higher law.

Formally Dilthey moves even closer to Kant at the end of the lectures
by acknowledging that ultimately we must make “moral
judgments” that are “unconditional” and
“synthetic a priori” (1890b/GS.X, 108).
Although Dilthey had rejected the possibility of synthetic a
priori theoretical judgments for outer experience, he is now
willing to speak of synthetic a priori practical judgments
for inner experience. Had Dilthey published his 1890 lectures himself
he would probably have tempered the language that was imported from
his early essay. But he clearly still thinks that morality requires
judgmental assent to oughts that are unconditionally self-binding.

The normative implications of anthropological reflection about life
and history also led Dilthey to address the value of worldviews. Just
as the nature of universal history forces us to conceive of history as
more than a human science, so worldviews are more broadly based
attempts at acquiring a unified perspective on life. The sciences are
by their nature partial and cannot provide a comprehensive worldview.
A worldview attempts to provide not only a cognitive picture of the
world, but also an estimation of what in life is valuable and worth
striving for. Worldviews have been developed in literary, religious
and philosophical works. Philosophers have produced metaphysical
formulations of worldviews that attempt to give them a universal
conceptual determinacy. Dilthey analyzes three recurrent types of such
metaphysical formulations: naturalism, the idealism of freedom and
objective idealism. The naturalism of Democritus, Hobbes and others
derives everything from what can be cognized and is pluralistic in
structure; idealism of freedom as found in Plato, Kant and others
insists on the sovereignty of the will and is dualistic; objective
idealism as found in Heraclitus, Leibniz and Hegel affirms reality as
the embodiment of a harmonious set of values and is monistic. The
three types of metaphysical worldviews are incommensurable in that
each sets its priorities differently. Dilthey finds naturalism too
reductive; his ethical views incline him toward the idealism of
freedom; aesthetically he felt attracted towards objective idealism.
No metaphysical formulation can have more than relative validity
because it attempts to arrive at a totalization that transcends
experience. Literary expressions of worldviews tend to be more
successful because they do not claim to be totalizing. All that is
humanly possible is to probe reality on the basis of life-experience
and to settle for more limited philosophical insights informed by
historical understanding. Ultimately, our reflective understanding of
life and history must remain determinate-indeterminate.

We can see certain parallels to Dilthey’s attempt to replace
metaphysical systems with more informal life-based
“meta-physical reflection” or worldviews in Rudolf Carnap,
who studied in Jena with Dilthey’s student Herman Nohl before
moving to Vienna. Carnap’s paper “The Elimination of
Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of Language” refers to
Dilthey and his students as positive counterexamples to varieties of
meaningless metaphysical systems as found in Fichte, Hegel and
Heidegger. Another essay by Carnap entitled “Metaphysics as
Expression of an Attitude to Life” acknowledges the importance
of Dilthey’s notion of “Lebensgefuehl”.
Carnap’s analogue for Dilthey’s
“Weltanschauung” is
“Weltauffassung”. Carnap also incorporated a more
or less Diltheyan conception of the human sciences in his Der
logische Aufbau der Welt of 1928. Carnap refers to
Dilthey’s Introduction to the Human Sciences, but
replaces its language of “facts of consciousness” with
that of “elementary experiences”. He does not refer to
Dilthey’s last main work Der Aufbau der geschichtlichen
Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften, but he did read Hans
Freyer’s Theorie des objektiven Geistes, a work heavily
influenced by Dilthey’s Aufbau and its approach to
objective spirit as the medium of intersubjective communication.
Carnap writes in his own Aufbau: 


only the more recent history of philosophy (since Dilthey) has called
attention to the methodological and object-theoretical distinctness of
the domain of the human sciences (Geisteswissenschaften).
(Carnap 1928: 23) 


Carnap acknowledges the independent nature of spiritual
(geistigen) or intersubjective objects such as political
states and social customs. They differ from psychical and physical
objects in that they can “survive” even though the
original subjects that generated them “perish and other subjects
take their place” (Carnap 1928: 23). It is not clear why
Dilthey’s work on the methods of the sciences and his empirical
approach to experience did not earn him more serious consideration by
the Vienna Circle as a whole and other analytically oriented
philosophers. But what is evident is that his theory of understanding
(Verstehen) came to be widely misinterpreted as a kind of
empathy. Although Dilthey had sharply differentiated between
understanding and empathy, Carnap spoke of the understanding of others
as an intuitive act that involves a measure of empathy, but which can
be cognitively vetted in part through the analysis of objective
manifestations ranging from gestures, linguistic expressions to
practical actions (Carnap 1928: 55, 143). Subsequent discussions of
Dilthey’s theory of Verstehen by analytic philosophers
such as Theodor Abel, Ernest Nagel and Arthur Danto went further by
reducing it to “empathic identification”. Later Danto
recognized that this is not the case and acknowledged that
“Verstehen is a very brilliant notion, utterly
misconceived heretofore by crass philosophical critics, myself
included” (Danto 1970: 215). Verstehen is not some
immediate projection of ourselves into others, but stands for a
deliberate process that finds the proper context to relate others and
their objectifications to what is already familiar to us. It is a
reflective mode of inquiry that provides the framework for more
specific explanations, whether causal or rational.